Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in Item 8 in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth in the section of the Annual Report captioned “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward- looking statements.
Overview
We endeavor to become the leader in discovery, development, and commercialization of therapeutic agents capable of addressing significant unmet medical need via the application of the silence and replace approach to the treatment of genetic disorders.
Benitec Biopharma Inc. (“Benitec” or the “Company” or in the third person, “we” or “our”) is a development- stage biotechnology company focused on the advancement of novel genetic medicines with headquarters in Hayward, California. The proprietary platform, called DNA-directed RNA interference, or ddRNAi, combines RNA interference, or RNAi, with gene therapy to create medicines that facilitate sustained silencing of disease- causing genes following a single administration. The Company is developing ddRNAi-based therapeutics for chronic and life-threatening human conditions including Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD).
BB-301 is the most advanced ddRNAi-based genetic medicine currently under development by Benitec. BB-301 is an internally optimized, AAV-based gene therapy agent that is designed to both silence the expression of mutated, disease-causing genes (to slow, or halt, the underlying mechanism of disease progression) and replace the mutant genes with normal, “wild type” genes (to drive restoration of function in diseased cells). This fundamental approach to disease management is called “silence and replace” and this biological mechanism offers the potential to restore the underlying physiology of the treated tissues and, in the process, improve treatment outcomes for patients suffering from the chronic and, potentially, fatal effects of Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD). BB-301 has been granted Orphan Drug Designation in the United States and the European Union.
Through the combination of the targeted gene silencing effects of RNAi and the durable transgene expression achievable via the use of modified viral vectors, the silence and replace approach has the potential to produce long-term silencing of disease-causing genes along with simultaneous replacement of wild type gene function following a single administration of the proprietary genetic medicine. We believe this novel attribute of the investigational agents under development by Benitec may facilitate the achievement of robust clinical activity while greatly reducing the dosing frequencies traditionally expected for medicines employed for the management of chronic diseases. Additionally, the establishment of chronic gene silencing and gene replacement may significantly reduce the risk of patient non-compliance during the course of medical management of potentially fatal clinical disorders.
Re-domiciliation
On April 15, 2020, or the Implementation Date, the Re-domiciliation of Benitec Limited, a public company incorporated under the laws of the State of Western Australia, or Benitec Limited, was completed in accordance with the Scheme Implementation Agreement, as amended and restated as of January 30, 2020, between Benitec Limited and us. As a result of the Re-domiciliation, the jurisdiction of incorporation was changed from Australia to Delaware, and Benitec Limited became our wholly owned subsidiary.
The Re-domiciliation was effected pursuant to a statutory scheme of arrangement under Australian law, or the Scheme, whereby on the Implementation Date, all of the issued and outstanding ordinary shares of Benitec
Limited were exchanged for newly issued shares of our common stock, on the basis of one share of our common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, for every 300 ordinary shares of Benitec Limited issued and outstanding. Holders of Benitec Limited’s American Depository Shares, or ADSs (each of which represented 200 ordinary shares), received two shares of our common stock for every three ADSs held.
COVID-19
COVID-19 has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and has spread to nearly every country, including Australia and the United States. The impact of this pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to businesses and capital markets around the world. The extent to which the coronavirus impacts us will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and its variants, and the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, including the effectiveness and adoption of vaccines for the virus, among others.
Certain of our research and development efforts are conducted globally, including the ongoing development of our silence and replace therapeutic for the treatment of Oculopharyngeal Muscular Dystrophy (OPMD), and will be dependent upon our ability to initiate preclinical and clinical studies despite the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As we continue to actively advance our preclinical programs, including our ongoing tissue transduction studies for BB-301, we are in close contact with our principal investigators and preclinical trial sites, which are primarily located in France, and are assessing the impact of COVID-19 on our studies and the expected development timelines and costs of all of our product candidates, on an ongoing basis. In light of developments relating to the COVID-19 global pandemic since the beginning of the outbreak, the focus of healthcare providers and hospitals on fighting the virus, and consistent with the FDA’s industry guidance for conducting clinical trials, we have experienced delays to the original timeline regarding the initiation and anticipated completion of the ongoing BB-301 IND-enabling development work. The initiation of the BB-301 tissue transduction study, which represents a key component of the IND-enabling work, was initially delayed by several months, however, the study has been recently initiated and the dosing of the initial preclinical cohorts has proceeded without incident. We will continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and expect to reevaluate the timing of our anticipated preclinical and clinical milestones as we learn more and the impact of COVID-19 on our industry becomes more clear.
We had also implemented work-from-home measures for the majority of our employees, resulting in a reduction of laboratory work and a halt of non-essential business travel. As we transition our employees back to our premises, there is a risk that COVID-19 infections occur at our offices or laboratory facilities and significantly affect our operations. Additionally, if any of our critical vendors are impacted, our business could be affected if we become unable to timely procure essential equipment, supplies or services in adequate quantities and at acceptable prices.
Royalties, milestone payments and other license fees
We are required to pay royalties, milestone payments and other license fees in connection with our licensing of intellectual property from third parties, including as discussed below.
We have collaborated with Biomics Biotechnologies Co., Ltd., or Biomics, pursuant to several collaboration agreements in relation to single-stranded RNA and shRNA sequences for treatment of hepatitis B. In July 2015, we entered into an earn-out agreement with Biomics which confirmed Benitec’s ownership of certain patents resulting from the collaboration in exchange for an upfront payment and equity issuance to Biomics and a share of certain future licensing revenue received by Benitec.
Foreign Currency Translation and Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The Company’s functional currency and reporting currency is the United States dollar. BBL’s functional currency is the Australian dollar (AUD). Assets and liabilities are translated at the exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date. Revenues and expenses are translated at the average rate of exchange prevailing during the reporting period. Equity transactions are translated at each historical transaction date spot rate. Translation adjustments arising from the use of different exchange rates from period to period are included as a component of stockholders’ equity as “Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).” Gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions are included in the statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) as other comprehensive income (loss).
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) for all periods presented includes only foreign currency translation gains (losses).
Explanatory Paragraph in the Auditors’ Report About the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
The independent auditors’ report on our June 30, 2022 financial statements included in this Annual Report states that the Company’s historical losses and net cash used in operations raise substantial doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. We can make no assurances that our business operations will develop and provide us with significant cash to continue operations. In order to improve the Company’s liquidity, the Company’s management is actively pursuing additional financing through discussions with investment bankers, financial institutions and private investors. There can be no assurance the Company will be successful in its effort to secure additional financing. Our ability to continue as a going concern is subject to our ability to develop profitable operations. We are devoting substantially all of our efforts to developing our business and raising capital. Our net operating losses increase the difficulty in meeting such goals and there can be no assurances that such methods will prove successful.
October 2020 Capital Raise
On October 6, 2020, the Company announced the closing of an underwritten public offering of common stock and common stock equivalents (the “October 2020 Capital Raise”). The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $11.5 million and net proceeds of approximately $9.9 million from the offering.
April 2021 Capital Raise
On April 30, 2021, the Company announced the closing of an underwritten public offering of common stock and common stock equivalents (the “April 2021 Capital Raise”). The Company received gross proceeds of approximately $14.3 million and net proceeds of approximately $12.7 million from the offering.
Results of Operations
Revenues from customers
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, the Company generated funds primarily from capital raising activities. The Company has not generated any revenues from the sales of products. Revenues from licensing fees and interest income are included in the revenue from customers line item on our statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). Our licensing fees have been generated through the licensing of our ddRNAi technology to biopharmaceutical companies.
The following table sets forth a summary of our revenues for each of the periods set forth below:
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company recognized $73 thousand in customer revenues, as compared to $59 thousand for the comparable year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in revenues from customers is due to the increase in licensing and royalty revenues in the current year.
Royalties and license fees
Royalties and license fees consist primarily of payments we are required to remit for royalties and other payments related to in-licensed intellectual property. Under our in-license agreements, we may pay up-front fees and milestone payments and be subject to future royalties. We cannot precisely predict the amount, if any, of royalties we will owe in the future, and if our calculations of royalty payments are incorrect, we may owe additional royalties, which could negatively affect our results of operations. As our product sales increase, we may, from time to time, disagree with our third-party collaborators as to the appropriate royalties owed, and the resolution of such disputes may be costly, may consume management’s time, and may damage our relationship with our collaborators. Furthermore, we may enter into additional license agreements in the future, which may also include royalty, milestone and other payments.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses relate primarily to the cost of conducting clinical and pre-clinical trials. Pre-clinical and clinical development costs are a significant component of research and development expenses. The Company records accrued liabilities for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, and contract manufacturing activities. The Company records the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and includes these costs in trade and other payables on the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expenses on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The Company accrues for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with its third-party service providers. The Company makes significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance at the end of each reporting period. As actual costs become known, the Company adjusts its accrued liabilities. The Company has not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, related benefits, travel, and equity-based compensation expense. General and administrative expenses also include facility expenses, professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and audit services and other related costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses may increase as the Company focuses on the continued development of the pre-clinical OPMD program. The Company also anticipates an increase in expenses relating to accounting, legal and regulatory-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums and other costs associated with being a domestic public company after the Re-domiciliation.
Expenses
The following table sets forth a summary of our expenses for each of the periods set forth below:
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we incurred $9 thousand in royalties and license fees, as compared to $123 thousand for the comparable year ended June 30, 2021. The change is primarily due to a decrease in license fees.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we incurred $11.272 million in research and development expenses, as compared to $7.020 million for the comparable year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in research and development expenses relates primarily to the OPMD project. The Company concluded the BB-301 Regulatory Toxicology Study and the Parallel Assay Method Development, Qualification, and Validation project, and continued with the GMP Manufacturing project.
General and administrative expense was $6.646 million and $6.512 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase for the year relates primarily to legal costs, combined with higher NASDAQ filing fees and share-based compensation expense.
Other Income (Loss)
The following table sets forth a summary of our other income (loss) for each of the periods set forth below:
The other loss, net during the year ended June 30, 2022 totaled ($354) thousand, which consists of foreign currency transaction loss, interest expense, other income, and unrealized gain (loss) on investment. During the year ended June 30, 2021, other income (loss) totaled ($286) thousand. Foreign currency transaction loss has decreased due to a change in foreign exchange rates. Interest expense, net increased due to higher interest expense resulting from extension of the Company’s lease to June 2025. Other income (expense), net became an expense due to the discontinuation of COVID-19 stimulus incentives from the Australian government, combined with higher state taxes. Unrealized gain (loss) on investment was due to lower fair market values of the Company’s investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has incurred cumulative losses and negative cash flows from operations since our predecessor’s inception in 1995, except for the year ended June 30, 2019 where we had net income of $2.609 million and generated positive cash flows of $4.790 million from operating activities. The Company had accumulated losses of $148.3 million as of June 30, 2022. We expect that our research and development expenses may increase due to the continued development of the OPMD program.
We had no borrowings for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 and do not currently have a credit facility.
As of June 30, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $4.1 million. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation. Currently, our cash and cash equivalents are held in bank accounts. Our short-term investments consist of term deposits with maturity within 180 days.
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods set forth below:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $15.899 million. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $12.832 million. Net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of our net loss, change in working capital, depreciation and amortization, and share-based compensation expense.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $13 thousand and $221 thousand, respectively, and primarily related to purchases of equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities was zero and $22.522 million for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. For the year ended June 30, 2021, cash from financing activities related to the issuance of ordinary shares, including $25.750 million in gross proceeds from the October 2020 and April 2021 Capital Raises and exercise of pre-funded warrants, partially offset by $3.228 million in share issue transaction costs.
The future of the Company as an operating business will depend on its ability to keep operating costs and budgeted amounts and obtain adequate financing. While we continue to progress discussions and advance opportunities to engage with pharmaceutical companies and continue to seek licensing partners for ddRNAi in disease areas that are not our focus, there can be no assurance as to whether we will enter into such arrangements or what the terms of any such arrangement could be.
While we have established some licensing arrangements, we do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize one of our current or future product candidates.
Unless and until we establish significant revenues from licensing programs, strategic alliances or collaboration arrangements with pharmaceutical companies, or from product sales, we anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of product candidates and begin to prepare to commercialize any product that receives regulatory approval. We are subject to the risks inherent in the development of new gene therapy products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. The Company does not have adequate liquidity to fund its operations for the next twelve months without raising additional funds and the success of raising such additional capital is not solely within the control of the Company.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the timing and costs of our planned clinical trials for our ddRNAi and silence and replace product candidates;
•
the timing and costs of our planned preclinical studies for our ddRNAi and silence and replace product candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•
the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•
revenue received from commercial sales of any of our product candidates that may receive regulatory approval;
•
the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may establish;
•
the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property related claims; and
•
the extent to which we need to in-license or acquire other products and technologies.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
On October 1, 2016, the Company entered into an operating lease for office space in Hayward, California that originally expired in April 2018. The Company has entered into lease amendments that extend the lease commitment through June 2025.
The Company enters into contracts in the normal course of business with third-party contract research organizations, contract development and manufacturing organizations and other service providers and vendors. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice and, therefore, are cancellable contracts and not considered contractual obligations and commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported. Note 2 of Notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report describes the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. Certain of these significant accounting policies are considered to be critical accounting policies.
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments that could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results of operations. Specifically, these policies have the following attributes: (1) the Company is required to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate; and (2) different estimates the Company could reasonably have used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as the Company’s operating environment changes. These changes have historically been minor and have been included in the consolidated financial statements as soon as they became known. In addition, management is periodically faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within its control and will not be known for prolonged periods of time. These uncertainties are discussed in the section above entitled “Risk Factors.” Based on a critical assessment of its accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that the Company’s consolidated financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and provide a meaningful presentation of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
Management believes that the following are critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with that core principle by applying the following steps:
Step 1: Identify the contract(s) with a customer.
Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract. Step 3: Determine the transaction price.
Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
Step 5: Recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company applies judgement in determining whether contracts entered into fall within the scope of ASC 606 -Revenue from Contracts with Customers
(“ASC 606”). In doing so, management considers the commercial substance of the transaction and how risks and benefits of the contract accrue to the various parties to the contract.
Management has also made the judgement that the grant of the license and transfer of associated know-how and materials are accounted for as one performance obligation as they are not considered to be distinct; they are
highly interrelated and could not provide benefits to the customer independently from each other. Judgements were made in relation to the transfer of the license and know-how and whether this should be recognized over time or a point in time. The point in time has been determined with regard to the point at which the transfer of know-how has substantially been completed and the customer has control of the asset and the ability to direct the use of and receive substantially all of the remaining benefits.
Licensing revenues
Revenue from licensees of the Company’s intellectual property reflects the transfer of a right to use the intellectual property as it exists at the point in time in which the license is transferred to the customer. Consideration can be variable and is estimated using the most likely amount method. Subsequently, the estimate is constrained until it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur when the uncertainty is resolved. Revenue is recognized as or when the performance obligations are satisfied.
The Company recognizes contract liabilities for consideration received in respect of unsatisfied performance obligations and reports these amounts as other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet. Similarly, if the Company satisfies a performance obligation before it receives the consideration, the Company recognizes either a contract asset or a receivable in its consolidated balance sheet, depending on whether something other than the passage of time is required before the consideration is due.
Royalties
Revenue from licensees of the Company’s intellectual property reflect a right to use the intellectual property as it exists at the point in time in which the license is granted. Where consideration is based on sales of product by the licensee, revenue is recognized when the customer’s subsequent sales of product occur.
Services revenue
Revenue is earned (constrained by variable considerations) from the provision of research and development services to customers. Services revenue is recognized when performance obligations are either satisfied over time or at a point in time. Generally, the provision of research and development services under a contract with a customer will represent satisfaction of a performance obligation over time where the Company retains the right to payment for services performed but not yet completed.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses relate primarily to the cost of conducting clinical and pre-clinical trials. Pre- clinical and clinical development costs are a significant component of research and development expenses. The Company records accrued liabilities for estimated costs of research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, and contract manufacturing activities. The Company records the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and includes these costs in trade and other payables on the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expenses on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The Company accrues for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with its third-party service providers. The Company makes significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance at the end of each reporting period. As actual costs become known, the Company adjusts its accrued liabilities. The Company has not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company records share-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, “Stock Compensation
”. ASC 718 requires the fair value of all share-based employee compensation awarded to employees and non-employees to be recorded as an expense over the shorter of the service period or the vesting period. The Company values employee and non-employee share-based compensation at fair value using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting Standards recently adopted
None.
New Accounting Standards and Interpretations not yet mandatory or early adopted
ASU 2016-13
-In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13: “Financial Instruments-Credit
Losses
(Topic 326)”. This ASU represents a significant change in the accounting for credit losses model by requiring immediate recognition of management’s estimates of current expected credit losses (CECL). Under the prior model, losses were recognized only as they were incurred. The Company has determined that it has met the criteria of a smaller reporting company (“SRC”) as of November 15, 2019. As such, ASU 2019-10: “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, Derivatives and Hedging, and Leases: Effective Dates”
amended the effective date for the Company to be for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company will adopt this ASU effective July 1, 2023.