ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Bluescape Opportunities Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on July 9, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region for purposes of consummating a Business Combination, we intend to focus on businesses that have sound fundamentals but that have the opportunity for substantial performance enhancement through a combination of sharpening of strategic focus, more disciplined capital allocation, capital structure improvements, rationalization of cost structure, and enhanced management skillset. Our sponsor is Bluescape Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
We consummated our Initial Public Offering on October 30, 2020 and our underwriters partially executed their Over-Allotment Option on November 12, 2020. We also entered into Forward Purchase Agreements simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering with our Sponsor and with the Zimmer Entity which provide for the purchase of additional forward purchase units in private placements to occur concurrently with the closing of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete an initial Business Combination by October 27, 2022, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but no more than ten business days thereafter subject to lawfully available funds therefor, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay the Company’s franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s remaining shareholders and the Company’s board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from July 9, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 relates to our formation and execution of our Initial Public Offering, which was consummated on October 27, 2020. Since such offering, for the year ended December 31, 2021, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Initial Business Combination. However, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. Additionally, we recognize non-cash gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our warrant liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from July 9, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $40,414,517, which consisted of $102,519 in investment income from the Trust Account, a $294,855 non-cash gain related to expiration of the unexercised portion of the underwriters’ overallotment option, offset by $295,267 in combined formation and general and administrative costs, $2,006,624 of offering costs, $2,921,000 of stock compensation expense related to the private placement warrants, and a non-cash loss from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $35,589,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $50,729,169, which consisted primarily of a non-cash gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $51,507,500.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $2.7 million in our operating bank account for working capital. As of December 31, 2021 we had approximately $1.5 million in our operating bank account for working capital.
Our liquidity needs up to September 30, 2020 were satisfied through a $25,000 contribution from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares to our Sponsor and the advancement of funds by our Sponsor of $298,067 under a promissory note (the “Note”) to us to cover for offering costs in connection with the Initial Public Offering. We fully repaid the Note on October 30, 2020 and no amounts under the Note were outstanding as of December 31, 2021 or 2020. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants, our liquidity has been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account of approximately $2.0 million as well as an expense reimbursement of approximately $1.2 million. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw income earned on investments (if any) to pay our income taxes, if any. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We will be using our existing working capital funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Going Concern Consideration
As more fully described in Note 1 to the financial statements, our business plan is dependent on the completion of a business combination, and if we are unable to complete a business combination by October 27, 2022, then we will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our plans in regard to these matters are described in Note 1. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern and the financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On July 13, 2020, our sponsor paid $25,000, to cover certain expenses on our behalf in consideration of 20,125,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 (the “Founder Shares”). On October 23, 2020, our sponsor surrendered 3,593,750 shares, resulting in an aggregate of 16,531,250 Class B ordinary shares outstanding. As a result of the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, 1,343,750 additional Founder Shares were forfeited, resulting 15,187,500 Founder Shares outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Prior to the initial investment in the company of $25,000 by the sponsor, the company had no assets, tangible or intangible. The per share price of the founder shares was determined by dividing the amount contributed to the company by the number of founder shares issued. The Founder Shares are identical to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering except that the Founder Shares automatically convert into shares of Class A ordinary shares at the time of our Initial Business Combination on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustments and certain transfer restrictions, as described in more detail below. On October 27, 2020, the Sponsor transferred 15,000 Founder Shares to each of our independent director nominees, at the original per share purchase price. The Founder Shares will be worthless if we do not complete an initial Business Combination.
Our Sponsor has agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of its Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination or (B) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation,
merger, stock exchange, reorganization or similar transaction after a Business Combination that results in all of the Company’s shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-division, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-day trading period commencing at least 150 days after a Business Combination, the Founder Shares will be released from the lockup.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneous with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 13,500,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor and an investment fund managed by Zimmer Partners LP. Subsequently, on November 12, 2020, the Company received notice of the underwriters’ election to partially exercise the Over-Allotment option and we consummated the private placement of an additional 650,000 warrants, at a purchase price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, to our Sponsor and the Zimmer Entity for an aggregate of 14,150,000 warrants. Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of our Class A ordinary shares at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the purchase price of the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the Initial Business Combination is not completed by October 27, 2022, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees.
Our Sponsor and our officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Forward Purchase Agreements
We also entered into a forward purchase agreement simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering with the Sponsor providing for the purchase of up to 3,000,000 forward purchase units, and with the Zimmer Entity providing for the purchase of up to 27,000,000 forward purchase units, at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, in private placements to occur concurrently with the closing of our initial Business Combination. Participation by the Forward Purchase Agreement providers is discretionary. However, if requested by the Company, and approved by Zimmer Partners’ investment committee, the proceeds from the sale of forward purchase securities may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Business Combination, expenses in connection with the initial Business Combination or for working capital in the post-transaction company. If we do not consummate an initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of our Initial Public Offering, the private placement warrants will expire worthless.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion of such shares to Class A ordinary shares) pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that the Company will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the forward purchase agreements, we have agreed to use reasonable best efforts (i) to file within 30 days after the closing of a Business Combination a registration statement with the SEC for a secondary offering of the forward purchase shares and the forward purchase warrants (and underlying Class A ordinary shares), (ii) to cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than sixty (60) days after the initial filing, (iii) to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which the Sponsor, the Zimmer Entity or their respective assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 under the Securities Act and (iv) after such registration statement is declared effective, cause us to conduct firm commitment underwritten offerings, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the forward purchase agreements provide that these holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company.
Related Party Loans and Advances
Our Sponsor had agreed to loan us an aggregate of $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to the terms of a related party promissory note (the “Note”). This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We fully repaid the Note on October 30, 2020 and no amounts under the Note were outstanding as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Commitments and Contingencies
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $11.5 million in the aggregate paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and an incremental $0.7 million paid upon the Over-Allotment Option exercise (for an aggregate of approximately $12.2 million). In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $21.3 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions (inclusive of approximately $1.1 million of incremental deferred commissions related to the Over-Allotment Exercise). The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Administrative Support Agreement
We entered into an agreement, commencing on October 30, 2020 through the earlier of our consummation of a Business Combination and our liquidation, to reimburse our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services.
Risks and Uncertainties
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (the “COVID-19 outbreak”). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the Company’s results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, the Company’s results of operations, financial position and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, the Company’s ability to complete an Initial Business Combination may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 outbreak or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit the Company’s ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an Initial Business Combination in a timely manner. The Company’s ability to consummate an Initial Business Combination may also be dependent on the ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 outbreak and the resulting market downturn.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Remeasurement adjustments associated with the redeemable shares of Class ordinary shares are excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair
value. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial Public Offering and Private Placement in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Under this guidance, shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 60,750,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented, at redemption value, as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in additional paid-in capital, or in the absence of additional paid-in capital, in accumulated deficit.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815”), the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. The Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants are not indexed to the Company’s own stock and therefore are accounted for as liabilities and, as the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statements of Operations in the period of change.
Our warrant agreements, dated as of October 27, 2020, between the Company and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, a New York corporation, as warrant agent (the “Warrant Agreement”), include settlement terms and provision related to certain tender offers following a business combination. In consideration of the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity, we have concluded that such provisions in the Warrant Agreement that relate to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair value at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change. The Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants are not indexed to the Company’s own stock and therefore are accounted for as liabilities and, as the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815 Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Offering Costs
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, and other costs incurred that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-
operating expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with issuance of the Class A ordinary shares were charged against the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. The Company classifies deferred underwriting commissions as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had recognized aggregate offering costs of $33,103,735, consisting of $12,150,000 of underwriting fees, $21,262,500 of deferred underwriting fees, $906,235 of other offering costs, and an expense reimbursement of $1,215,000, of which $2,006,624 was immediately expensed, and remaining was allocated to Class A ordinary shares, reducing the carrying amount of such shares.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Under Item 3030(b)(1), a registrant is no longer required to disclose its off-balance-sheet arrangements in a separately caption section; however, in accordance with Instruction 8 to Item 303(b), a registrant must disclose material off-balance-sheet arrangement as part of the Liquidity and Capital resources discussion.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.