Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Report”) and the section entitled “Risk Factors.” Unless otherwise indicated, the terms “Beachbody,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company” refer to The Beachbody Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (“Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (“Exchange Act”), including statements about and the financial condition, results of operations, earnings outlook and prospects of the Company. Forward-looking statements are typically identified by words such as “plan,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “outlook,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “project,” “continue,” “could,” “may,” “might,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “should,” “would” and other similar words and expressions, but the absence of these words does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking.
The forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations as applicable and are inherently subject to uncertainties and changes in circumstances and their potential effects and speak only as of the date of such statement. There can be no assurance that future developments will be those that have been anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance
to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to the following:
•our future financial performance, including our expectations regarding our revenue, cost of revenue, gross profit, operating expenses including changes in selling and marketing, general and administrative and enterprise technology and development expenses (including any components of the foregoing), Adjusted EBITDA (as defined below) and our ability to achieve and maintain future profitability;
•our anticipated growth rate and market opportunity;
•our liquidity and ability to raise financing in the future;
•our success in retaining or recruiting, or changes required in, officers, key employees or directors;
•our warrants are accounted for as liabilities and changes in the value of such warrants could have a material effect on our financial results;
•our ability to effectively compete in the fitness and nutrition industries;
•our ability to successfully acquire and integrate new operations;
•our reliance on a few key products;
•market conditions and global and economic factors beyond our control;
•intense competition and competitive pressures from other companies worldwide in the industries in which we will operate;
•litigation and the ability to adequately protect our intellectual property rights; and
•other risks and uncertainties set forth in this Report under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize or should any of the assumptions made by management prove incorrect, actual results may vary in material respects from those projected in these forward-looking statements.
Except to the extent required by applicable law or regulation, we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this Report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
Overview
Beachbody is a leading subscription health and wellness company. We are the creator of some of the world’s most popular fitness programs, including P90X®, Insanity® and 21 Day Fix®, which transformed the at-home fitness market and disrupted the global fitness industry by making it accessible for people to get results-anytime, anywhere. Our comprehensive nutrition-first programs, Portion Fix® and 2B Mindset®, teach healthy eating habits and promote healthy, sustainable weight loss. These fitness and nutrition programs are available through our Beachbody On Demand® streaming service. In addition, we offer nutritional products such as Shakeology® nutrition shakes and BEACHBAR® snack bars as well a professional-grade stationary cycle with 360-degree touch screen tablet and connected fitness software.
In the health, wellness and fitness industry, we focus primarily on digital content, supplements, connected fitness, and consumer health and wellness. Our goal is to continue to provide holistic health and wellness content and subscription-based solutions. Leveraging our history of fitness content creation, nutrition innovation, and our network of micro-influencers, whom we call Coaches, we plan to continue market penetration into connected fitness to reach a wider health, wellness and fitness audience.
Historically, our revenue has been generated primarily through our network of micro-influencers, social media marketing channels, and direct response advertising. Components of revenue include recurring digital subscription revenue, connected fitness revenue, and revenue from the sale of nutritional and other products. In addition to selling individual products on a one-time basis, we bundle digital and nutritional products together at discounted prices.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Total revenue was $873.6 million, a 1% increase;
•Digital revenue was $365.4 million, a 9% increase;
•Connected fitness revenue was $42.7 million subsequent to the Myx acquisition in June 2021;
•Nutrition and other revenue was $465.5 million, a 12% decrease;
•Net loss was $228.4 million, compared to net loss of $21.4 million; and
•Adjusted EBITDA loss was $86.1 million, compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $51.5 million.
See “Non-GAAP Information” below for information regarding our use of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact on most businesses, including Beachbody. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced strong demand for our digital subscriptions as the government ordered closures and restrictions on gyms and as consumers were reluctant to return to gyms as the COVID-19 pandemic continued. We also experienced modestly slower product fulfillment to customers and supply chain delays. During 2021, the pandemic has resulted in higher shipping, freight, and fulfillment costs and the cancellation of certain Coach events. In the second half of 2021, as government restrictions eased and pandemic fatigue set in, the demand for at-home fitness solutions slowed.
The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our financial and operating results is unknown, but could be material. Although the pandemic initially increased consumer demand for our products, we believe the structural shift towards wellness and at-home fitness solutions like ours will continue after COVID-19. We continue to monitor customer demand along with our logistics capabilities to deliver products to our customers on a timely and consistent basis, and we intend to adapt our plans as needed to continue to drive our business.
Beachbody has business continuity programs in place to ensure that employees are safe and that the business continues to function while employees are working remotely. We have only seen minor adverse impacts on the ability of the business to function (production), and we have not seen any network connectivity issues that would have an adverse impact on our customers’ ability to access our product offerings.
Key Operational and Business Metrics
We use the following key operational and business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts, and make strategic decisions:
(1) See “Non-GAAP Information” below for a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA and an explanation for why we consider Adjusted EBITDA to be a helpful metric for investors.
Digital Subscriptions
Our ability to expand the number of digital subscriptions is an indicator of our market penetration and growth. Digital subscriptions include BOD, BODi, and Openfit subscriptions. Digital subscriptions include paid and free-to-pay subscriptions with free-to-pay subscriptions, representing less than 2% of total digital subscriptions on average. Digital subscriptions are inclusive of all billing plans, currently for annual, semi-annual, quarterly and monthly billing intervals.
Nutritional Subscriptions
We package and bundle the content experience of digital subscriptions with nutritional subscriptions to optimize customer results. Nutritional Subscriptions include monthly subscriptions of nutritional products such as, Shakeology, Beachbody Performance, BEACHBAR, Bevvy, and Ladder supplements.
Average Digital Retention
We use month-over-month digital subscription retention, which we define as the average rate at which a subscription renews for a new billing cycle, to measure customer retention.
Total Streams
We use total streams to quantify the number of fitness or nutrition programs viewed per subscription, which is a leading indicator of customer engagement and retention. While the measure of a digital stream may vary across companies, to qualify as a stream on any of our digital platforms, a program must be viewed for a minimum of 25% of the total running time.
Daily Active Users to Monthly Active Users (DAU/MAU)
We use the ratio of daily active users to monthly active users to measure how frequently digital subscribers are utilizing our service in a given month. We define a daily active user as a unique user streaming content on our platform in a given day. We define a monthly active user as a unique user streaming content on our platform in that same month.
Non-GAAP Information
We use Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP performance measure, to supplement our results presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating our operating performance, as it is similar to measures reported by our public competitors and is regularly used by security analysts, institutional investors, and other interested parties in analyzing operating performance and prospects. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a substitute for any GAAP financial measure and, as calculated, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of performance of other companies in other industries or within the same industry.
We define and calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted for impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, depreciation and amortization, amortization of capitalized cloud computing implementation costs, amortization of content assets, interest expense, income tax provision (benefit), equity-based compensation, and other items that are not normal, recurring, operating expenses necessary to operate the Company’s business as described in the reconciliation below.
We include this non-GAAP financial measure because it is used by management to evaluate Beachbody’s core operating performance and trends and to make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital and new investments. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain expenses that are required in accordance with GAAP because they are non-cash (for example, in the case of depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, and net realizable value adjustment) or are not related to our underlying business performance (for example, in the case of interest income and expense).
The table below presents our Adjusted EBITDA reconciled to our net income (loss), the closest GAAP measure, for the periods indicated:
(1) Other adjustment items includes incremental costs associated with COVID-19.
(2) Non-operating primarily includes interest income and gain on investment on the Myx convertible instrument.
Results of Operations
We operate and manage our business in two operating segments, Beachbody and Other. For financial reporting purposes, we have one reportable segment, Beachbody. We identified the reportable segment based on the information used by management to monitor performance and make operating decisions. See Note 1 and Note 23 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information regarding our reportable segment. The following discussion of our results of operations is on a consolidated basis as the Other non-reportable operating segment is not material to the understanding of our business taken as a whole.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition
and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in Amendment No. 4 to the Form S-4, Registration Statement, filed with the SEC on May 19, 2021.
Revenue
Revenue includes digital subscriptions, nutritional supplement subscriptions, one-time nutritional sales, connected fitness products and other fitness-related products. Subscription revenue is recognized ratably over the subscription period (up to 12 months). We often sell bundled products that combine digital subscriptions, nutritional products, and/or other fitness products. We consider these sales to be revenue arrangements with multiple performance obligations and allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on its relative stand-alone selling price. We defer revenue when we receive payments in advance of delivery of products or the performance of services.
The increase in digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to year-over-year growth in digital subscriptions during the first half of 2021 and the launch of BODi in the fourth quarter of 2021. During the second half of the year, the demand for at-home fitness decelerated, and we ended 2021 with 3% fewer digital subscriptions compared to prior year.
The increase in connected fitness revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was due to the acquisition of Myx in June 2021.
The decrease in nutrition and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $45.8 million decrease in revenue from nutritional subscriptions and a $8.0 million decrease in associated shipping revenue due to our sales composition shift from nutrition and other products, which contain a shipping component, to digital products, which are non-shippable. We ended 2021 with 23% fewer nutritional subscriptions compared to prior year.
Cost of Revenue
Digital Cost of Revenue
Digital cost of revenue includes costs associated with digital content creation including amortization and revisions of content assets, depreciation of streaming platforms, digital streaming costs, and amortization of acquired digital platform intangible assets. It also includes customer service costs, payment processing fees, depreciation of production equipment, live trainer costs, facilities, and related personnel expenses.
Connected Fitness Cost of Revenue
Connected fitness cost of revenue consists of product costs, including bike hardware costs, duties and other applicable importing costs, shipping and handling costs, warehousing and logistics costs, costs associated with service calls and repairs of products under warranty, payment processing and financing fees, customer service expenses, and personnel-related expenses associated with supply chain and logistics.
Nutrition and Other Cost of Revenue
Nutrition and other cost of revenue includes product costs, shipping and handling, fulfillment and warehousing, customer service, and payment processing fees. It also includes depreciation of nutrition-related e-commerce websites and social commerce platforms, amortization of acquired formulae intangible assets, facilities, and related personnel expenses.
The increase in digital cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by a $7.4 million increase in the amortization of content assets. We released more content during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the creation of a full library for BODi, which launched in the fourth quarter of 2021, and the acquisition of Myx’s connected fitness library in connection with the acquisition of Myx. Other variable costs of digital revenue increased as a result of the increase in digital revenue. The decrease in
digital gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of the deleveraging of higher fixed content assets amortization on digital revenue.
The increase in connected fitness cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was driven by the acquisition of Myx in June 2021. The negative connected fitness gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $10.1 million net realizable value adjustment on inventory and higher product, freight, and shipping costs due to COVID-19.
The increase in nutrition and other cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $7.2 million increase in shipping, fulfillment and freight expenses, $3.3 million increase in depreciation expense, and a $1.6 million increase in personnel-related expense. These increases were partially offset by a $8.7 million decrease in product costs and $1.9 million decrease in payment processing fees. Nutrition and other gross margin decreased as a result of a higher reserve for excess and obsolete inventory, higher shipping, fulfillment and freight rates due to COVID-19, and the deleveraging of fixed costs such as depreciation and personnel-related expenses on lower revenue.
Operating Expenses
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses primarily include the cost of Coach compensation, advertising, royalties, promotions and events, and third-party sales commissions as well as the related personnel expenses for employees and consultants. Selling and marketing expense as a percentage of total revenue may fluctuate from period to period based on total revenue, timing of new content and nutritional product launches, and the timing of our media investments to build awareness around launch activity.
The increase in selling and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $59.9 million increase in online advertising and television media expenses in line with our strategic focus on customer acquisition and brand awareness building. Other increases were $23.6 million in expenses for personnel who support customer acquisition activities, $5.4 million in amortization of intangible assets, and $4.9 million in the production of marketing materials. These increases were partially offset by a $16.8 million decrease in Coach compensation, which was in line with the decrease in commissionable revenue.
Selling and marketing expense as a percentage of total revenue increased by 900 basis points primarily due to an increase in brand awareness media investments with the expectation of driving future revenue and higher media rates compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the deleveraging of more personnel and amortization expense of customer-related and contract-based intangible assets.
Enterprise Technology and Development
Enterprise technology and development expenses relate primarily to enterprise systems applications, hardware, and software that serve as the technology infrastructure for the Company and are not directly related to services provided or tangible goods sold. This includes maintenance and enhancements of the Company’s enterprise resource planning system, which is the core of our accounting, procurement, supply chain, and other business support systems. Enterprise technology and development also includes reporting and business analytics tools, security systems such as identity management and payment card industry compliance, office productivity software, research and development tracking tools, and other non-customer facing applications. Enterprise technology and development expenses include personnel-related expenses for employees and consultants who create improvements to and maintain technology
systems and are involved in the research and development of new and existing nutritional products, depreciation of enterprise technology-related assets, software licenses, hosting expenses, and technology equipment leases.
The increase in enterprise technology and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to an increase in personnel-related expenses from a headcount increase and depreciation of enterprise systems-related expenses due to the completion of certain technology initiatives.
Enterprise technology and development expense as a percentage of total revenue increased by 290 basis points due to the deleveraging of higher fixed costs, such as personnel-related expense and depreciation.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense includes personnel-related expenses and facilities-related costs primarily for our executive, finance, accounting, legal, and human resources functions. General and administrative expense also includes fees for professional services principally comprised of legal, audit, tax, and insurance.
The increase in general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to operating as a public company with a $6.5 million increase in personnel-related expenses, $3.9 million increase in insurance expense, $1.4 million increase in accounting fees, and $1.0 million increase in legal fees, and a $1.6 million increase in transaction costs related to the Business Combination.
General and administrative expense as a percentage of total revenue increased by 160 basis points due to the deleveraging of higher fixed costs on revenue.
Restructuring
Restructuring charges relate to our 2017 and 2018 restructuring plans, which were initiated to realign business priorities and optimize operations to maximize digital subscription scale and growth. The charges incurred primarily relate to lease termination adjustments and employee-related costs, with the restructuring benefit related to lower final lease termination expenses compared to initial estimates.
Restructuring benefit for 2020 and 2021 reflects adjustments to the estimated liability associated with the 2017 restructuring lease terminations.
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets
Impairment charges relate to our 2021 impairment of goodwill and intangible assets.
In testing for goodwill impairment, we compared the carrying value of each reporting unit to its estimated fair value. Fair value was estimated using a combination of a market approach and an income approach, with significant assumptions related to guideline company financial multiples used in the market approach and significant assumptions about revenue growth, long-term growth rates, and discount rates used in a discounted cash flow model in the income approach. While the fair value of the Beachbody reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value, the fair value of the Other reporting unit was determined to be less than its carrying value primarily due to lower revenue in the current year and long-term forecast. As a result, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $52.6 million.
In testing for impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets, we compared the carrying value of each asset to its estimated fair value. Fair value was estimated using an income approach, specifically the relief-from-royalty approach, and included significant assumptions related to the royalty rate and revenue growth. Additionally, we reviewed our definite-lived intangible assets for impairment as there were indicators that their carrying value might not be recoverable. We compared their carrying value to their forecasted undiscounted cash flows, and because this evaluation indicated that the carrying value of our definite-lived intangible assets was not recoverable, we performed an impairment test of these assets. Based on these analyses, we recognized an impairment charge of $42.3 million to reduce the carrying amounts of our trade names and talent and representation contracts to their fair values.
Other Income (Expenses)
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities consists of the fair value changes of the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants and the transaction costs and advisory fees for the Business Combination allocated to the warrants. Interest expense primarily consists of interest expense associated with our borrowings and amortization of debt issuance costs for our Credit Facility. Other income, net, consists of interest income earned on investments and gains (losses) on foreign currency.
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $50.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from the decrease in our stock price during the second half of 2021. The increase in other income, net was primarily due to the gain on the investment in the convertible instrument from Myx prior to June 25, 2021; there was no similar investment in 2020.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
Income tax benefit (provision) consists of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state jurisdictions as well as those foreign jurisdictions where we have business operations.
The income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the income tax provision during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a higher net loss in 2021 compared to 2020, an increase in net benefits from discrete events, primarily related to the acquisition of Myx, and the initial establishment of a valuation allowance against deferred taxes in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, cash flow from operating activities and borrowings under our Credit Facility have been our primary sources of liquidity. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received cash proceeds, net of issuance costs and cash paid for the acquisition of Myx, net of cash acquired of approximately $351.8 million in connection with the Business Combination. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash totaling $107.1 million, comprising $104.1 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and $3.0 million of restricted cash.
Net cash used in operating activities was $215.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash of $61.4 million provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash flow from operating activities in 2021, compared to the prior year, was primarily due to the following:
•increase in net loss;
•increase in inventory to support anticipated demand for our connected fitness hardware following the acquisition of Myx in June 2021;
•increase in payments we made for employee compensation;
•decrease in payments we received from customers in advance of service or product delivery;
•increase in content assets expenditures as we produced additional content for our newest platform BODi combined with new program development for our 2022 release schedule; and
•increase in prepaid expenses such as insurance and technology related to operating as a public company.
We do not expect cash used in operating activities during 2022 to approximate 2021 as 2021 included investments related to bike inventory and one-time technology integration costs associated with the Myx acquisition. For example, to address expected connected fitness demand and COVID-19 related supply chain volatility, we invested over $80.0 million in connected fitness inventory in 2021. Similarly, the integration of the connected fitness platform required certain one-time technology costs. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we invested approximately
$149.0 million in media which included certain brand media investments which we are pausing in 2022. Given changes in iOS advertising, tracking change permissions on social media platforms, less efficient media rates, and longer-term returns on brand media investments, we plan to return to performance marketing spend that is accretive to in-year cash flow in 2022. Finally, in assigning the lease for one of our offices, we expect cash savings of $9.2 million over the next year.
Net cash used in investing activities was $125.2 million and $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in 2021, compared to the prior year, was primarily due to cash consideration of $37.7 million paid for the acquisition of Myx, a $30.9 million increase in our capital expenditures, including software and web development, and our decision to purchase our principal production studio for $5.1 million. We expect a material reduction in capital expenditures during the next 12 months due to the completion of the build-out of material projects such as BODi and the BODgroups proprietary social platform.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $390.7 million and $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in 2021, compared to the prior year, was due to the Business Combination.
In November 2021, we terminated our Credit Facility. We believe we can effectively manage our business from cash flow from operations. We have $59.6 million of contractual obligations and other commitments associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts. See Note 13 Leases and Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of our lease obligations and purchase commitments.
Our future capital requirements may vary materially from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the timing and extent of growth initiatives, the expansion of selling and marketing activities, the timing of new product introductions, market acceptance of our products, and overall economic conditions. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our shareholders. There can be no assurances that we would be able to raise additional capital in amounts or on terms acceptable to us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that impact the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates and could differ based upon other assumptions or conditions. The critical accounting policies that reflect our more difficult and subjective judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include those noted below.
Inventory
Inventory consists of raw materials, work in process, and finished goods, is accounted for using the first-in, first-out method, and is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We record a reserve against the carrying value of inventory based on assumptions regarding future demand for our products, anticipated margin, planned product discontinuances, and the physical condition (e.g. age and quality) of the inventory. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a $17.5 million charge to reduce the carrying value of inventory on hand to net realizable value and reserve for excess inventory. This adjustment is included as a component of connected fitness cost of revenue and nutrition and other cost of revenue. During each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we reserved $2.8
million for excess inventory. These adjustments are included as a component of nutrition and other cost of revenue. Actual future write-offs of inventory may differ from estimates and calculations used to determine inventory reserves due to changes in customer demand or other market conditions.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets Impairment
Goodwill and intangible assets deemed to have an indefinite life are not amortized, but instead are assessed for impairment annually at October 1 and between annual tests if an event or change in circumstances occurs that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value or indicate that it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. We carry our definite-lived intangible assets at cost less accumulated amortization. If an event or change in circumstances occurs that indicates the carrying value may not be recoverable, we would evaluate our definite-lived intangible assets for impairment at that time. Due to the sustained decline in our market capitalization, and reduced revenue and operating income forecast observed in the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed an interim test for impairment of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and tested our definite-lived intangible assets for recoverability as of December 31, 2021. In performing both the annual and interim impairment tests for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, we elected to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed to performing the quantitative test for each.
In testing for impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets, we compared the carrying value of each asset to its estimated fair value. Fair value was estimated using an income approach, specifically the relief-from-royalty approach, and included significant assumptions related to the royalty rate and revenue growth. Based on this analysis, we recognized an aggregate impairment charge of $35.2 million to reduce the carrying amounts of our trade names to their fair values.
In testing for impairment of our definite-lived intangible assets, we first compared the carrying value of each asset group to its undiscounted cash flows to determine whether it was recoverable. Because the carrying value of one of our asset groups did not exceed its future undiscounted cash flows, we then calculated the fair value of the asset group as the present value of the estimated future cash flows and determined that the carrying value exceeded the fair value. Based on this analysis, we recognized an impairment charge of $7.1 million on our acquired talent and representation contracts.
We test goodwill for impairment at a level within the Company referred to as the reporting unit. We have determined that our reporting units are our operating segments, Beachbody and Other, because none of the components of either operating segment constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available or has operating results which are regularly reviewed by segment management. Goodwill was assigned to each reporting unit based on the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed assigned to each reporting unit, considering their usage in each reporting unit’s operations.
In testing for goodwill impairment, we compared the carrying value of each reporting unit to its estimated fair value. Fair value was estimated using a combination of a market approach and an income approach, with significant assumptions related to guideline company financial multiples used in the market approach and significant assumptions about revenue growth, long-term growth rates, and discount rates used in a discounted cash flow model in the income approach. While the fair value of the Beachbody reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value, the fair value of the Other reporting unit was determined to be less than its carrying value primarily due to lower revenue in the current year and long-term forecast. As a result, the Company recorded an aggregate goodwill impairment charge of $52.6 million.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. We record a provision or benefit for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of results that have been included in the financial statements.
Specifically, deferred income taxes are determined on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We must also assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets. In this evaluation, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including historical and current operating results, ongoing tax planning, and forecasts of future taxable income on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis. If, based on all available evidence, it is more likely than not that a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized, we reduce the carrying amount of our deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance. Based on the level of our losses, we established a valuation allowance of $16.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and recorded an additional $47.1 million valuation allowance during the year ended December 31, 2021. The valuation allowance was adjusted by $4.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 for acquisitions and deferred taxes related to tax deductible transaction costs included in additional paid-in capital in our consolidated financial statements. Our judgment regarding future recoverability of our deferred tax assets may change due to various factors, including changes in tax laws and changes in market conditions and their impact on our assessment of taxable income in future periods. These changes, if any, may require adjustments to the valuation allowances and an accompanying increase or decrease in net income (loss) in the period when such determination is made.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process in which (1) we determine whether it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position and (2) for those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our estimated unrecognized tax benefits were immaterial.