Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form-10K for the period ended December 31, 2021. Except as otherwise indicated herein or as the context otherwise requires, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “Bolt Bio,” “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Bolt Biotherapeutics, Inc.
Overview
We are pioneering a new class of immuno-oncology agents that combine the targeting precision of antibodies with the power of both the innate and adaptive immune systems. Our proprietary Boltbody™ ISAC approach uses immunostimulants to engage and activate myeloid cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells, that directly kill tumor cells via phagocytosis and expose tumor neoantigens to the adaptive immune system. This leads to recruitment of cytotoxic T cells and additional tumor-killing myeloid cells thereby converting immunologically “cold” tumors to “hot” tumors. Preclinical data demonstrate that this process leads to the development of systemic immunological memory with epitope spreading to neoantigens that is critical to achieving a long-term anti-tumor response. Our BDC-1001 program, currently in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial, and our BDC-2034 program, expected to enter the clinic later in 2022, both come from the Boltbody ISAC platform. Our expertise in myeloid cell biology also forms the foundation for additional, innovative ways to target the immune activation that complement our Boltbody ISAC platform. An example of this approach is BDC-3042, our Dectin-2 agonist antibody program. BDC-3042 is being developed to repolarize critical cells in the tumor microenvironment by targeting cell-surface receptors on macrophages. Dectin-2 agonism results in these tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) changing to the tumor-destructive M1 phenotype, away from the M2 phenotype, which suppresses immune responses and supports tumor growth.
Since our inception in January 2015, we have focused primarily on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, licensing, developing intellectual property, raising capital, developing our product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and early clinical trials. We have not recorded any revenue from product sales. To date, our only revenue has been derived from our collaborations with Toray and Genmab. In March 2019, we entered into the Toray Agreement to jointly develop and commercialize a Boltbody ISAC utilizing a Toray proprietary antibody. Prior to the completion of our initial public offering in February 2021, we funded our operations primarily through private placements of our convertible preferred stock for gross proceeds of $173.7 million, including Toray’s purchase of 717,514 shares of Series T convertible preferred stock for gross proceeds of $10.0 million and the January 2021 issuance and sale of 5,611,059 shares of Series C-2 preferred stock for net proceeds of $51.9 million. In February 2021, we completed our initial public offering of 13,225,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $20.00 per share, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 1,725,000 additional shares of our common stock. Including the option exercise, the aggregate net proceeds to us from the offering was approximately $242.0 million, net of underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering expenses.
In May 2021, we entered into an oncology research and development collaboration with Genmab to evaluate Genmab antibodies and bispecific antibody engineering technologies in combination with our proprietary Boltbody ISAC technology platform, with the goal of discovering and developing next-generation bispecific ISACs for the treatment of cancer. The research collaboration will evaluate multiple bispecific ISAC product candidate concepts with the potential to identify up to three clinical candidates for development. Genmab will fund the research, along with the preclinical and clinical development of these candidates through initial clinical proof of concept. Under the Genmab Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $10.0 million, and under the separate Genmab SPA, Genmab invested $15.0 million in our common stock. In August 2021, we entered into an oncology research and development collaboration with Innovent to leverage Innovent’s proprietary therapeutic antibody portfolio and antibody discovery capability against undisclosed oncology targets in combination with our advanced ISAC technology and myeloid biology expertise to create up to three new candidates for cancer treatments with the potential to provide significant benefit to patients. Innovent will fund the initial research, along with the preclinical and clinical development of these candidates through initial clinical proof of concept. Under the Innovent Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $5.0 million, and under the separate Innovent SPA, we may receive up to an additional $10.0 million from Innovent’s investment in our common stock. In September 2021, we entered into a clinical collaboration and supply agreement BMS to study BDC-1001 in combination with BMS’s nivolumab, a leading PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor, for the treatment of HER2-expressing solid tumors. Under the BMS Agreement, BMS will be providing nivolumab at no cost to us and we will sponsor, fund and conduct the initial Phase 1/2 clinical trial in accordance with an agreed-upon protocol. We initiated the clinical trial evaluating the combination of nivolumab and BDC-1001 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
We have incurred operating losses since our inception. Our net losses were $98.6 million and $60.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $207.0 million. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future, and we further expect our expenses will increase substantially as we:
•conduct our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•continue our research and development programs;
•expand our clinical, regulatory, quality and manufacturing capabilities;
•seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates; and
•operate as a public company.
Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our planned clinical trials and preclinical studies, and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Our business has been, and is expected to continue to be, impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic consequences wherever we have clinical trial sites or other business operations. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused, and could continue to cause significant disruption in the operations of CMOs, CROs and other third parties upon whom we rely. Many geographic regions have imposed restrictions to control the spread of COVID-19. Our headquarters are located in the San Francisco Bay Area and our CMOs are located in the United States and in the United Kingdom. At present, we have implemented a flexible work-from-home policy allowing employees to work from home in jobs where that is reasonable. The effects of the executive order and our work-from-home policies may negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business and delay our clinical programs and timelines, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct our business in the ordinary course. These and similar, and perhaps more severe, disruptions in our operations could negatively impact our business, operating results and financial condition.
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our productivity or our business, and as of December 31, 2021, we have not identified any significant disruption or impairment of our assets due to the pandemic. However, we cannot predict the potential future impacts of COVID-19 on us and third parties with whom we conduct business. These impacts will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. Given these uncertainties, COVID-19 could impact our business operations and our ability to execute on our associated business strategies and initiatives, and adversely impact our consolidated results of operations and our financial condition in the future, and could disrupt the business of third parties with whom we do business, including our existing and potential future collaborators. We will continue to closely monitor and evaluate the nature and extent of the impacts of COVID-19 on our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date our only revenue has been collaboration revenue derived from our collaborations with Toray and Genmab. We are collaborating with Toray to develop a Boltbody ISAC that incorporates a proprietary Toray antibody against a novel tumor antigen target. We are jointly responsible for early-stage development and for providing technical and regulatory support, and Toray will pay for the program expenses through the end of Phase 1 development. In conjunction with the collaboration, Toray purchased 717,514 shares of our Series T convertible preferred stock for $10.0 million. We evaluated the collaboration together with Toray’s purchase of Series T convertible preferred stock and allocated $1.5 million from the stock purchase proceeds to deferred revenue, which we recognize, together with payments received from Toray for compensation based on agreed-upon full-time equivalent rates and out of pocket costs, as collaboration revenue over time as we fulfill our performance obligation to Toray.
In May 2021, we entered into an oncology research and development collaboration with Genmab to evaluate Genmab antibodies and bispecific antibody engineering technologies in combination with our proprietary Boltbody ISAC technology platform, with the goal of discovering and developing next-generation bispecific ISACs for the treatment of cancer. The research collaboration will evaluate multiple bispecific ISAC concepts to identify up to three clinical candidates for development. Genmab will fund the research, along with the preclinical and clinical development of these candidates through initial clinical proof of concept. Under the Genmab Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $10.0 million, in conjunction with the collaboration, Genmab purchased 821,045 shares of our common stock for $15.0 million. We evaluated the collaboration together with Genmab’s purchase of our common stock and allocated $1.4 million from the stock purchase proceeds to deferred revenue, which we recognize, together with the $10.0 million upfront payment, payments received from Genmab for compensation based on agreed-upon full-time equivalent rates, and out-of-pocket costs, as collaboration revenue over time as we fulfill our performance obligation to Genmab.
In August 2021, we entered into an oncology research and development collaboration with Innovent to leverage Innovent’s proprietary therapeutic antibody portfolio and antibody discovery capability against undisclosed oncology targets in combination with our advanced ISAC technology and myeloid biology expertise to create up to three new candidates for cancer treatments with the potential to provide significant benefit to patients. Innovent will fund the initial research, along with the preclinical and clinical development of these candidates through initial clinical proof of concept. Under the Innovent Agreement, the Company received an upfront payment of $5.0 million and a potential equity investment in our common stock of up to $10.0 million. These contracts have been evaluated together and no consideration from the Innovent SPA has been included in the total consideration for collaboration revenue.
We expect that any collaboration revenue we generate from our current collaborations, and from any future collaboration partners, will fluctuate in the future as a result of the timing and results of development activities and the timing and amount paid, including upfront and milestone payments, and other factors.
We have not generated any revenue from product sales, and we do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize one of our product candidates.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses have related primarily to early research and discovery activities and to preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received.
Research and development expenses include:
•costs related to manufacturing our product candidates for clinical trials and preclinical studies, including fees paid to third-party manufacturers;
•salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation charges for those individuals involved in research and development efforts;
•external research and development expenses, including lab materials and supplies and payments to contract research organizations, or CROs, investigative sites and consultants to conduct our clinical trials and preclinical and non-clinical studies; and
•facilities and other allocated expenses which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, insurance and other supplies.
Our direct research and development expenses consist principally of external costs, such as fees paid to CROs and consultants in connection with our preclinical and toxicology studies and costs related to manufacturing materials for our preclinical studies. Since our inception and through December 31, 2021, the vast majority of our third-party expenses related to the research and development of BDC-1001. With the exception of cost incurred to satisfy our performance obligations under our collaboration agreements, we do not allocate employee costs and costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are associated with multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. We use internal resources primarily to conduct our research as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing, and clinical development activities. We deploy our personnel across all of our research and development activities and, as our employees work across multiple programs, we do not currently track our costs by product candidate.
We plan to continue to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates, particularly as product candidates in later stages of development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of development. We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of future clinical trials and preclinical studies of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of clinical and preclinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations.
We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates and development programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate or program on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments, and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Our future clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•the number and scope of preclinical and IND-enabling studies;
•per-patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients who participate in the trials;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and through all follow-up;
•the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
•the phase of development of our product candidates; and
•the safety and efficacy profile of our product candidates.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, and other administrative functions. Other significant costs include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting and consulting services and facility-related costs.
We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase for the foreseeable future to support our increased research and development activities and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increased costs will likely include higher expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs associated with operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Income, Net
Interest income consists of interest on our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Preferred Stock Purchase Right Liability
In connection with the issuance of our Series C-1 convertible preferred stock in June 2020, the investors agreed to buy, and we agreed to sell, additional shares of such preferred convertible stock at the original issue price upon the achievement of pre-defined milestones. These contractual obligations were required to be accounted for as liabilities and remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with any change in the fair value reported as a component of other income (expense). In January 2021, with the completion of the Series C-2 convertible preferred stock financing, this contractual obligation was settled, and the convertible preferred stock purchase right liability was remeasured to fair value on the purchase date and reclassified to permanent equity.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Collaboration Revenue
Revenue was $1.3 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue in 2021 was generated from the services performed under the Genmab Agreement as we fulfill our performance obligations to Genmab. Revenue in 2020 was generated from the services performed under the Toray Agreement as we fulfill our performance obligations to Toray. We expect to continue to provide services to further our collaborations with our partners.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $35.3 million from $40.4 million in 2020 to $75.7 million in 2021. The increase was due to $14.3 million in higher manufacturing expenses related to the timing of batch production of our product candidates, $10.3 million in higher personnel-related expenses due to an increase in headcount, $5.5 million in higher facility-related expenses, $2.9 million in higher expenses related to the ongoing BDC-1001 clinical trial due to increase in clinical sites and patient activities, and $2.2 million in higher lab supplies and contract services.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $9.3 million from $9.1 million in 2020 to $18.4 million in 2021. The increase was due to $6.4 million in higher personnel-related expenses due to an increase in headcount and $3.1 million in higher professional services expenses related to information technology and accounting services and other professional services, offset by $0.4 million in lower allocated office and facility-related expenses.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income increased by $0.1 million from $0.2 million in 2020 to $0.3 million in 2021. The increase was due to higher interest income from higher marketable securities balances.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Preferred Stock Purchase Right Liability
The $11.7 million change in fair value of convertible preferred stock purchase right liability in 2020 derived from the increase in the fair value of outstanding convertible preferred stock purchase right liability from the original estimate of $13.5 million to $25.2 million as of December 31, 2020, upon fair value remeasurement at period-end. The $6.1 million change in fair value of convertible preferred stock purchase right liability in 2021 derived from the increase in the fair value of the convertible preferred stock purchase right liability from $25.2 million as of December 31, 2020 to $31.3 million prior to the exercise of the convertible preferred stock purchase right in January 2021. Upon the exercise of the convertible preferred stock purchase right with the completion of the Series C-2 Closing in January 2021, we remeasured the convertible preferred stock purchase right liability to fair value and reclassified to permanent equity on the balance sheets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $207.0 million. Our net loss was $98.6 million and $60.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and we expect to incur additional losses in the future. We evaluated our current cash position, historical results, forecasted cash flows and plans with regard to liquidity. We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for at least 12 months following the issuance date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe we will meet longer term expected future cash requirements and obligations, through a combination of cash flows from operating activities, available cash balances, and equity or debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations, licenses, and other similar arrangements.
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for each of the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $57.1 million and $47.3 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities for 2021 was due to our net loss of $98.6 million, adjusted for $21.0 million of non-cash charges and a $20.5 million change in operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges were comprised of $8.5 million for stock-based compensation, $6.1 million related to the change in fair value of convertible preferred stock purchase right liability, $3.0 million for accretion of discount on marketable securities, $2.5 million of non-cash lease related expense, $1.2 million for depreciation and amortization expense, $0.3 million for unrealized loss on marketable securities, and $0.1 million for loss on disposal of property and equipment. The change in net operating assets was due to a $15.6 million increase in deferred revenue related to the Genmab Agreement and Innovent Agreement and a $6.7 million increase in our accounts payable and accrued expenses, offset by a decrease in operating lease liabilities and an increase in our prepaid expense and other current assets. Net cash used in operating activities for 2020 was due to our net loss of $60.7 million, adjusted for $15.7 million of non-cash charges and a $2.3 million change in operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges were comprised of $11.7 million related to the change in fair value of convertible preferred stock purchase right liability, $1.9 million of non-cash lease related expense, $1.4 million for stock-based compensation and $0.6 million for depreciation and amortization expense. The change in net operating assets was due to increases in our accounts payable and accrued expenses related to an increase in research and development expenses and the timing of vendor payments and increases in our operating lease liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 and 2020 were due to $229.9 million net purchases of marketable securities and purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $311.1 million and $39.6 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 was due to net proceeds of $244.3 million in connection with our IPO that was completed in February 2021, $51.9 million of net proceeds from the issuance of 5,611,059 shares of Series C-2 preferred stock in January 2021, $13.6 million of net proceeds from issuance of common stock related to Genmab SPA, and $1.3 million of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock from the 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan and exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 was due to net proceeds of $41.3 million for the issuance of 5,162,173 shares of our convertible preferred stock in July 2020, partially offset by payments of $1.9 million for deferred offering costs incurred in connection with our initial public offering that was completed in February 2021.
Funding Requirements
Based upon our current operating plans, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months following the issuance date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress and expenses in these trials is uncertain.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results, costs and timing of our clinical trials;
•the type, number, scope, results, costs, and timing of preclinical studies for our product candidates or other potential product candidates or indications which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•the outcome, timing and costs of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates, including commercial manufacturing;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our preclinical and clinical activities increase;
•the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities if any product candidate is approved;
•our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•patients’ willingness to pay out-of-pocket for any approved products in the absence of coverage and/or adequate reimbursement from third-party payors;
•the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•the costs of obtaining, maintaining, defending, and enforcing our patent and other intellectual property rights; and
•costs associated with any product candidates, products, or technologies that we may in-license or acquire.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity or debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations, licenses, and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams or research programs or may have to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contract Supply Agreement
In January 2022, we entered into an amended and restated supply agreement with EirGenix, Inc., or the Amended Supply Agreement, which amends the original supply agreement with EirGenix, Inc., or EirGenix, dated March 10, 2019, pursuant to which EirGenix agreed to supply to us, on a non-exclusive basis, bulk drug substance of EG12014, its monoclonal antibody being developed as a biosimilar of trastuzumab, which we use in the manufacture of BDC-1001. In addition, EirGenix provides us access to its regulatory data package and services to facilitate our development and commercialization efforts and we are required to make milestone payments to EirGenix up to an aggregate of $2.0 million based upon achievement of certain BDC-1001 regulatory milestones and pay for services based upon time and materials. The agreement will remain in effect as long as we, or any of our affiliates or licensees, continue to pursue the development or commercialization of any HER2 Boltbody ISAC, unless earlier terminated. We may terminate the agreement if EirGenix fails to supply sufficient quantities of EG12014, or if EirGenix does not obtain regulatory approval for EG12014 as a standalone biosimilar product. We may also terminate the EirGenix Agreement upon prior written notice to EirGenix. EirGenix may terminate the agreement if we do not actively develop a HER2 Boltbody ISAC for more than two years. In addition, either party may terminate the agreement for the other party’s uncured material breach or insolvency.
Collaboration Agreements
Joint Development and License Agreement with Toray Industries
In March 2019, we entered into a Joint Development and License Agreement, or the Toray Agreement, with Toray Industries, Inc., or Toray, to develop and commercialize a Boltbody ISAC containing a proprietary antibody owned by Toray. Under the Toray Agreement, we exchanged co-exclusive (with each other) licenses to certain patents and know-how covering our respective technologies. Each party is required to use commercially reasonable efforts to conduct development and regulatory activities assigned to it under a development plan. Toray will be solely responsible for both parties’ development costs up to the conclusion of the first Phase 1 clinical trial and Toray is entitled to reimbursement for 50% of such development costs from our share of revenues collected from the sale or licensing of collaboration products. After the conclusion of the first Phase 1 clinical trial, the parties will share equally all costs of development activities necessary for obtaining regulatory approval of collaboration products in the indications in the territories covered under the agreement, unless either party elects to opt out of its co-funding obligations or reduce them by half, which election can be on a region-by-region basis. Both parties are currently reevaluating of the research plan and the outcome of this reevaluation may impact the scope and timing of the collaboration.
Oncology Research and Development Collaboration with Genmab A/S
In May 2021, we entered into a License and Collaboration Agreement, or the Genmab Agreement, with Genmab A/S, or Genmab. Together, the companies will evaluate Genmab antibodies and bispecific antibody technologies in combination with our ISAC technology platform, with the goal of discovering and developing next-generation bispecific ISACs for the treatment of cancer. Under this research collaboration, the companies will evaluate multiple bispecific ISAC concepts to identify up to three clinical candidates for development. Genmab will fund the research, along with the preclinical and clinical development of these candidates through initial clinical proof of concept. Under the Genmab Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $10.0 million and an equity investment of $15.0 million under a separate stock purchase agreement. Under the Genmab Agreement, we will be compensated for research and development services at the agreed upon full-time employee rate and third-party costs through initial clinical proof of concept of the therapeutic candidates, after which both parties can exercise their respective program opt-in rights. With respect to each candidate for which a party has exercised its program opt-in rights and has exclusive global rights, the other party is eligible to receive potential development and sales-based milestone payments and tiered royalties. Bolt is eligible to receive total potential milestone payments of up to $285.0 million per therapeutic candidate exclusively developed and commercialized by Genmab, along with tiered royalties.
Oncology Research and Development Collaboration with Innovent Biologics, Inc.
In August 2021, we entered into a License and Collaboration Agreement, or the Innovent Agreement, with Innovent Biologics, Inc., or Innovent. Together, the companies will leverage Innovent’s proprietary therapeutic antibody portfolio and antibody discovery capability against undisclosed oncology targets in combination with our Boltbody ISAC technology and myeloid biology expertise to create up to three new candidates for cancer treatments. Innovent will fund the initial research, along with the preclinical and clinical development of these candidates through initial clinical proof of concept. Under the Innovent Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $5.0 million. Under the Innovent Agreement, we will be compensated for research and development services at the agreed upon full-time employee rate and third-party costs through initial clinical proof of concept of the therapeutic candidates, after which both parties can exercise their respective license rights. The Innovent Agreement includes license options exercisable by each party to exclusively develop, manufacture and commercialize each candidate in a specific territory. With respect to each candidate for which a party has exercised its license option, the other party is eligible to receive a license option exercise fee, potential development and sales-based milestone payments and tiered royalties.
Oncology Clinical Trial Collaboration and Supply Agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb
In September 2021, we entered into a clinical collaboration and supply agreement, or the BMS Agreement, with Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, or BMS, to study BDC-1001 in combination with BMS’s PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor nivolumab, for the treatment of HER2-expressing solid tumors. Under the BMS Agreement, BMS granted us a non-exclusive, non-transferrable, royalty-free license (with a right to sublicense) under its intellectual property to use nivolumab in a clinical trial for a combination therapy of nivolumab and our proprietary compound, BDC-1001, and has agreed to supply nivolumab at no cost to us and we will sponsor, fund and conduct the initial Phase 1/2 clinical trial in accordance with an agreed-upon protocol. Both parties will own the study data produced in the clinical trial, other than study data related solely to nivolumab, which will belong solely to BMS, or study data related solely to BDC-1001, which will belong solely to us. The parties may conduct additional clinical trials on the combined therapy which may be sponsored and funded by one party, or jointly funded. We initiated the clinical trial evaluating the combination of nivolumab and BDC-1001 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
License Agreements
License Agreements with Stanford University
In May 2015 and June 2018, we entered into license agreements with Stanford, pursuant to which Stanford granted us worldwide exclusive licenses under certain patents related to our proprietary Boltbody ISAC technology and myeloid modulation for cancer immunotherapy, respectively. Under these agreements, we are obligated to pay annual license maintenance fees, which are nominal and will be creditable against any royalties payable to Stanford under such agreement in the applicable year. We are required in each agreement to make milestone payments up to an aggregate of $0.4 million for the first licensed product under such agreement that meets certain patent issuance, clinical and regulatory milestones, and an additional milestone payment of $0.2 million for each additional regulatory approval. We also agreed in each agreement to pay Stanford tiered royalties on our and our sublicensees’ net sales of licensed products, at low single-digit percentage rates, subject to certain customary reductions. Our royalty obligations continue for the term of each agreement, and we are required to pay royalties on any licensed products made, used, imported or offered for sale during the term of such agreement but sold after the term of the agreement. In addition, we are obligated in each agreement to pay Stanford a sub-teen double digit to low teen double-digit percentage, based on the date of sublicensing, of certain consideration we receive as a result of granting sublicenses to the licensed patents. Pursuant to each agreement, we will reimburse Stanford’s patent expenses, including reasonable costs incurred in assisting us with prosecuting and maintaining licensed patents.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
For all periods presented, we recognized revenue in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standard Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contract with Customers, or ASC 606. In accordance with ASC 606, when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We perform the following five steps in determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of these agreements:
•identification of the promised goods and services in the contract;
•determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract;
•measurement of the transaction price, including any constraint on variable consideration;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy each performance obligation.
If an agreement includes a license to our intellectual property and that license is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. For combined performance obligation that is satisfied over time, collaboration revenue is recognized over time proportionate to the costs incurred to perform the services using an input method as a measure of progress towards satisfying the performance obligation, which is based on project hours. In some agreements, we receive compensation for the research and development services performed, which may be billed in the quarter ahead of performance and are trued up on the subsequent quarter’s invoice following the work performed, or billed based on actual hours incurred. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimated hours to complete our performance obligation will be recorded in the period in which changes are identified and amounts can be reasonably estimated. While such changes to our estimates have no impact on our reported cash flows, the amount of revenue recorded in the period could be materially impacted.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the above revenue recognition criteria were recognized as deferred revenue until all applicable revenue recognition criteria were met. Deferred revenue represented the portion of payments received that have not been earned.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, consultants and CROs, in connection with conducting research and development activities. The financial terms of these contracts vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. We reflect research and development expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended.
We account for these expenses according to the progress of the preclinical study as measured by the timing of various aspects of the study or related activities. We determine accrual estimates through review of the underlying contracts along with discussions with our third-party services providers and our personnel as to the progress of studies, or other services being conducted. During the course of a study, we adjust our rate of expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrual is dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party vendors. Variations in the assumptions used to estimate accruals including, but not limited to, the number of patients enrolled, the rate of patient enrollment and the actual services performed, may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to clinical trial expenses in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our financial condition and results of operations. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense represents the cost of the grant date fair value of equity awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize forfeitures as they occur.
For restricted stock awards, the fair value of the award is the estimated fair value of our common stock on the grant date, as determined by our board of directors.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of stock options, the expected dividend yield and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. See Note 10 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted in 2021 and 2020.
In 2021 and 2020, stock-based compensation expense related to stock options was $8.5 million and $1.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to stock options was $24.2 million and is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.5 years.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an "emerging growth company" may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Therefore, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards, and, therefore, will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of our initial public offering, is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Net Operating Loss and Research and Development Carryforwards and Other Income Tax Information
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state NOL carryforwards of $178.1 million and $168.5 million, respectively. The federal NOLs include $4.5 million that may be used to offset up to 100% of future taxable income and will begin to expire in 2035 unless previously utilized and $173.6 million that are not subject to expiration. The net operating loss carryforwards subject to expiration could expire unused and be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities. The federal NOLs not subject to expiration are available to offset up to 80% of taxable income each year indefinitely. The state NOL carryforwards will begin to expire in 2035, unless previously utilized. As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research credit carryforwards of $4.7 million and $3.6 million, respectively. The federal research and development tax credit carryforwards expire beginning in 2038 unless previously utilized, and the state research and development tax credit carryforwards do not expire. We have established valuation allowances against our NOLs and research and development credits due to the uncertainty surrounding the realization of these assets. We file tax returns in the U.S. and California. We are not currently under examination in any of these jurisdictions and all its tax years remain effectively open to examination due to net operating loss carryforwards.
We have not completed a Section 382 study to assess whether an ownership change has occurred or whether there have been multiple ownership changes since our formation due to the complexity and cost associated with such a study and the fact that there may be additional such ownership changes in the future. Pursuant to Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code, annual use of our NOL and research and development tax credit carryforwards may be limited in the event a cumulative change in ownership of more than 50% occurs within a three-year period.