Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion should be read in conjunction with Bowlero Corp.’s audited consolidated financial statements and notes included herein. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described under the heading “Risk Factors.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. All period references are to our fiscal periods unless otherwise indicated. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Company,” and “Bowlero” are intended to mean the business and operations of Bowlero Corp. and its consolidated subsidiaries. Unless otherwise indicated, all financial information in this section is presented in thousands.
Overview
Bowlero Corp. is the world’s largest operator of bowling entertainment centers. The Company operates traditional bowling centers and more upscale entertainment concepts with lounge seating, arcades, enhanced food and beverage offerings, and more robust customer service for individuals and group events, as well as hosting and overseeing professional and non-professional bowling tournaments and related broadcasting.
The Company remains focused on creating long-term shareholder value through continued organic growth, the conversion and upgrading of centers to more upscale entertainment concepts offering a broader range of offerings, the opening of new centers and acquisitions. A core tenet of our long-term strategy to increase profitability is to grow the size and scale of the Company in order to improve our leverage of Selling, General and Administrative expenses (“SG&A”). Due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s revenue for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 decreased by 26.7% on a same-store basis. However, during fiscal year 2021, the Company saw positive trends for revenue growth as we re-opened our centers, as well as positive growth from acquisitions and new centers. Our current fiscal year ended July 3, 2022 was fifty-three weeks, while fiscal year 2021 and pre-pandemic were fifty-two weeks. The additional week in fiscal 2022 added approximately $14,921 in sales. The following amounts are reported fiscal year amounts and are not adjusted for the additional week in fiscal 2022. For fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 (which was adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic) and pre-pandemic periods (the first and second quarters of fiscal 2020 combined with the third and fourth quarter of fiscal 2019), the Company’s total revenue (inclusive of acquisitions and new centers) increased by 131% and 31%, respectively. For fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 (which was adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic) and pre-pandemic periods (the first and second quarters of fiscal 2020 combined with the third and fourth quarter of fiscal 2019), the Company’s total revenue on a same-store basis increased by 120% and 19%, respectively.
Same-store revenues includes centers that are open in periods presented (open in both the current period and the prior period being reported) and excludes centers that are not open in periods presented, such as acquired new centers or centers closed for upgrades, renovations or other such reasons, as well as media revenues. We continue to see positive momentum for future demand and we have recovered to better than pre-pandemic performance. This growth came despite the emergence of the COVID-19 Omicron and other variants, which had a significant impact on our results. In particular, the corporate event business (which typically peaks in the second fiscal quarter) was significantly reduced in connection with delayed/reversed returns to the office. This was particularly impactful in New York City area and Silicon Valley, CA area. While we generated a strong financial performance prior to the COVID-19 pandemic and during the previous four quarters, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, various COVID-19 virus variants, the governmental actions imposed in response to the pandemic, and the resulting consequences on our consumer’s risk tolerance toward health and safety matters remains uncertain.
Business Combination
On December 15, 2021, we completed the Business Combination contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2021, as amended on November 1, 2021, by and among Isos and Bowlero Corp. (“Old Bowlero”). Pursuant to the BCA, Old Bowlero was merged with and into Isos, with Isos surviving the merger, and Isos was renamed “Bowlero Corp.”
Recent Developments
Bowlero’s results for the current fiscal year ended 2022 exhibited a strong rebound in our operations after the COVID-19 pandemic, the strength of our business model, the increase in confidence of our customers and the resilience in
the bowling market. Additionally, the further improvements in our quarterly results demonstrate our continued ability to execute our growth strategy and business model. To highlight the Company’s recent activity during the fiscal year ended July 3, 2022:
•We made ten acquisitions (inclusive of those acquisitions of businesses that are accounted for as asset acquisitions) that we believe will aid the Company in several key geographic markets and aid in leveraging our fixed costs by adding 27 net new centers. We had signed two agreements to acquire three additional centers as of July 3, 2022, which are expected to close in fiscal year 2023.
•During fiscal year 2022, we completed two new builds, which opened in the beginning of our second fiscal quarter. We also signed three new agreements for build-outs in prime markets.
We continue to address the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the governmental actions imposed in response to it. The rise of other variants of COVID-19 and public health officials’ response to potential resurgences in the virus could impact our future operations. Although we believe our recent results, actions and goals exhibit our strength in the bowling market and our position for the future growth, we may incur future expenses related to training, hiring and retaining associates, and navigating the disruption in the food and beverage supply chains. For more, see “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Bowlero’s Business and Industry.”
Impact of COVID-19
The Company continues to monitor health authority requirements when evaluating the protocols we have in place. While the future impact of the COVID-19 situation is not known, as centers remain open and operating, we continue to see favorable trends with increasing sales and positive center-level cash flows due, in part, to a revamped operating model that is being executed at lower cost. We continue to monitor the situation closely and it is possible that we will implement further measures.
Trends
There are a number of trends that we expect to materially affect our future profitability, including changing economic conditions with the resulting impact on our sales, profitability, and capital spending, changes in our debt levels and applicable interest rates, and increasing prices of labor, raw materials and other food and beverage costs. Additionally, sales and results of operations could be impacted by acquisitions and restructuring projects. Restructuring can include various projects, including closure of centers not performing well, cost reductions through staffing reductions, and optimizing and allocating resources to improve profitability.
The following graph and table detail the Company’s quarterly revenues and net income (loss) over the previous eight quarters:
Presentation of Results of Operations
The Company reports on a fiscal year with each quarter generally comprised of one 5-week period and two 4-week periods. Our current fiscal year ended July 3, 2022 (“fiscal 2022”) was fifty-three weeks, which consisted of an extra week in the last period of quarter four as compared to our fifty-two week fiscal years. Fiscal year 2021 was fifty-two weeks and ended on June 27, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”).
All amounts are presented in thousands, unless otherwise noted, except share and per share amounts.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended July 3, 2022 Compared To the Fiscal Year Ended June 27, 2021
Analysis of Consolidated Statement of Operations. The following table displays certain items from our consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ends presented below:
___________
Note: Fiscal 2022 consisted of 53 weeks compared to fiscal 2021, which consisted of 52 weeks.
Note: (1) Percent calculated as a percentage of revenues and may not total due to rounding.
Revenues: For fiscal 2022, revenues totaled $911,705 and represented an increase of $516,471, or 131%, over the prior fiscal year. The Company’s revenue for fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 increased by 120% on a same-store basis. The overall increase in revenues is due to the continued organic growth, improvement in market conditions, with less COVID-related restrictions put in place by federal, state and local government policies, the impact of 29 centers added through acquisitions and new construction and the additional week in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. The additional week in fiscal 2022 added approximately $14,921 in sales as compared to fiscal 2021. The following table summarizes the increase in the Company’s revenue on a same-store-basis for fiscal 2022 (including the additional week) compared to fiscal 2021:
Same-store revenues includes centers that are open in periods presented (open in both the current period and the prior period being reported) and excludes centers that are not open in periods presented such as acquired new centers or centers closed for upgrades, renovations or other such reasons, as well as media revenues. The increase in same-store revenues during fiscal 2022 reflects a significantly lower level of center closures and restrictions on our operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as compared to fiscal 2021, as well as an overall improvement in demand for our products and services.
Cost of Revenues: The Company’s cost of revenues includes costs that are not variable or less variable with changes in revenues, such as depreciation, amortization, rent, property taxes, supplies and insurance, as well as more fully variable costs that include labor, food and beverage costs, prize funds, production expenses and amusement costs. The increase in cost of revenues of $235,716, or 63%, is mainly due to the increase in revenues and operating activities in comparison to the prior fiscal year, as well as the higher costs due to inflation. In fiscal 2021, our operations were greatly impacted by the closure of our centers in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, and we responded by cutting costs. Partially offsetting the increase in costs of revenue is a reduction in rent expense of approximately $5,603 related to rent relief obtained by the Company. As detailed in Note 6 - Leases to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, this rent abatement is part of the Company's efforts to secure rent relief from landlords due to the COVID-19 pandemic closures. Cost of revenues as a percent of revenues decreased from 95% during fiscal 2021 to 67% during fiscal 2022, mainly due to the increase in revenues and the resulting operating leverage expansion, since a large portion of our cost of revenues do not generally grow with increased sales. As we increase our revenues, we expect our cost of revenues as a percent of revenue to continue to decrease.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”): SG&A expenses include employee related costs with payroll and benefits as well as depreciation and amortization (excluding those related to our center operations), media and promotional expenses. SG&A expenses increased $102,367 or 131% to $180,702, mainly due to approximately $68,405 in transactional costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Business Combination, including share-based compensation of $42,212 incurred in connection with the Business Combination. Also contributing to the overall increase in SG&A is the increase in revenues and operating activities as compared to the same period last fiscal year, including an increase of $8,275 in compensation, an increase of $4,860 in share-based compensation not directly related to the close of the Business Combination, a $3,783 increase in professional fees and the overall impact of higher costs due to inflation. The increase in compensation costs mainly reflects increases in pay rates and higher staffing to support the increase in business. The increase in share-based compensation costs reflects new equity awards as a public-company to key members of management as an incentive to motivate and retain associates. Partially offsetting the increase in SG&A costs is a reduction in rent expense of approximately $1,867 related to COVID-19 rent relief obtained by the Company. As detailed in Note 6 - Leases to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, this rent abatement is part of the Company's efforts to secure rent relief from landlords in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic closures. Total SG&A expenses as a percent of net sales for fiscal 2022 was approximately 20%, which was materially unchanged when compared to fiscal 2021. SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenue would have decreased as compared to the prior year except for the higher costs associated with the Business Combination. The Company is able to achieve improved operating leverage with the impact of higher revenues, since a large proportion of our SG&A costs are highly leverageable and not variable with changes in revenue. Excluding the $68,405 in Business Combination-related transactional costs and expenses, SG&A costs as a percentage of revenues were approximately 12%.
Other operating expense: Other operating expenses include various cost, including professional fees related to transactions, such as acquisitions of centers. The increase in other operating expenses is mainly due to an increase in transactions as compared to the prior year.
Business interruption insurance proceeds: During fiscal 2021, the Company collected and recognized as income $20,188 in business interruption insurance proceeds due to the closure of our centers starting in mid-March 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic. There were no business interruption insurance proceeds received during the current fiscal year.
Interest expense, net: Interest expense primarily relates to interest on debt and capital leases. Interest expense increased $5,603, or 6%, to $94,460. The higher interest expense is primarily the result of our increased capital lease obligation and expense during fiscal 2022. Total average outstanding debt was approximately $881,046 during fiscal 2022 as compared to $866,993 during fiscal 2021. The Company’s weighted average interest rate on debt was approximately 5.39% for fiscal 2022, as compared to 5.48% for fiscal 2021.
Change in fair value of earnouts and warrants: As a result of Business Combination, the Company recorded liabilities for earnouts and warrants. The Company redeemed all outstanding public and private warrants as of May 16, 2022. Changes in the fair value of the earnout and warrant liabilities are recognized in the statement of operations. Decreases in the liability will have a favorable impact on the statement of operations and increases in the liability will have an unfavorable impact. The estimated fair value of the liabilities is determined using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. Inputs that have a significant effect on the valuation include the expected volatility, stock price, expected term, risk-free interest rate and performance hurdles. The unfavorable impact on the statement of operations during fiscal 2022 is due to the increase in the fair value of the earnouts and warrants, which mainly reflects the increase in the Company’s stock price.
Income Taxes: Income tax (benefit) expense and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s assessment of the Company’s tax position.
The income tax benefit for fiscal 2022 is due to the release of a portion of the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets resulting from recording of deferred tax liabilities associated with accounting for the acquisition of Bowl America, which was partially offset by increases in income tax expense due to higher taxable income with improved operating results and income from the sale of certain Bowl America non-operating assets. The prior year income tax benefit was mainly driven by losses before tax offset in part by valuation allowance increases.
No provisions for United States income taxes have been made with respect to earnings that are planned to be reinvested indefinitely outside the United States.
The amount of income taxes the Company pays is subject to audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Management performs a comprehensive review of our tax positions and accrues estimated amounts for applicable tax positions. Based on these reviews, the results of discussions and resolutions of matters with certain tax authorities and the closure of tax years subject to tax audit, liabilities for applicable tax positions are adjusted as necessary.
Non-GAAP measure
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that is not in accordance with, or an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. The Company believes certain financial measures which meet the definition of non-GAAP financial measures provide important supplemental information. The Company considers Adjusted EBITDA as an important financial measure because it provides a financial measure of the quality of the Company’s earnings. Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, which might limit its usefulness as a comparative measure. Adjusted EBITDA is used by management in addition to and in conjunction with the results presented in accordance with GAAP. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA solely as a supplemental disclosure because we believe it allows for a more complete analysis of results of operations and assists investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance, such as Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, Share-based Compensation, EBITDA from Closed Centers, Foreign Currency Exchange Loss (Gain), Asset Disposition Loss (Gain), Transactional and other advisory costs, Charges attributed to new initiatives, Extraordinary unusual non-recurring gains or losses and Changes in the value of earnouts and warrants. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are that Adjusted EBITDA and trailing twelve month Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect:
•every expenditure, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•changes in our working capital needs;
•the interest expense, or the amounts necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our outstanding debt;
•income tax (benefit) expense, and because the payment of taxes is part of our operations, tax expense is a necessary element of our costs and ability to operate;
•non-cash equity compensation, which will remain a key element of our overall equity based compensation package; and
•the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations.
Refer to notes below for additional details concerning the respective items for Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table provides a reconciliation from net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the fiscal years ended July 3, 2022 and June 27, 2021 :
Adjusted EBITDA represents Net income (loss) before Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization, Share-based Compensation, EBITDA from Closed Centers, Foreign Currency Exchange Loss (Gain), Asset Disposition Loss (Gain), Transactional and other advisory costs, Charges attributed to new initiatives, Extraordinary unusual non-recurring gains or losses and Changes in the value of earnouts and warrants. Refer to notes below for additional details concerning the respective items for Adjusted EBITDA.
Notes to Adjusted EBITDA:
(1)The closed center adjustment is to remove EBITDA for closed centers. Closed centers are those centers that are closed for a variety of reasons, including permanent closure, newly acquired or built centers prior to opening, centers closed for renovation or rebranding and conversion. Closed centers do not include centers closed in compliance with local, state and federal government restrictions due to COVID-19. If a center is not open on the last day of the reporting period, it will be considered closed for that reporting period. If the center is closed on the first day of the reporting period for permanent closure, the center will be considered closed for that reporting period.
(2)The adjustment for transaction costs and other advisory costs is to remove charges incurred in connection with any transaction, including mergers, acquisitions, refinancing, amendment or modification to indebtedness, dispositions and costs in connection with an initial public offering, in each case, regardless of whether consummated.
(3)The adjustment for charges attributed to new initiatives is to remove actual charges attributed to new initiatives, including charges with the undertaking and/or implementation of new initiatives, business optimization activities, cost savings initiatives, cost rationalization programs, operating expense reductions and/or synergies and/or similar initiatives and/or programs including any restructuring charge (including any charges relating to any tax restructuring), any charge relating to the closure or consolidation of any office or facility, any systems implementation charge, any severance charge, any one time compensation charge, any charge relating to entry into a new market, any charge relating to any strategic initiative or contract and any lease run-off charge.
(4)The adjustment for extraordinary unusual non-recurring gains or losses is to remove extraordinary gains and losses, which include any gain or charge from any extraordinary item as determined in good faith by the Company and/or
any non-recurring or unusual item as determined in good faith by the Company and/or any charge associated with and/or payment of any legal settlement, fine, judgment or order.
(5)The adjustment for changes in the value of earnouts and warrants is to remove of the impact of the revaluation of the earnouts and warrants. As a result of the Business Combination, the Company recorded liabilities for earnouts and warrants. Changes in the fair value of the earnout and warrant liabilities are recognized in the statement of operations. Decreases in the liability will have a favorable impact on the statement of operations and increases in the liability will have an unfavorable impact. The adjustment also includes realized costs associated with the settlement of warrants during the fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We manage our liquidity through assessing available cash-on-hand, our ability to generate cash and our ability to borrow or otherwise raise capital to fund operating, investing and financing activities. The Company remains in a positive financial position with available cash balances. We also obtained rent deferrals or abatements on a substantial number of our leases due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
A core tenet of our long-term strategy is to grow the size and scale of the Company in order to improve our operating profit margins through leveraging our fixed costs. As such, one of the Company’s known cash requirements is for capital expenditures related to the construction of new centers and upgrading and converting existing centers. We believe our financial position, generation of cash, available cash on hand, existing credit facility, and access to potentially obtain additional financing from sale-lease-back transactions or other sources will provide sufficient capital resources to fund our operational requirements, capital expenditures, and material short and long-term commitments for the foreseeable future. However, there are a number of factors that may hinder our ability to access these capital resources, including but not limited to the ongoing impacts of COVID-19 on our business, our degree of leverage, and potential borrowing restrictions imposed by our lenders. See “Risk Factors” for further information.
On December 15, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our First Lien Credit Agreement, dated as of July 3, 2017, by and among Bowlero, Kingpin Intermediate Holdings LLC, as borrower, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and the lenders from time to time party thereto (as amended, the “First Lien Credit Agreement”), pursuant to which we refinanced our then-existing revolving credit facility with a $140,000 senior secured revolving credit facility that has a maturity date of the earlier of December 15, 2026 or the date that is 90 days prior to the scheduled maturity date of term loans outstanding under the First Lien Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount exceeding $175,000. Interest on borrowings under the new revolving credit facility is initially based on either the Adjusted Term SOFR Rate or the Alternate Base Rate (each as defined in the First Lien Credit Agreement). In addition, on December 17, 2021, we entered into a further amendment to the First Lien Credit Agreement pursuant to which the total revolving commitments under the new revolving credit facility were increased by $25,000 to an aggregate amount of $165,000.
On December 15, 2021, the principal, accrued and unpaid interest, fees, premium, if any, and other amounts (other than obligations not then due and payable or that by their terms survive the termination thereof) outstanding under the Incremental Liquidity Facility was repaid in full and all commitments to extend credit thereunder were terminated.
At July 3, 2022, we had approximately $132,236 of available cash and cash equivalents.
Fiscal Year Ended July 3, 2022 Compared To the Fiscal Year Ended June 27, 2021
The following compares the primary categories of the consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended July 3, 2022 and June 27, 2021:
During fiscal 2022, net cash provided from operations totaled $177,670, as compared to $58,232 during the prior fiscal year. The increase in cash provided by operating activities reflects the strong recovery with higher revenues and
operating leverage. We benefited during fiscal year 2022 from the rebound in consumer demand and revenues from recently acquired centers and opening newly built centers.
Investing activities utilized $220,345, reflecting our acquisitions of businesses, including $44,621 related to the asset acquisition of Bowl America, and capital expenditures, as well as center conversions and related capital expenditures. We expect to continue to invest in accretive acquisitions in future periods as well as center upgrades and conversions.
Financing activities utilized $12,136 in fiscal 2022 reflecting $31,463 for the repurchase of treasury stock, $5,375 for the settlement of warrants and scheduled long-term debt payments, partially offset by net funds received from the Business Combination. In the comparable period in the prior fiscal year, we obtained additional funds under our Incremental Liquidity Facility, which was entered into on September 25, 2020, as part of the Company’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic to increase liquidity.
Our contractual obligations primarily include, but are not limited to, debt service, self-insurance liabilities, and leasing arrangements. The Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K provide additional information on the timing and amounts of those contractual obligations. We believe our sources of liquidity, namely available cash on hand, positive operating cash flows, and access to capital markets will continue to be adequate to meet our contractual obligations, as well as fund working capital, planned capital expenditures, center acquisitions, and execute purchases under our share repurchase program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of July 3, 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our results of operations and financial condition as reflected in the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates, judgements, and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates and judgments on historical experience and assumptions believed to be reasonable under current facts and circumstances. Actual results, however, may differ from the estimated amounts we have recorded. We regularly evaluate these estimates, judgements and assumptions.
The following discussion provides information on our critical accounting estimates that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, and which may result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. Additionally, we expect that the COVID-19 outbreak may impact future assumptions and estimates made related to the critical accounting estimates listed below, though the extent of those impacts is uncertain at this time.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets (such as Bowlero and Professional Bowlers Association trade names and liquor licenses), including property and equipment and other definite-lived intangibles such as trade names and customer relationships are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The COVID-19 pandemic did not result in an impairment of long-lived assets since the COVID-19 situation was considered temporary and the Company’s overall business was expected to recover.
For long-lived assets, an impairment is indicated when the estimated total undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset or group of assets is less than carrying value. If impairment exists, an adjustment is made to write the asset down to its fair value, and a loss is recorded as the difference between the carrying value and fair value. The Company recognized impairment charges of $1,548 and $386 in fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively. The impairments primarily relate to long-lived assets for an open center, closed centers and liquor licenses. We estimated the fair value of these assets utilizing the business enterprise valuation based on discounted cash flows for the open center, and for the closed centers and liquor licenses, the market approach using orderly liquidation values or broker quotes for sale of similar properties. We then compared these fair values to the related carrying value of the long-lived assets.
Impairment of Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Management assesses impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets, including goodwill, brokered liquor licenses on a quota system and our Bowlero and Professional Bowlers Association trade names, on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or more frequently under certain circumstances.
We assessed macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors that could have a negative impact, overall financial performance including actual results and trends, and other relevant entity-specific events. For fiscal 2022, we performed a qualitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill and brokered liquor licenses. For fiscal 2021, the Company performed a quantitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill and brokered liquor licenses due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with the temporary closure of our centers. There were no impairment charges for goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets other than brokered liquor licenses recorded in fiscal 2022 or 2021.
Valuation of Earnouts and Warrants
The estimated fair value of the earnout liabilities is determined by using a Monte-Carlo simulation model and the estimated fair value of previous warrant liabilities was determined by using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. Inputs that have a significant effect on the valuation include the expected volatility, stock price, expected term, risk-free interest rate and performance hurdles.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Recently Issued Accounting Standards: In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (“Topic 842”). Following ASU 2016-02, the FASB issued subsequent guidance and amendments including ASU 2017-13, 2018-01, 2018-11, 2018-20, 2019-01, and 2020-05 (collectively, including ASU 2016-02, “Topic 842”). Topic 842 will replace the guidance in Topic 840. The main objectives are to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by recognizing right-of-use assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. The right-of-use asset reflects the lessee’s right to direct the use of and obtain substantially all the economic benefits from that asset over the lease term, and it will be based on the lease liability at commencement, subject to certain adjustments such as accrued rent, lease incentives, lease intangibles, initial direct costs and prepaid rent. The lease liability reflects the obligation to make payments for the right to use that asset, which is the present value of future payments. Operating leases will remain being expensed on the straight-line basis of the lease, and finance leases will retain their front-loaded expense pattern, similar to current capital leases.
As a result of ASU 2020-05, Topic 842 will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company has not adopted Topic 842, which be effective for the Company for its fiscal year ending 2023. We are currently evaluating our lease population, current processes, internal controls, and timeline required for adoption. Additionally, we are still evaluating the practical expedients and the methods of adoption that we will use when adopting the new standard. Although management continues to evaluate the effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and disclosures, management currently estimates total operating lease assets and liabilities will increase approximately $430,000 to $530,000, respectively, upon adoption based on the lease population as of July 3, 2022. The Company estimates that this standard will result in a material impact to our balance sheet from the recognition of right of use assets and liabilities. We do not believe the adoption of this standard will have a material impact on our statement of operations or cash flows.
Emerging Growth Company Accounting Election
The Company is an emerging growth company, as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements.
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a registration statement under the Securities Act declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies
adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with those of another public company that is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of Isos’ IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1,070,000 or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common equity that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700,000 as of the end of the prior fiscal year’s second fiscal quarter; and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1,000,000 in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period. References herein to “emerging growth company” have the meaning associated with it in the JOBS Act.