Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Box is the Content Cloud: one secure, cloud-native platform for managing the entire content journey. Content - from blueprints to wireframes, videos to documents, proprietary formats to PDFs - is the source of an organization’s unique value. Our cloud content management platform enables our customers, including 67% of the Fortune 500, to securely manage the entire content lifecycle, from the moment a file is created or ingested to when it’s shared, edited, published, approved, signed, classified, and retained. Box keeps content secure and compliant, while also allowing easy access and sharing of this content from anywhere, on any device - both within the organization and with external partners.
With our Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) platform, users can collaborate on content both internally and with external parties, automate content-driven business processes, develop custom applications, and implement data protection, security and compliance features to comply with legal and regulatory requirements, internal policies and industry standards and regulations. The Box Content Cloud accelerates business processes, improves employee productivity, enables secure remote work, and protects an organization’s most valuable data. Our platform enables a broad set of high-value business use cases across enterprises, hundreds of file formats and media types, and user experiences. Our platform integrates with more than 1,500 leading enterprise business applications, and is compatible with multiple application environments, operating systems and devices, ensuring that workers can securely access their critical business content whenever and wherever they need it.
In addition, we continue to innovate by expanding our core services and offerings with a focus on frictionless security and compliance, seamless internal and external collaboration and workflow, and integration with best-of-breed applications. For example, we provide Box Shield, our advanced security offering that helps customers reduce the risk of accidental content leakage and protect their business from insider threats and account compromise; Box KeySafe, a solution that builds on top of Box’s strong encryption and security capabilities to give customers greater control over the encryption keys used to secure the file contents that are stored with Box; Box Governance, which gives customers a better way to comply with regulatory policies, satisfy e-discovery requests and effectively manage sensitive business information throughout its lifecycle; Box Relay, which allows our end users to easily build, manage and track their own workflows; Box Sign, which enables customers to securely send documents for electronic signature directly from Box; Box Platform, which further enables customers and partners to build enterprise apps using our open APIs and developer tools; and Box Zones, which gives global customers the ability to store their content locally in certain regions. We also offer self-service and managed content migration services with Box Shuttle, and with Box Consulting, we also provide in-house professional services such as implementation support, assisted content migration, and change management. The increasing traction of these product innovations allows our customers to realize the full set of capabilities of our Content Cloud.
We offer our solution to our customers as a subscription-based service, with subscription fees based on the requirements of our customers, including the number of users and functionality deployed. The majority of our customers subscribe to our service through one-year contracts, although we also offer our services for terms ranging from one month to three years or more. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multi-year, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. We recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligations. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the term of the contract.
Our objective is to build an enduring business that creates sustainable revenue and earnings growth over the long term. To best achieve this objective, we focus on growing the number of users and paying organizations through direct field sales, direct inside sales, indirect channel sales and through word-of-mouth by individual users, some of whom use our services at no cost. Individual users and organizations can also simply sign up to use our solution on our website. We believe this approach not only helps us build a critical mass of users but also has a viral effect within organizations as more of their employees use our service and encourage their IT professionals to deploy our services to a broader user base.
As of January 31, 2022, we had over 100,000 paying organizations, and our solution was offered in 25 languages. We define paying organizations as separate and distinct buying entities, such as a company, an educational or government institution, or a distinct business unit of a large corporation, that have entered into a subscription agreement with us to utilize our services.
Organizations typically purchase our solution in the following ways: (i) employees in one or more small groups within the organization may individually purchase our service; (ii) organizations may purchase IT-sponsored, enterprise-level agreements with deployments for specific, targeted use cases ranging from tens to thousands of user seats; (iii) organizations may purchase IT- sponsored, enterprise-level agreements where the number of user seats sold is intended to accommodate and enable nearly all information workers within the organization in whatever use cases they desire to adopt over the term of the subscription; and (iv) organizations may purchase our Box Platform service to create custom business applications for their internal use and extended ecosystem of customers, suppliers and partners. Customers can choose between an a la carte approach (i.e., by purchasing specific add-on products to complement their Box subscription) or one of our bundled Enterprise Plus plan, which include multiple add-on products to help accelerate customer time to value.
We intend to continue scaling our organization to meet the increasingly complex needs of our customers. Our sales and customer success teams are organized to efficiently serve organizations ranging from small businesses to the world’s largest global organizations. We have invested in our sales and marketing teams to sell our services around the world, as well as in our development efforts to deliver additional features and capabilities of our cloud services to address our customers’ evolving needs. We also expect to continue to make investments in both our infrastructure to meet the needs of our growing global user base and our professional services organization (Box Consulting) to address the strategic needs of our customers in more complex deployments and to drive broader adoption across a wide array of use cases.
Current Period Highlights
For the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, our revenue was $874.3 million and $770.8 million, respectively, representing year-over-year growth of 13%. As of January 31, 2021, our remaining performance obligations were $1.1 billion, representing a 19% increase from our remaining performance obligations of $896.9 million as of January 31, 2021. For the year ended January 31, 2022, our operating loss was $27.6 million, and our operating margin was negative 3%, compared to our operating loss of $37.6 million and our operating margin of negative 5% for the year ended January 31, 2021. Our operating loss included $15.6 million in fees related to shareholder activism during the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $1.4 million during the year ended January 31, 2021. For the year ended January 31, 2022, our net cash provided by operating activities was $234.8 million, compared to our net cash provided by operating activities of $196.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. For the year ended January 31, 2022, our free cash flow was positive $170.2 million, an increase of $49.9 million from our free cash flow of positive $120.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Continuous Innovation
Despite the pandemic’s impact, we were able to continue delivering product innovation throughout our fiscal year 2022. During the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, we launched several new products including, but not limited to:
•Box Sign - an e-signature solution natively integrated into Box. The launch of Box Sign includes unlimited web-based signatures and a robust set of APIs, enabling businesses to digitize and modernize the way agreements are managed and governed in the cloud;
•New self-service migration tools for customers as part of Box Shuttle, our cost-effective and easy-to-use content migration service;
•New all-in subscription plan, Box Enterprise Plus, which gives customers access to all of our most valued products in one simple package, with the ability to migrate up to 20 terabytes of data from legacy network files shares, Sharepoint online, and enterprise file sync & share tools in Box at no cost using Box Shuttle;
•Major new developments in our partnership with Microsoft, including giving customers the ability to default to Box as a storage option in Microsoft Teams, and the ability to co-author in real time in the Microsoft Office desktop and mobile apps, with all content saved to the Box Content Cloud; and
•New deep learning-based malware scanning in Box Shield, to enable even more rigorous protections against sophisticated malware attacks, including ransomware.
COVID-19
We continue to monitor, analyze and respond to evolving developments regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, which has significantly impacted global economic activity and social practices. As part of these efforts, we have taken steps to protect the health and welfare of our employees by temporarily closing certain of our offices and suspending most business-related travel, while continuing our commitment and efforts to serve customers that rely on us. In addition, we have shifted substantially all of our customer and marketing events in the United States to virtual-only experiences.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our financial results for our fiscal year 2022, the pandemic has negatively impacted some of our customers and prospects. As a result, we have experienced, and may continue to experience, increased customer churn and delayed sales cycles, as well as customers and prospective customers reducing budgets related to services that we offer. Despite these adverse impacts, the COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally changed how organizations get work done, with many businesses shifting to remote and hybrid remote work environments. This shift has created additional opportunities for Box by enabling our customers’ and prospects’ employees to engage in secure remote work through our platform.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, results of operations, and financial position will depend on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, and include the severity and duration of the pandemic, the occurrence of breakthrough cases and COVID-19 variants, the availability, effectiveness, and administration of COVID-19 vaccines globally, actions that may be taken by government authorities to contain the virus and minimize its economic impact, passing or not passing of further stimulus packages by governments, the impact of COVID-19 on our customers, business partners, and employees, and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A "Risk Factors" of this Form 10-K. As a result, the extent and magnitude of the impact COVID-19 will have on our business and operating results cannot be predicted at this time.
Our Business Model
Our business model focuses on maximizing the lifetime value of a customer relationship. We make significant investments in acquiring new customers and believe that we will be able to achieve a positive return on these investments by retaining customers, cross-selling our add-on products and expanding the size of our deployments within our customer base over time. In connection with the acquisition of new customers, we incur and recognize
significant upfront costs. These costs include sales and marketing costs associated with acquiring new customers, such as sales commission expenses, a portion of which are deferred and then amortized over a period of benefit, and marketing costs, which are expensed as incurred. We recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligations to customers. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription services ratably over the term of the contract.
We experience a range of profitability with our customers depending in large part upon their current stage. We generally incur higher sales and marketing expenses for new customers and existing customers who are still in an expanding stage. For new customers and for customers who are expanding their use of Box, our associated sales and marketing expenses typically represent a higher portion of revenue for the initial subscription term for new customers or the remaining subscription term for existing customers. For customers who are renewing their Box subscriptions, our associated sales and marketing expenses are significantly less than the revenue we recognize from those customers over the term of the renewed subscription. These differences are primarily driven by the higher compensation we provide to our sales force for new customers and customer subscription expansions compared to the compensation we provide to our sales force for routine subscription renewals by customers. We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, lower sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue as our existing customer base grows over time and a relatively higher percentage of our revenue is attributable to renewals versus new or expanding Box deployments.
Key Business Metrics
We use the key metrics below for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that these key metrics provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these key metrics in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting, and analyzing future periods. These key metrics also facilitate management's internal comparisons to our historical performance as well as comparisons to certain competitors' operating results. We believe these key metrics are useful to investors both because (1) they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making and (2) they are used by institutional investors and the analyst community to help analyze the health of our business. The below data is presented in millions, except for percentage rate data.
Remaining Performance Obligations
Remaining performance obligations (RPO) represent, at a point in time, contracted revenue that has not yet been recognized. RPO consists of deferred revenue and backlog, offset by contract assets. Backlog is defined as non-cancellable contracts deemed certain to be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. Future invoicing is determined to be certain when we have an executed non-cancellable contract or a significant penalty that is due upon cancellation, and invoicing is not dependent on a future event such as the delivery of a specific new product or feature, or the achievement of contractual contingencies. While Box believes RPO is a leading indicator of revenue as it represents sales activity not yet recognized in revenue, it is not necessarily indicative of future revenue growth as it is influenced by several factors, including seasonality of contract renewal timing, average contract terms and foreign currency exchange rates. Box monitors RPO to manage the business and evaluate performance.
RPO as of January 31, 2022 was $1.1 billion, an increase of 19% from January 31, 2021. The increase in RPO was primarily driven by expansion within existing customers as they broadened their deployment of our product offerings, longer customer contract durations, the addition of new customers, and the timing of customer-driven renewals.
Billings
Billings represent our revenue plus the changes in deferred revenue and contract assets in the period. Billings we record in any particular period primarily reflect subscription renewals and expansion within existing customers plus sales to new customers, and represent amounts invoiced for all of our products and professional services. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multi-year, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. If the customer negotiates to pay the full subscription amount at the beginning of the period, the total subscription amount for the entire term will be reflected in billings. If the customer negotiates to be invoiced annually or more frequently, only the amount billed for such period will be included in billings.
Billings help investors better understand our sales activity for a particular period, which is not necessarily reflected in our revenue given that we recognize subscription revenue ratably over the contract term. We consider billings a significant performance measure. We monitor billings to manage our business, make planning decisions, evaluate our performance and allocate resources. We believe that billings offer valuable supplemental information regarding the performance of our business and will help investors better understand the sales volumes and performance of our business. We do not consider billings to be a non-GAAP financial measure because it is calculated using exclusively revenue, deferred revenue, and contract assets, all of which are financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Billings during the year ended January 31, 2022 were $941.9 million, an increase of 16% from the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in billings was primarily driven by expansion within existing customers as they broadened their deployment of our product offerings, the addition of new customers, and the timing of customer-driven renewals.
Our use of billings has certain limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue or an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Billings are recognized when invoiced, while the related subscription and premier services revenue is recognized ratably over the contract term as we satisfy a performance obligation. Also, other companies, including companies in our industry, may not use billings, may calculate billings differently, may have different billing frequencies, or may use other financial measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of billings as a comparative measure.
Over time, we expect to continue to normalize payment durations. In addition, as we have gained and expect to continue to gain more traction with large enterprise customers, we also anticipate our quarterly billings to increasingly concentrate in the back half of our fiscal year, especially in the fourth quarter.
A calculation of billings starting with revenue, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, is presented below (in thousands):
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, principal payments of finance lease liabilities, capitalized internal-use software costs, and other items that did not or are not expected to require cash settlement and that management considers to be outside of our core business. We specifically identify adjusting items in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures. We consider free cash flow to be a profitability and liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by the business that can possibly be used for investing in our business and strengthening the balance sheet, but it is not intended to represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. A reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, its nearest GAAP equivalent, is presented in the non-GAAP Financial Measures section at the end of Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The presentation of free cash flow is also not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity.
For the year ended January 31, 2022, free cash flow was $170.2 million, an increase of $49.9 million from the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase in free cash flow was primarily driven by an increase in cash provided by operating activities of $38.0 million, a decrease in principal payments of finance lease liabilities of $9.6 million and a decrease in capital expenditures of $4.3 million, partially offset by an increase in capitalized internal-use software costs of $2.0 million. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was driven by the increase in revenue outpacing the increase in cash expenses compared to the prior period, adjusted for the timing of working capital.
Net Retention Rate
Net retention rate is defined as the net percentage of Total Annual Recurring Revenue (Total ARR) retained from existing customers, including expansion. We define Total ARR as the annualized recurring revenue from all active customer contracts at the end of a reporting period. We adjust exchange rates used to calculate Total ARR on an annual basis, at the beginning of each fiscal year. We calculate constant currency Total ARR growth rates by applying the current period rate to prior period results. We calculate our net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the Total ARR from customers as of 12 months prior to such period end (Prior Period Total ARR). We then calculate Total ARR from these same customers as of the current period end (Current Period Total ARR). Finally, we divide the Current Period Total ARR by the Prior Period Total ARR to arrive at our net retention rate. In calculating our net retention rate, we include only Total ARR associated with those customers who have subscribed to Box for at least 12 months. We present net retention rate on a constant currency basis to provide a framework for assessing how our business performed excluding the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations. We believe our net retention rate is an important metric that provides insight into the long-term value of our subscription agreements and our ability to retain and grow revenue from our customer base. Net retention rate is an operational metric and there is no comparable GAAP financial measure to which we can reconcile this particular key metric.
Our net retention rate was 111%, 102%, and 104% as of January 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our net retention rates were primarily attributable to seat growth in existing customers and strong attach rates of add-on products and our bundled Enterprise Plus plan. As our customers purchase add-on products or our bundled Enterprise Plus plan, we tend to realize significantly higher average contract values and stronger net retention rates as compared to customers who only purchase our core product. We believe our go-to-market efforts to deliver a solution selling strategy and our investments in product, customer success, and Box Consulting, including our Box Shuttle migration offering, have been significant factors in our customer retention results. As we penetrate customer accounts, we expect our net retention rate to remain above 100% for the foreseeable future.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive our revenue primarily from three sources: (1) subscription revenue, which is comprised of subscription fees from customers who have access to our content cloud platform including routine customer support; (2) revenue from customers purchasing our premier services package; and (3) revenue from professional services such as implementing best practice use cases, project management and implementation consulting services.
To date, practically all of our revenue has been derived from subscription and premier services. Subscription and premier services revenue are driven primarily by the number of customers, the number of seats sold to each customer and the price of our services.
We recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligation. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the contract term. We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multi-year, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. Our subscription and premier services contracts are typically non-cancellable and do not contain refund-type provisions. The majority of our customers subscribe to our service through one-year contracts, although we also offer our services for terms ranging between one month to three years or more.
Professional services are generally billed on a fixed price basis, for which revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion performed. Professional services revenue was not material as a percentage of total revenue for all periods presented.
Revenue is presented net of sales and other taxes we collect on behalf of governmental authorities.
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue consists primarily of costs related to providing our subscription services to our paying customers, including employee compensation and related expenses for data center operations, customer support and professional services personnel, payments to outside technology service providers, depreciation of servers and equipment, security services and other tools, as well as amortization expense associated with acquired technology and capitalized internally developed software. We allocate overhead such as rent, information technology costs and employee benefit costs to all departments based on headcount. As such, general overhead expenses are reflected in cost of revenue and each of the operating expense categories set forth below.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities, information technology costs and employee benefit costs.
Research and Development. Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, as well as allocated overhead. Our research and development efforts are focused on scaling our platform, building an ecosystem of best-of-breed applications and platforms, infrastructure, adding enterprise grade features, functionality and enhancements such as workflow automation, intelligent content management capabilities, and advanced security to enhance the ease of use of our cloud content management services. We capitalize certain qualifying costs to develop software for internal use incurred during the application development stage.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel-related expenses, as well as allocated overhead. Marketing programs include but are not limited to advertising, events, corporate communications, brand building, and product marketing. Sales and marketing expense also consists of data center and customer support costs related to providing our cloud-based services to our free users. We market and sell our cloud content management services worldwide through our direct sales organization and through indirect distribution channels such as strategic resellers.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources, recruiting, information systems, security, compliance, fees for external professional services and cloud-based enterprise systems, as well as allocated overhead. External professional services fees are primarily comprised of outside legal, accounting, audit and outsourcing services.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Interest and other expense, net consists of interest expense, interest income, gains and losses from foreign currency transactions, and other income and expense. Interest expense consists primarily of interest charges for our line of credit and interest rate swap agreement, interest expense related to finance leases, and the amortization of issuance costs of our convertible senior notes. Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. We have historically invested our cash and cash equivalents in overnight deposits, certificates of deposit, money market funds, and short term, investment-grade corporate debt, marketable securities and asset backed securities.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and state income taxes in the United States and, as applicable, changes in our deferred taxes and related valuation allowance positions, uncertain tax positions, and taxes associated with jurisdictional transfers of intellectual property.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands and as a percentage of our revenue):
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the year ended January 31, 2021 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020 can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 19, 2021, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Comparison of the Years Ended January 31, 2022 and 2021
Revenue
The increase in revenue was primarily driven by an increase in the number of large deals and higher attach rates of our bundled offering. The increase in subscription services was also driven by the addition of new customers, as the number of paying organizations increased by 6% from January 31, 2021 to January 31, 2022. In the year ended January 31, 2022, we experienced significant growth in the Japan market, driving an increase in revenue from non-U.S. customers to 32%, compared to 28% in the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was partially offset by customers partially churning their deployment with Box.
Cost of Revenue
The increase in absolute dollars during the fiscal year was primarily due to an increase of $14.5 million in hosted data service costs and bandwidth, an increase of $5.1 million in acquired intangible assets amortization, and an increase of $3.4 million in enterprise subscription software costs. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue remained flat year-over-year. We expect our cost of revenue to increase in dollars but decrease as a percentage of revenue over time as we continue to optimize data center efficiencies and invest in public cloud infrastructure.
Research and Development
The increase in absolute dollars during the fiscal year was primarily due to an increase of $7.0 million in stock-based compensation expense driven by equity grants to existing and new employees, an increase of $5.7 million in employee and related costs due to higher headcount, an increase of $1.5 million in enterprise subscription software costs, and an increase of $1.3 million in consulting services. Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 100 basis points year-over-year. We continue to invest in enhancements of our products and services, developing new products, and further differentiating our offerings. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in dollars but decrease as a percentage of revenue over time as we continue to make significant improvements to our content cloud product offerings and services.
Sales and Marketing
The increase in absolute dollars during the fiscal year was primarily due to an increase of $10.5 million in stock-based compensation expense due to equity grants to existing and new employees, an increase of $9.2 million in commission expense, driven by growth in sales and improved pacing of sales, and an increase of $4.7 million in employee and related costs due to higher headcount. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was partially offset by a decrease of $1.4 million in travel-related costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue decreased 200 basis points year-over-year due to our focus on driving greater efficiency from our solution selling strategy and simplifying our product offerings, as well our focus on higher performing geographies and segments producing a greater return on investment.
Our sales and marketing expenses are generally higher for acquiring new, or expanding existing, customers than for renewals of existing customer subscriptions. We expect to continue to invest in capturing our large market opportunity globally and capitalize on our competitive position with continued focus on our profitability objectives. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in dollars but decrease as a percentage of revenue over time as our existing customer base grows and a relatively higher percentage of our revenue is attributable to renewals versus new or expanding Box deployments and as we continue to focus on improving sales productivity and simplifying our product offerings. While we expect certain expenses that were reduced due to COVID-19 to increase over time, we currently do not expect to return to pre-COVID-19 levels, even after we return to an office-based environment.
General and Administrative
The increase in absolute dollars during the fiscal year was primarily due to an increase of $14.2 million in fees related to shareholder activism, an increase of $5.9 million in stock-based compensation expense driven by equity grants to existing and new employees, an increase of $2.2 million in consulting and audit services, an increase of $2.2 million in employee and related costs driven by the annual merit increase to salaries, and a $1.0 million impairment charge related to capitalized cloud computing arrangements. General and administrative expense as a percentage of revenue increased 100 basis points year-over-year. We expect our general and administrative expense to slowly increase in dollars but to decrease as a percentage of revenue over time as we benefit from greater operational efficiency.
Interest Expense, Net and Other Income (Loss), Net
* Percentage change not meaningful
The increase in absolute dollars during the fiscal year was primarily due to an increase of $6.2 million in foreign currency losses, an increase of $1.2 million in the amortization of issuance costs related to our convertible debt, and a decrease of $0.3 million in interest income from our certificates of deposit and money market funds due to a lower interest rate environment. This was partially offset by a decrease of $2.4 million in interest expense related to our finance leases and line of credit.
Provision for Income Taxes
The increase in absolute dollars during the fiscal year was due to $1.6 million in higher foreign tax expense from recurring operations and $1.0 million in non-recurring tax expense associated with the transfer of intellectual property between our entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term investments of $586.9 million. Our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments are comprised primarily of overnight cash deposits, money market funds, and certificates of deposit. Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through equity financing, cash generated from operations and debt financing. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with our finance leases and credit facilities, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, data center expansions, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of international activities, the introduction of new and enhanced service offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our services. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all.
Cash Flows
We generated positive cash flow from operations. While we may continue to incur operating losses, we expect to continuously improve overall cash flow from operations through improvements to our working capital management processes which will provide capital resources for strategic initiatives to grow our business.
For the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, our cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
For the year ended January 31, 2022, cash provided by operating activities was $234.8 million. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $41.5 million, favorably offset by non-cash charges of $179.0 million for stock-based compensation, $78.2 million for depreciation and amortization of our property and equipment and capitalized software, and $45.9 million for amortization of deferred commissions. Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended January 31, 2022 were further adjusted by net cash outflows of $29.7 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities.
The primary drivers for the changes in operating assets and liabilities include a $59.2 million increase in deferred commissions resulting from capitalization of incremental commissions paid to our sales force, a $47.4 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, a $27.2 million increase in accounts receivable that was primarily due to higher sales and timing of our cash collections, and a $16.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets. This was partially offset by a $63.1 million increase in deferred revenue, a $41.8 million decrease in operating right-of-use assets, and a $15.3 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $239.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 was primarily driven by $170.0 million in purchases of short-term investments, $59.4 million in cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash acquired, $5.8 million of capitalized internally developed software costs, and $4.7 million of fixed asset purchases.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities of $172.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 was primarily driven by $561.6 million in repurchases of our common stock, $57.4 million of employee payroll taxes paid related to net
share settlement of restricted stock, $50.4 million of principal payments of finance lease liabilities, and $9.6 million of dividend payments to preferred stockholders. This was partially offset by $485.1 million from the issuance of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, net of issuance costs and $25.4 million from issuances of common stock under our employee equity plans.
Debt
In January 2021, we issued $345.0 million aggregate principal amount of 0.00% convertible senior notes due January 15, 2026. The Notes are senior unsecured obligations and do not bear regular interest. Each $1,000 principal amount of the Notes is convertible into 38.7962 shares of our Class A common stock, which is equivalent to a conversion price of approximately $25.78 per share, subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of specified events. We have made an irrevocable election to settle the principal portion of the Notes only in cash. Accordingly, upon conversion, we will pay the principal in cash and we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, the conversion premium in cash, shares of common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election.
In connection with the pricing of the Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with certain counterparties (the "Capped Calls"). The Capped Calls each have a strike price of approximately $25.80 and initial cap prices of $35.58 per share, subject to certain adjustments.
On November 27, 2017, we entered into a secured credit agreement (as amended or otherwise modified from time to time, the "November 2017 Facility"). On July 26, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 4 to the November 2017 Facility. Pursuant to the terms of the amendment, the maturity date of borrowings under the November 2017 Facility is July 26, 2024, the revolving commitment is $65.0 million, and it provides for a sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit of $45.0 million. As of January 31, 2022, debt outstanding under the November 2017 Facility was $30.0 million.
Refer to Note 10 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for detailed descriptions of the Notes and the November 2017 Facility.
Recent Financing Activities
Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
On April 7, 2021, we entered into an investment agreement (the "Investment Agreement") with certain investment funds managed or advised by KKR (collectively "KKR") relating to the issuance and sale of 500,000 shares of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value of $0.0001 per share, for an aggregate purchase price of $500 million, or $1,000 per share (the "Issuance"). The closing of the Issuance occurred on May 12, 2021. Refer to Note 11 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a detailed description of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
Tender Offer
On June 2, 2021, we announced the commencement of a tender offer to purchase up to $500 million in value of shares of our Class A common stock. On June 30, 2021, upon the completion of the tender offer, we announced that we repurchased 9.2 million shares at a price of $25.75 for a total amount of $238.2 million.
Share Repurchase Plan
On July 9, 2021, our board of directors authorized a $260 million Class A common stock Share Repurchase Plan. On November 27, 2021, our board of directors authorized a $200 million expansion of the Share Repurchase Plan. Refer to Note 17 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding a subsequent expansion of the Share Repurchase Plan, which occurred after January 31, 2022 and authorized up to an additional $150 million for repurchase.
As of January 31, 2022, we had repurchased 13.3 million shares under this plan at a weighted average price of $24.61 for a total amount of $328.5 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of (i) obligations under operating leases for office spaces and data centers, (ii) obligations under finance leases for servers and related equipment for our data center operations, (iii) purchase obligations not recognized on the consolidated balance sheet as of January 31, 2022, which relate primarily to infrastructure services and IT software and support services, and (iv) debt, including obligations under both our November 2017 Facility and Notes. For more information regarding our obligations for leases, purchase agreements, and debt, refer to Notes 6, 9, and 10, respectively, in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through January 31, 2022, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material effect on our financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations. The estimates and assumptions included in our critical accounting policies have not changed during the year ended January 31, 2022 from those disclosed during the year ended January 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenue from three sources: (1) subscription revenue, which is comprised of subscription fees from customers who have access to our content cloud platform which includes routine customer support; (2) revenue from customers purchasing our premier services package; and (3) revenue from professional services such as implementing best practice use cases, project management and implementation consulting services.
Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Revenue recognition is subject to uncertainty due to the judgments made in applying the revenue recognition framework.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue as we satisfy a performance obligation
Subscription and Premier Services Revenues
We recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligation. Accordingly, due to our subscription model, we recognize revenue for our subscription and premier services ratably over the contract term.
We typically invoice our customers at the beginning of the term, in multi-year, annual, quarterly or monthly installments. Our subscription and premier services contracts generally range from one to three years in length, are typically non-cancellable and do not contain refund-type provisions. Revenue is presented net of sales and other taxes we collect on behalf of governmental authorities.
Professional Services
Professional services are generally billed on a fixed price basis, for which revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion performed.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our contracts can include multiple performance obligations which may consist of some or all of subscription services, premier services, and professional services. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine the standalone selling prices based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration discounting practices, the size and volume of our transactions, the customer demographic, the geographic area where services are sold, price lists, our go-to-market strategy, historical standalone sales and contract prices.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue consists of billings in advance of revenue recognition generated by our subscription services, premier services, and professional services described above.
Deferred Commissions
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for new contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have estimated to be five years. Arriving at this period of benefit involves judgment. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration both qualitative and quantitative factors, including the duration of our customer contracts, the life cycles of our technology and other factors. If these factors change or different assumptions are used, our period of benefit could change and result in a materially different amortization of sales commissions. Sales commissions for renewal contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contractual renewal period. Amortization expense is included in sales and marketing expenses on the consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to our employees and other service providers, including stock options, restricted stock units, restricted stock and purchase rights granted under our 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (2015 Plan) and 2015 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (2015 ESPP), based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards and purchase rights granted under our 2015 Plan and 2015 ESPP. We use the market closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange for the fair value of restricted stock units granted after our initial public offering. We recognize the fair value of stock options and restricted stock units as an expense, net of estimated forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recognize the fair value of purchase rights granted under our 2015 ESPP as an expense on a straight-line basis over the offering period.
Our Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of certain assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. We use the market closing price for our Class A common stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange to determine the fair value of our common stock at each grant date.
•Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our share-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions were determined based on the vesting terms, exercise terms and contractual lives of the options and 2015 ESPP purchase rights.
•Expected Volatility. We estimate the expected volatility of the stock option grants and 2015 ESPP purchase rights based on the historical volatility of our Class A common stock over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants and 2015 ESPP purchase rights, respectively.
•Risk-free Interest Rate. The risk-free rate that we use is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options and 2015 ESPP purchase rights.
•Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our Class A common stock and do not plan to pay cash dividends on our Class A common stock in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero.
Refer to Note 12 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock option and ESPP purchase rights.
For performance-based restricted stock units that vest based upon continued service and achievement of certain performance conditions established by the board of directors for a predetermined period, the fair value is determined based upon the market closing price of our Class A common stock on the date of the grant; compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period if it is probable that the performance condition will be satisfied based on the accelerated attribution method.
In addition, we have issued performance-based stock options that vest based upon continued service through the vesting term and achievement of certain market conditions established by the board of directors for a predetermined period. We measure stock-based compensation expense for performance-based stock options containing market conditions based on the estimated grant date fair value determined using the Monte Carlo valuation model; we recognize compensation expense for such awards over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution method.
We estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares that are expected to vest. We estimate the expected forfeiture rate at the date of grant based on historical experience and our expectations regarding future pre-vesting termination behavior of employees and other service providers and revise the estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. To the extent our actual forfeiture rate is different from our estimate, stock-based compensation expense is adjusted accordingly.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K regarding the effect of recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements on our financial statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Regulation S-K Item 10(e), “Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures in Commission Filings,” defines and prescribes the conditions for use of non-GAAP financial information. Our measures of non-GAAP operating income (loss), non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net income (loss), non-GAAP net income (loss) per share, and free cash flow (collectively, the non-GAAP financial measures) each meet the definition of a non-GAAP financial measure.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures and our key metrics for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain expenses that may not be indicative of our recurring core business operating results. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting, and analyzing future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics also facilitate management’s internal comparisons to our historical performance as well as comparisons to our competitors’ operating results. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures and key metrics are useful to investors both because (1) they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making and (2) they are used by our institutional investors and the analyst community to help them analyze the health of our business.
Non-GAAP operating income (loss) and non-GAAP operating margin
We define non-GAAP operating income (loss) as operating income (loss) excluding expenses related to stock-based compensation (SBC), acquired intangible assets amortization, and as applicable, other special items. Non-GAAP operating margin is defined as non-GAAP operating income (loss) divided by revenue. Although SBC is an important aspect of the compensation of our employees and executives, determining the fair value of certain of the stock-based instruments we utilize involves a high degree of judgment and estimation and the expense recorded may bear little resemblance to the actual value realized upon the vesting or future exercise of the related stock-based awards. Furthermore, unlike cash compensation, the value of stock options, which is an element of our ongoing stock-based compensation expense, is determined using a complex formula that incorporates factors, such as market volatility, that are beyond our control. For restricted stock unit awards, the amount of stock-based compensation expenses is not reflective of the value ultimately received by the grant recipients. Management believes it is useful to exclude SBC in order to better understand the long-term performance of our core business and to facilitate comparison of our results to those of peer companies. Management also views amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, such as the amortization of the cost associated with an acquired company’s developed technology and trade names, as items arising from pre-acquisition activities determined at the time of an acquisition. While these intangible assets are continually evaluated for impairment, amortization of the cost of purchased intangibles is
a static expense, one that is not typically affected by operations during any particular period. Furthermore, Box excludes the following expenses as they are considered by management to be special items outside of Box’s core operating results: (1) fees related to shareholder activism, which include directly applicable third-party advisory and professional service fees, (2) expenses related to certain litigation, (3) expenses associated with restructuring activities, consisting primarily of severance and other personnel-related costs, and (4) expenses related to announced acquisitions, including transaction and discrete tax costs. There are no expenses related to litigation excluded from non-GAAP operating income (loss) in any of the periods presented.
Non-GAAP net income (loss) and net income (loss) per share
We define non-GAAP net income (loss) as net loss excluding expenses related to stock-based compensation, acquired intangible assets amortization and as applicable, other special items. We specifically identify other adjusting items in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net income (loss). These items include expenses related to certain litigation and the amortization of the issuance costs associated with our Notes, which are amortized as interest expense, because they are considered by management to be special items outside our core operating results. We define non-GAAP net income (loss) per share as non-GAAP net income (loss) divided by the weighted-average outstanding shares. Similarly, the same adjusting items specified in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net income (loss) are also excluded from the calculation of non-GAAP net income (loss) per share.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as cash flows from operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, principal payments of finance lease liabilities, capitalized internally developed software costs, and other items that did not or are not expected to require cash settlement and that management considers to be outside of our core business. We specifically identify other adjusting items in our reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures. We consider free cash flow to be a profitability and liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by the business that can possibly be used for investing in our business and strengthening the balance sheet, but it is not intended to represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. A reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, its nearest GAAP equivalent, is presented below. The presentation of free cash flow is also not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity.
Limitations on the use of non-GAAP financial measures
A limitation of our non-GAAP financial measures is that they do not have uniform definitions. Our definitions will likely differ from the definitions used by other companies, including peer companies, and therefore comparability may be limited. Thus, our non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, in the case of stock-based compensation expense, if we did not pay a portion of compensation in the form of stock-based compensation expense, the cash salary expense included in cost of revenue and operating expenses would be higher which would affect our cash position.
We compensate for these limitations by reconciling non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP financial measures. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view our non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with the most comparable GAAP financial measures.
Our reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures for years ended January 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 are as follows (in thousands, except per share data and percentages):