Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes and other financial information of Boxed included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Boxed is an e-commerce retailer and an e-commerce enabler. We operate an e-commerce Retail service that provides bulk pantry consumables to businesses and household customers. This service is powered by our own purpose-built storefront, marketplace, analytics, fulfillment, advertising, and robotics technologies. We further enable e-commerce through our Software & Services business, which offers customers in need of an enterprise-level e-commerce platform access to our end-to-end technology.
Founded in 2013 by an experienced group of tech pioneers, we have been a technology-first organization since our inception. The founders (including our Chief Executive Officer Chieh Huang and Chief Operating Officer Jared Yaman) had a simple idea: make shopping for bulk, household essentials easy, convenient and fun so customers can focus their time and energy on the things that really matter, instead of spending their weekends traveling to and shopping in traditional brick-&-mortar wholesale clubs with their families. From that initial concept, we grew into the e-commerce technology company that it is today, with our own purpose-built storefront, analytics, fulfillment, advertising, and robotics technologies. Now, in addition to offering B2C and B2B customers with bulk consumables, such as paper products, snacks, beverages, and cleaning supplies, we have also begun to drive high-margin revenue through our Software & Services business, helping the world to stock up through our technology.
Since our inception, we have been engaged in developing and expanding our Retail and Software & Services businesses. We have incurred net operating losses and have generated negative cash flows from operations in each year since our inception. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net operating loss and negative cash flows from operations of $69.2 million and $53.5 million, respectively. Since our inception, beyond sales of our product and services, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the issuance of stock and borrowings, including under our term loans and revolving credit facilities, as well as through the consummation of the Business Combination.
Business Combination and Public Company Costs
On December 8, 2021, we consummated our previously announced Business Combination, at which time (i) Old Boxed merged with a subsidiary of Seven Oaks and became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Seven Oaks and (ii) Seven Oaks changed its name from Seven Oaks Acquisition Corp. to Boxed, Inc., and is referred to herein as “New Boxed” or “us” or “we”. In connection with the Closing, among other things:
•We became an SEC-registrant and our common stock and warrants commenced trading on the NYSE on December 9, 2021 under the symbols “BOXD” and “BOXD WS,” respectively.
•Immediately prior to Closing, each share of Old Boxed preferred stock was converted into Old Boxed common stock based on the conversion ratios of each respective series. Then upon Closing, each share of Old Boxed common stock was converted into the right to receive approximately 0.9498 shares of New Boxed common stock, par value $0.0001 per share.
•The 6,468,750 shares of Seven Oaks Class B common stock held by the Sponsor, JTCM Ventures and related parties were each automatically reclassified into one share of New Boxed common stock (of which 1,940,625 shares are subject to vesting under certain conditions).
•PIPE Investors contributed a total of $120.0 million, comprised of $32.5 million for 3,250,000 shares of New Boxed common stock and an aggregate of $87.5 million in PIPE Convertible Notes.
•An aggregate of $181.0 million was paid from Seven Oaks' trust account to holders that exercised their right to have initial shares redeemed. In addition, on December 9, 2021, one day following the Closing, we paid the Prepayment Amount of $65.1 million to ACM utilizing funds from Seven Oaks' trust account, pursuant to the terms of a Forward Purchase Agreement entered into by Seven Oaks and ACM on November 28, 2021 for an OTC Equity Prepaid Forward Transaction.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse capitalization in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Under the guidance in ASC 805, Business Combinations, Seven Oaks is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Refer to Note 1, Description of Business, in Part I, Item 1. “Financial Statements” for additional detail about the Business Combination as well as Note 11 therein for further detail about the Forward Purchase Agreement.
As a result of becoming an NYSE-listed company, we will need to hire additional staff and implement processes and procedures to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources and fees.
Factors Affecting our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on many factors. While we believe that each of these factors present significant opportunities for our business, each factor also poses risks and challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and continue to improve our results of operations.
COVID-19. During fiscal year 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a mixed impact on our results of operations. Throughout the pandemic our fulfillment centers have largely remained open as they were deemed as “essential businesses” in our locations. While we experienced increased demand from B2C customers, as many individuals adopted online shopping during the pandemic, that increase was offset by a decline of demand from our B2B customers, as many businesses reverted to work-from-home environments. The result of these two counteracting trends was slight growth in 2020 sales compared to fiscal year 2019. Further, during fiscal year 2020, we experienced a significant increase in organic new customer traffic to our web properties as a result of COVID-19. This rapid and variable surge in traffic put significant stress on our supply chain, with industry-wide inventory supply shortages limiting our ability to provide the products in demand from our customers. As such, during this period, we significantly reduced our growth-related investments (i.e. promotional spend and advertising expense) and temporarily shut down service to certain new customers in specific states. While industry-wide demand for e-commerce services remains elevated compared to pre-pandemic levels, the surge in organic new customer traffic we experienced in 2020 did not persist at the same levels in 2021, and we began to meaningfully increase our investments in advertising expense and promotional spend in order to drive additional demand. In addition, the wave of COVID-19 virus variants, including the proliferation of the Delta and Omicron variants, further delayed the return-to-office plans of many of our B2B customers in 2021, which yielded a slower recovery from our B2B customers than originally anticipated throughout 2021. While the recovery of the Company's B2B offerings remains optimistic, the demand from our B2B customers may not fully recover to the levels that existed during 2019. These changes could adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Additionally, the higher propensity for online shopping has led to increased demand for our technology, which we have begun to monetize in 2021, but could also reverse in the future as customer behavior changes. Overall, the COVID-19 pandemic is unprecedented and continuously evolving and the long-term impacts on our financial condition and results of operations are still uncertain. We are continuing to monitor the impact of the pandemic on the overall macro-economic environment, as well as the impact it has had on cost inflation in consumable products and transportation, which continues to drive up our operating costs.
The COVID-19 pandemic may impact many of the factors discussed in this section, including, among others, overall economic trends, consumer preferences and demand, product mix, competitive dynamics, and sourcing and distribution, which in turn could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Acquisition of new customers and retention of existing customers. The size of our customer base and our customers’ level of engagement and retention are critical to our success. Our ability to continue to attract and retain customers depends, in part, on our ability to consistently provide our customers with a convenient, high-quality experience with competitive pricing for consumer goods, groceries, household products, and other bulk or discounted products. If our customers preferences change or they do not perceive our service and the products we sell to be convenient, competitively priced, and of high quality, we may not be able to attract and retain customers, and as a result, our revenue may be adversely impacted.
Brand recognition and customer loyalty. Our ability to succeed in a crowded e-commerce marketplace will depend on our continued success at attracting and retaining a large number of high-value customers to the Boxed Sites who have traditionally purchased bulk consumer packaged goods from our larger competitors. We may be required to incur significantly higher advertising and promotional expenditures to differentiate Boxed Sites from that of our competitors. If our branding efforts are not successful, our operating results and our ability to attract and retain customers may be adversely impacted. In addition, we sell many products under the Prince & Spring private-label brand. Increasing the portfolio of private-label products offered is essential to developing and maintaining customer loyalty. Prince & Spring private-label products also generally carry higher margins than national brand products offered on the Boxed Sites, representing a growth portion of our overall sales. If the Prince & Spring brand experiences a loss of customer acceptance or confidence, our sales and gross margin results could decline.
Competition. We operate in a market that is rapidly evolving and in which we face competition, especially from larger and more well-established companies. These more well-established competitors may have longer operating histories, greater financial, technical, marketing, and other resources, greater name and brand recognition, a larger base of vendors, or faster shipping times or lower-cost shipping. These factors may allow our competitors to derive greater revenue and profits, acquire customers at lower costs, or respond more quickly to emerging technologies and evolving consumer trends. If we are unable to compete successfully, or if competing successfully requires us to expend greater resources, our financial condition and results of operating could be adversely affected.
Effective sourcing and distribution of products. Our net revenues and gross profit are affected by our ability to purchase our products in sufficient quantities at competitive prices. While we believe our vendors have adequate capacity to meet our current and anticipated demand, our level of net revenues could be adversely affected in the event of constraints in our supply chain, including our inability to procure and stock sufficient quantities of some merchandise in a manner that is able to match market demand from our customers, leading to lost sales.
Software & Services offerings. Our Software & Services business, encompassing the licensing of our software and technology assets, is expected to be an increasing part of our revenue and profitability as we expand. As of the second half of 2021, we have begun to successfully deliver and market these services to customers, but if we are not able to continue and expand such services, we would fail to achieve the anticipated benefits of our Software & Services offering. The success of our early operations of our Software & Services offering may significantly impact our future business, results of operations and financial condition. Our results of operations and future revenue prospects will be harmed if we are unable to increase the adoption of our offerings.
Seasonality. Our Retail business is moderately seasonal, with a meaningful portion of our sales and promotional campaigns dedicated to back-to-school and back-to-work time periods, typically resulting in higher customer demand in the first and third fiscal quarters. Due to the importance of our peak sales periods, which include the post-holiday winter and fall seasons, the first and third fiscal quarters have historically contributed, and are expected to continue to contribute, significantly to our operating results for the entire fiscal year. In anticipation of seasonal increases in sales activity during these periods, we incur additional expense prior to and during our peak seasonal periods. These expenses may include the acquisition of additional inventory, seasonal staffing needs and other similar items. As a result, any factors negatively affecting us during these periods, including adverse weather, spread of seasonal infectious diseases and unfavorable economic conditions, could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations for the entire fiscal year.
Key Performance Indicators
We measure our business using both financial and operating data and use the following metrics and measures to assess the near-term and long-term performance of our overall business, including identifying trends, formulating financial projections, making strategic decisions, assessing operational efficiencies and monitoring our business. Key performance indicators (“KPIs”) are typically operational in nature, are not measures of financial performance in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may exclude items that are significant in understanding and assessing the Company’s financial results.
Therefore, these measures should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net revenue, cash flows from operations or other measures of growth, profitability, liquidity or performance under U.S. GAAP. You should be aware that our presentation of these measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures used by other companies.
We present the following key performance indicators to assist investors in understanding our operating results: (i) Advertising Expenses (ii) Active Customers (iii) Average Order Value (“AOV”) and (iv) Gross Merchandise Value (“GMV”).
This table sets forth our key performance indicators for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019. Figures disclosed for Active Customers and AOV reflect Retail segment metrics only, and do not aggregate metrics from Software & Services customers who are leveraging our software or technology for their own retail operations.
Advertising Expenses
Advertising Expenses primarily consist of (i) investment in customer acquisition and retention related marketing, public relations and third-party marketing agency costs, and (ii) marketing content related expenses, including television content, print, photography, and direct mail. Our Active Customer count and GMV, as discussed below, are both meaningfully influenced by our investment in Advertising Expenses, and therefore we believe it is a key factor in driving our overall revenue trends of our Retail segment. While we believe Advertising Expenses is a meaningful driver of growth, it is just one of many factors influencing our ability to increase or retain our Active Customer base.
Advertising Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $17.1 million, or 78%, to $22.0 million as compared to $4.9 million for the year period ended December 31, 2020. The increase was a result of our efforts to drive new customer acquisition in the more recent period as some of the increased B2C customer engagement fueled by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic leveled off. Notwithstanding the period over period increase, during 2021, Advertising Expenses continued to remain below desired levels due to capital constraints prior to consummation of the Business Combination. Further, during 2020, Advertising Expenses were limited due to capital constraints as well as strains on our supply chain, both of which limited our ability to invest into growth initiatives, such as marketing.
Advertising Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $15.8 million, or 76%, to $4.9 million as compared to $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was a result of our capital constraints, increases in organic new customer traffic, along with a conscious decision to reduce marketing investment given industry-wide supply chain challenges, which limited our ability to keep key inventory items in stock and market products to our customers effectively.
Active Customers
We define active customers as the distinct number of customers in our Retail segment who placed at least one order in the referenced respective time-period (“Active Customers”). The change in Active Customers in a reporting period captures both the inflow of new customers as well as the outflow of customers who have not made a purchase in the time period. We view the number of Active Customers as a key indicator of our performance, which is influenced by the level of investment in Advertising Expenses, the number of new customers acquired during a given time period, as well as the churn of previously Active Customers.
The decrease in our Active Customers when comparing the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 30, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in B2C customers during the more recent period compared to the prior period, as the latter included the temporary impact of increased customer traffic during the peak periods of COVID-19, which occurred late in the first quarter of 2020 and throughout the second quarter of 2020. Also contributing to this decrease is a decline in our B2B customer base as customers moved to work-from-home environments beginning in the second quarter of 2020, which drove the overall decline in Active Customers during the more recent period.
The decrease in our Active Customers when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 was driven by the 76% decrease in Advertising Expenses, which yielded a meaningful decrease in new customer acquisition. This was combined with a decrease in our B2B customer base as customers moved to work from-home environments beginning in the second quarter of 2020.
Average Order Value (AOV)
We define AOV as the GMV for the respective time-period divided by the total number of orders placed by customers during the same period. We believe AOV is an important indicator of business performance as it is supported by our proprietary e-commerce technology, where our mobile app, website, and personalization engine provide a seamless shopping experience, enabling customers to easily discover new and relevant products and categories. This results in a trend where on average, AOVs expand over the course of a customer’s lifecycle. Further, larger orders are on average more profitable, helping to drive margin improvement from shipping, packaging, and labor efficiencies.
Total AOV increased by $14 to $122 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $108 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which had increased by $14 compared to $94 for the year ended December 31, 2019, as the result of (i) ongoing technology and personalization improvements (ii) adjustments to the user experience designed to help drive AOV increases across both our new and repeat customers and (iii) price increases caused by inflationary pressures across our supply chain. We do not believe AOV has been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
We measure AOV on a gross basis, comparable to the way that we measure GMV. As a result, it does not account for any discounts, promotions, or rewards that are offered to or redeemed by our customers, and therefore it is not intended for use as an alternative to net revenue recorded in accordance with GAAP.
Gross Merchandise Value (GMV)
We define GMV as (i) the total value of Boxed goods sold, (ii) 3rd party goods sold on Boxed Sites, gross of any customer promotions, price discounts, credits, or rewards used, and (iii) goods sold on 3rd party (i.e. AEON) websites which are leveraging Boxed Software & Services technology, all of which are (iv) inclusive of shipping fees, service fees and taxes. We believe our ability to expand GMV is an indicator of the global scale of our technology services platform in any given period, and an indicator of end-customer engagement on our technology services platform worldwide. GMV is not intended for use as an alternative to net revenue recorded in accordance with GAAP.
GMV decreased by $27.2 million, or 15%, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was a result of several factors which impacted GMV, including a reduction in Active Customers in the more recent period as discussed above. The reduction in Active Customers was somewhat offset by an increase in AOV of $14, or 11%, along with an increase in GMV related to our Software & Services business. We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic primarily impacted our GMV through the Active Customer count, as discussed above.
GMV increased by $12.8 million, or 7%, when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily attributable to the growth in GMV from our B2C customers, partially offset by the decline in GMV from our B2B customers and a decrease in Active Customers due to reduced advertising investments.
Components of our Results of Operations
We operate in two reportable segments: Retail and Software & Services, to reflect the way our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) reviews and assesses the performance of the business. Our Retail segment engages in the sale of consumer products and goods in bulk sizes to consumers and businesses in the continental United States. Our Retail segment includes net revenue from merchandising sales, subscription sales, and outbound delivery and marketing fees, as discussed below and within Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Until the first quarter of 2021, we had not generated revenue under our Software & Services segment, which primarily relates to our research, development, marketing, and production of our propriety software for sale to third parties. Both our Retail and Software & Services segments are recorded within net revenue in our Statements of Operations.
Net Revenue
We derive net revenue primarily from the sale of both third-party brand and private-label brand merchandise through our e-commerce platform on which we offer merchandise in the following core categories: groceries, snacks, beverages, and household and cleaning products. Revenue generated through our e-commerce platform is generally recognized upon delivery to the customer, net of promotional discounts and refund allowances. Outbound delivery fees (if applicable) are included in customer billing and are also recorded as revenue upon delivery. Taxes collected from customers are excluded from net revenue.
We earn additional Retail segment revenue through membership fees from customers who sign up for our Boxed Up subscription program. Membership fees allow customers to earn cash back on every purchase, gain access to exclusive discounts, and enjoy free shipping on all eligible orders. Because we have the obligation to provide access to our website for the duration of the membership term, we recognize membership fees on a straight-line basis over the life of the membership.
We also earn revenue through a mix of marketing services offered to merchants, including vendors, manufacturers, and other partners. We provide these merchants access to our e-commerce platform where merchants display and sell their products to users through our third-party marketplace offering. We also provide advertising services to help merchants promote their products within our platform. While these additional revenue streams have not historically been material, the generate higher margins and we believe there is substantial opportunity to expand these offerings to drive growth in both net revenue and profitability in the future.
In the first quarter of 2021, we began generating revenue through software license agreements with customers. A software license contract with multiple performance obligations typically includes the following elements: implementation services, software license, training services, and maintenance and support services.
Refer to the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional definitions of our financial statement line items included within our Statements of Operations.
The following tables presents our results of operations for the periods indicated:
(1) For information related to related party transactions, see Note 17 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenue
Total net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $9.9 million, or -5.3%, to $177.3 million as compared to $187.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The total $9.9 million decrease was attributable to a $20.3 million increase in Software & Services revenue, more than offset by a $30.2 million decrease in Retail revenue.
The $30.2 million decrease in Retail revenue was primarily driven by a $27.9 million decline in merchandise sales generated through our e-commerce platform, including related shipping revenue, combined with a $2.8 million increase in mark-downs (including refunds, promotions, and price discounts) during the period. This decrease in merchandising sales resulted from a decline in Active Customers in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. As discussed above, the Active Customer decline resulted from the temporary impact of unique customer acquisition trends occurring during the COVID-19 pandemic, which impacted the fiscal 2020 results. The decline in Active Customers was partially offset by a 4% increase in Retail revenue per Active Customer as we saw improved engagement from our customer base.
The Software & Services revenue increase of $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was the result of the recognition of license fees related to our satisfaction of specific performance obligations for our software licensing agreement with AEON, which had its initial go-live date in the third quarter of 2021. The software licensing agreement with AEON, a related party, was signed in the first quarter of 2021 and is further discussed below under “-Application of Critical Accounting Policies.”
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Cost of sales for our Retail segment decreased by $18.3 million, or -11.4%, to $142.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $161.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in Retail cost of sales is primarily the result of a $18.1 million decrease in product costs as the result of lower Retail sales, as discussed above. Retail gross profit as a percentage of Retail net revenue (Retail gross margin) decreased to 8.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 13.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year-over-year decline in Retail gross margin was primarily a result of higher mark-downs, as well as increases in product and outbound shipping costs as vendors passed on cost inflation from their own supply chains, resulting from raw material and labor shortages. Retail gross margin has recovered to 11.3% as of the fourth quarter of 2021.
Cost of sales for our Software & Services segment increased by $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to integration and maintenance costs related to our licensing agreement with AEON which was signed in the first quarter of 2021, as discussed above. Software & Services gross profit as a percentage of Software & Services net revenue (Software & Services gross margin) increased to 88.0% due to our initial go-live date and related revenue recognition in second half of 2021 for our licensing agreement with AEON, as well as the nature of our higher-margin Software & Services segment. Our Software & Services gross margin was particularly favorable in this period due to the timing of revenue recognition for our AEON licensing fees.
Total gross profit increased to $31.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in a total gross margin of 18.0% as compared to the total gross profit and total gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $25.9 million and 13.8%, respectively. Total gross profit and total gross margin increased in fiscal 2021 primarily due to the increase in revenue mix from our higher-margin Software & Services segment.
Advertising Expense
Advertising expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $17.0 million to $22.0 million as compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in advertising media costs used to acquire and retain customers. In addition, our advertising spend was temporarily reduced during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of capital constraints as well as a significant spike in COVID-19-related demand that stressed our inventory levels and supply chain, forcing us to pull back on growth-related investments, such as marketing.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $9.3 million, or 18.7%, to $59.0 million as compared to $49.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The year-over-year increase was primarily due to one-time legal and third-party consulting fees of $4.8 million incurred related to our preparation for becoming a public company, increases in third-party software costs of $2.4 million primarily driven by our new subscription agreement with Palantir, and an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $2.0 million.
Operating Income (Loss)
Total operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $20.4 million to $49.0 million as compared to $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The total $20.4 million decrease was attributable to an increase in operating income of $18.3 million in our Software & Services segment, more than offset by an increase in operating loss of $38.6 million in our Retail segment.
The increase in operating loss of $38.6 million in our Retail segment was primarily driven by a decline in merchandising sales and related revenue, as discussed above, combined with increases in shipping and freight costs, advertising expense, and selling, general, and administrative costs.
The increase in operating income of $18.3 million for our Software & Services segment was primarily driven by the successful delivery and acceptance of our software technology to AEON in 2021, satisfying specific performance obligations from our software licensing agreement and resulting in the recognition of applicable license, maintenance, and implementation fee revenue. The operating loss of $2.4 million in our Software & Services segment for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to research and development expense as we did not begin earning revenue in this segment until the first quarter of 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense increased by $14.4 million to $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expense of $20.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by mark-to-market adjustments for the (i) Sponsor Earnout Shares of $5.5 million, (ii) forward purchase option derivative of $4.2 million, and (iii) SPAC Warrants of $4.8 million. Also included in other income (expense), net for fiscal 2021 are transaction costs allocated to derivatives of $4.5 million. Interest expense also increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to interest expense incurred related to our term loan entered into in August 2021 as well as interest expense incurred related to our PIPE Convertible Notes. The expense of $5.7 million in the December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the mark-to-market adjustments of a previously outstanding convertible note derivative, which fully converted into equity as of June 2020, as well as fair value adjustments to our then outstanding common stock warrants and preferred stock warrants.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $13.2 million, or 7.6%, to $187.2 million as compared to $174.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This growth was primarily due to a $10.5 million increase in merchandise and related sales revenue generated from our e-commerce platform, including shipping revenue. This increase in sales and shipping revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 was directly attributable to the increase in demand of our goods and services from our B2C customers as a result of unique customer buying trends during the COVID-19 pandemic, especially during the first and second quarters of 2020. That increase in demand from our B2C customers was partially offset by a decline in demand from our B2B customers, many of whom moved to work-from-home environments during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, net revenue was positively impacted year over year due to a $2.0 million reduction in promotional discounts, customer credits, and refund allowances.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, all revenue generated was derived from Retail revenue.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $2.8 million, or 1.7%, to $161.3 million as compared to $164.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of sales is primarily driven by a $3.2 million decrease in product costs and a $1.8 million decrease in shipping and packaging costs related to pricing optimizations and negotiations with vendors, offset by a $2.1 million decrease in vendor discounts and allowances.
Gross profit as a percentage of net revenue (gross margin) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 13.8% as compared to 5.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This favorability in gross margin is due to a year-over-year improvements in the variable cost structure of the business, as discussed in the preceding paragraph.
Advertising Expense
Advertising expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $15.8 million, or 76.3%, to $4.9 million as compared to $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a $15.1 million decrease in advertising media spend intended to drive new and repeat customer engagement. The decreased investment was a result in Company capital constraints, combined with increases in organic new customer traffic, and industry-wide inventory sourcing challenges that impacted our supply chain due to COVID-19.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $5.2 million, or 9.5%, to $49.7 million as compared to $54.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $3.6 million in salaries and compensation largely driven by a reorganization in the corporate office, as well as temporary reductions in salaries for most corporate staff and executive officers in response to COVID-19 related uncertainty.
Stock-based compensation for the year December 31, 2020 decreased by $0.3 million to $2.0 million as compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 changed by $6.0 million to $5.8 million of expense as compared to $0.3 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2019. This change was primarily attributable to the mark-to-market fair value adjustments of our convertible note derivative as well as fair value adjustments of our outstanding common stock warrants and preferred stock warrants.
Quarterly Results (Unaudited)
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly consolidated financial data for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021. The quarterly consolidated financial data has been recast to reflect the number of shares of our common stock, $0.0001 par value per share, issued to Old Boxed's stockholders in connection with the Business Combination. As such, the shares and corresponding capital amounts and earnings per share related to Old Boxed convertible preferred stock and Old Boxed common stock prior to the Business Combination has been retroactively recast as shares reflecting the Exchange Ratio of 0.9498 established in the Business Combination.
Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
We utilize Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, to budget, make operating and strategic decisions and evaluate our performance, and believe it is useful to investors as it provides additional information to facilitate comparisons of historical operating results, identify trends in our underlying operating results and provide additional insight and transparency on how we evaluate our business. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as GAAP net loss adjusted for interest income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, one-time costs associated with the Business Combination and MaxDelivery acquisition, gains (losses) attributable to the change in fair value of our warrants and derivatives, and other income (expense) outside of the fair value adjustments. Adjusted EBITDA is supplemental to our operating performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and has important limitations. For example, Adjusted EBITDA excludes the impact of certain costs required to be recorded under GAAP and could differ substantially from similarly titled measures presented by other companies in our industry or companies in other industries. Accordingly, this measure should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA to our GAAP net loss, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the periods indicated:
1 Transaction costs represent non-recurring consulting and advisory costs with respect to the Business Combination.
The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by an increase in net loss, as the increase in gross profit was more than offset by increases in advertising expense and selling, general, and administrative expense, described in more detail above. The change in Adjusted EBITDA was also impacted by the fair value adjustments related to our warrants, forward purchase option derivative, and earnout liability as well as increases to stock-based compensation, interest expense related to our term loan and PIPE Convertible Notes and transaction costs, primarily related to the Business Combination.
The increase in Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of a decrease in net loss associated with an increase in gross profit combined with declines in advertising expense and selling, general, and administrative expenses, as described above. The change in Adjusted EBITDA was also impacted by the fair value adjustment of the convertible note derivative.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview and Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had total we had cash and cash equivalents of $105.0 million, restricted cash of $2.8 million, and an accumulated deficit. In addition, we also had $60.1 million in receivables related to the Forward Purchase Agreement entered into in connection with the Business Combination. The timing and terms of any recoupment of the receivables (or some portion thereof) are influenced by our stock price performance over the next 24 months. Notwithstanding the foregoing, our net loss and net cash used in operating activities amounted to $69.2 million and $53.5 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021. As an emerging growth company, we are dependent on outside capital to execute our strategy of investing in growth at the expense of short-term profits. As a result, we have incurred significant losses and net cash outflows from operating activities since our inception and expect to incur such losses and remain dependent on outside capital for the foreseeable future until such time that we can realize our growth strategy by generating profits and reducing our reliance on outside capital. Given the inherent uncertainties associated with executing our growth strategy, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to obtain sufficient outside capital or generate sufficient cash from operations to fund our obligations as they become due over the next twelve months.
In addition, in August 2021 we entered into a new term loan agreement for principal of $45.0 million, as discussed below. The term loan contains a certain number of financial covenants, which requires us to (i) maintain minimum unrestricted cash balance of $15.0 million, (ii) maintain minimum net Retail revenue based upon agreed quarterly targets, and (iii) maintain a Retail gross margin percentage of at least 8%. In order to achieve these targets, we expect to invest in growth initiatives including substantially increasing our marketing spend, resulting in an increase in cash used in operating activities for the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the financial covenants required by our new term loan agreement. However, the inherent uncertainties described above may impact our ability to remain in compliance with these covenants over the next twelve months. If we breach our financial covenants and fail to secure a waiver or forbearance from the third-party lender, such breach or failure could accelerate the repayment of the outstanding borrowings under the new term loan agreement or the exercise of other rights or remedies the third-party lender may have under applicable law. No assurance can be provided a waiver or forbearance will be granted or the outstanding borrowings under the new term loan agreement will be successfully refinanced on terms that are acceptable us.
Despite the substantial amount of capital that we have raised from outside investors and lenders, as well as our Business Combination, as of December 31, 2021, we had no additional capital available for borrowing and no firm commitment from current or prospective investors to provide us additional capital to fund operations in the foreseeable future. While management believes the that we will be able to obtain additional capital, no assurance can be provided that such capital will be obtained or on terms that are acceptable to us. These uncertainties raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unsuccessful in securing additional capital and/or executing our strategy of growth whereby we realize profits and generate sufficient cash inflows from operations to fund our obligations as they become due, we may be required to seek other strategic alternatives such as a further reduction in our current cost structure, or a recapitalization of our balance sheet, including related outstanding debt and equity securities.
Debt and Convertible Debt Financing
Term Loan
In June 2020, we amended and extended the loan and security agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), originally dated previously amended in December 2017, January 2018, and March 2020. The June 2020 amendment, which was the Seventh Amendment to the Credit Agreement, granted us a term loan in the principal amount of $7.5 million, with a maturity date of December 22, 2022, of which $5.1 million was immediately drawn. In July 2020, the Company drew down on the remaining $2.4 million of principal in this most recent amendment, increasing the Company’s total borrowings to $7.5 million. The Seventh Amendment also reduced the available letters of credit from $11.0 million to $4.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had issued $2.6 million letters of credit, out of the $4.0 million available.
The Credit Agreement provided the bank a first perfected security interest in all of our assets with a negative pledge on intellectual property. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, outstanding amounts drawn on the Credit Agreements accrued interest at a floating per annum rate equal to three and one-quarter of one percentage points (3.25%) above the Prime Rate for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On August 4, 2021, we paid down the existing $5.0 million in remaining principal in the Seventh Amendment to the Credit Agreement. In connection with the loan repayment, our letter of credit was modified we are now required to maintain cash collateral for the outstanding letters of credit. As a result, the cash collateral related to the outstanding letters of credit will now be segregated in restricted cash accounts as of September 30, 2021. Approximately $2.8 million of letters of credit were issued to us as of December 31, 2021.
New Term Loan
On August 4, 2021, we entered into a new term loan agreement (the “New Term Loan”). The New Term Loan provided us with $45.0 million at a floating per annum rate of LIBOR plus 8.5%, with a maturity date of August 4, 2025. The agreement provides the lender with a first priority security interest in all of our assets and contains a certain number of financial covenants, which requires us to (i) maintain minimum unrestricted cash balance of $15.0 million, (ii) maintain minimum net Retail revenue based upon agreed upon quarterly targets, and (iii) maintain a Retail gross margin percentage of at least 8%. These net Retail revenue and Retail gross margin targets are tested quarterly on a trailing twelve-month basis. The agreement also includes other affirmative and negative covenants, which, among other things, restricts our ability to pay dividends or make any distributions, incur indebtedness, make investments, incur liens, sell substantially all of its assets, and consummate fundamental changes. The agreement also subjects us to certain reporting covenants. We are required to provide monthly, quarterly, and annual financial statements, operating budget and metrics, and other financial information as requested. Also in connection with the term loan agreement, we issued 126,993 warrants to purchase preferred stock at an exercise price of $7.0871. These warrants were cashless exercised immediately prior to the consummation of the Business Combination and are no longer outstanding. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants and reporting requirements under the New Term Loan. There was $45.0 million in principal remaining as of December 31, 2021.
Convertible Promissory Notes
On May 15, 2020, May 26, 2020 and May 29, 2020, we issued Subordinated Convertible Promissory Notes (each, a “2020 Note”) in an aggregate principal amount of $8.2 million pursuant to the respective Note Purchase Agreement. The maturity date of the 2020 Notes was the earlier of (a) two years from the 2020 Note issuance; (b) upon acceleration due to an Event of Default; and (c) upon conversion of the 2020 Notes in connection with us raising equity proceeds of $25.0 million or more inclusive of the principal amount of the 2020 Notes. The 2020 Notes accrued .25% simple interest per annum (the short-term AFR fixed on the respective Note issuance date). The 2020 Notes converted into Series E-2 preferred stock as a result of the Series E raised in June 2020.
Immediately prior to the consummation of the Business Combination, all of the Old Boxed preferred stock, including the Series E-2 preferred stock, converted into shares of Old Boxed common stock. Then upon Closing, each share of Old Boxed common stock converted into the right to receive approximately 0.9498 shares of New Boxed common stock.
PIPE Convertible Notes
Upon consummation of the Business Combination, pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, we issued an aggregate of $87.5 million of principal amount of PIPE Convertible Notes. The PIPE Convertible Notes will mature five years after their initial issuance. The Convertible Notes will be convertible, at our election, for shares of common stock, cash or a combination of cash and such shares, based on a conversion price of $12.00 per share (subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments) in accordance with the terms thereof. The PIPE Convertible Notes will bear interest at a rate of 7.00% per annum, paid-in-kind or in cash at our option and accruing semi-annually. We may redeem the PIPE Convertible Notes after the third anniversary of their issuance, subject to a holder’s right to convert prior to the redemption date, if (i) the trading price of the shares of common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price on at least twenty out of the preceding thirty consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the trading day immediately before we issue a redemption notice, and (unless we elect to settle conversions in connection with such redemption in cash) if (ii) certain conditions related to the ability of the converting holders to resell the conversion shares without restrictions under the U.S. securities laws are satisfied. For further detail regarding the terms of the PIPE Convertible Notes, refer to Note 5 of Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward Purchase Agreement
As discussed above, prior to the Closing, on November 28, 2021, Seven Oaks entered into the Forward Purchase Agreement with ACM for an OTC Equity Prepaid Forward Transaction. Pursuant to the terms of the Forward Purchase Agreement, ACM purchased approximately 6,504,768 shares of Seven Oaks' Class A common stock (the “Forward Purchase shares”) and, one business day following the closing of the Business Combination, the Prepayment Amount of $65.1 million was paid out of the funds we received from Seven Oaks' trust account, which will be held in a deposit account for the benefit of ACM until the “Valuation Date” (the second anniversary of the closing of the Business Combination, subject to certain acceleration provisions). At any time prior to the Valuation Date, ACM may elect an optional early termination to sell some or all of the Forward Purchase shares in the open market. If ACM sells any shares prior to the Valuation Date, the pro-rata portion of the Prepayment Amount will be released from the deposit account and paid to us. As of December 31, 2021, ACM has sold 501,109 shares, for which we received gross proceeds of $5.0 million. Depending on the manner in which the Forward Purchase Transaction is settled, we may never have access to the full Prepayment Amount.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities consisted of net loss adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, the change in fair value of warrants and derivatives, and other non-cash items, as well as the effect of the changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $53.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $69.2 million net loss, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily included $4.5 million of depreciation and amortization, $13.0 million in the changes in fair value of the warrants, derivatives, and earnout liability, and $4.0 million in stock-based compensation, as well as a $6.3 million net decrease in operating assets and liabilities. The decrease in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by the change prepaid and other current assets of $2.8 million, primarily attributable to amounts prepaid for our subscription agreement with Palantir as well as legal and consulting fees related to the Business Combination. Also contributing to the net decrease in operating assets and liabilities is the addition of unbilled receivables, net of related deferred revenue of $8.9 million, primarily related to our AEON software licensing agreement as well as the addition of total deferred contract costs of $19.4 million, attributable to known obligations for software licenses and insurance premiums that have not yet been paid, mostly offset by the change in accounts payable of $19.3 million. Also contributing to the net decrease in net operating assets and liabilities is a $2.8 million change in inventory due to lower sales volume as well as other changes to our net operating assets and liabilities of $2.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $24.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $34.4 million net loss, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily included $4.8 million of depreciation and amortization, $5.2 million in the change in fair value of warrants and embedded derivatives, and $2.0 million in stock-based compensation, as well as a $1.9 million net decrease in operating assets and liabilities. The increase in our net operating assets and liabilities was driven by a net change in accounts payable and other current liabilities of $5.0 million related to the timing of payments as well as changes in our prepaid and other current assets of $1.0 million primarily due to lower upfront payments to advertising vendors, as well as other changes to working capital of $1.2 million, partially offset by a change in long-term liabilities of $0.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $45.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisting of $65.4 million net loss, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily included $4.4 million of depreciation and amortization and $2.3 million in stock-based compensation, as well as a $12.9 million net increase in operating assets and liabilities. The increase in our net operating assets and liabilities was driven by a change in accounts payable and other current liabilities of $11.4 million related to increased expenditures to support general business growth, as well as the timing of payments and a change in prepaid and other current assets of $1.1 million, primarily driven by lower outstanding vendor funds.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $64.7 million, which largely resulted from a gross cash outflow of $65.1 million which is being held in a deposit account pursuant to the terms of the Forward Purchase Transaction. The $65.1 million gross cash outflow is partially offset by a $5.0 million inflow from funds which were recollected from the forward purchase receivable deposit as ACM sold a portion of the respective shares it purchased as part of the Forward Purchase Transaction, as discussed above. Further, the Company paid $1.1 million for the purchase of fixed assets and $3.6 million in cash consideration for the acquisition of MaxDelivery.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $1.2 million, primarily due to the purchase of fixed assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $3.9 million, primarily due to the purchase of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $195.9 million, primarily due to $159.6 million in proceeds from the Business Combination, net of redemptions and transaction costs and $43.8 million in net proceeds after debt issuance costs related to our term loan signed in August 2021, offset by repayments of the prior term loan of $7.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $42.5 million, primarily due to proceeds from the sale of preferred stock of $30.0 million, proceeds from the convertible note issuance of $8.2 million, and proceeds from the term loan of $12.5 million, partially offset by repayments of the term loan of $7.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $6.0 million primarily due to proceeds from proceeds from the sale of preferred stock of $10.0 million, partially offset by principal payments on finance lease obligations of $3.0 million and repayments of the term loan of $1.0 million.
Other Commitments
We maintain our principal offices in New York City, New York and maintain fulfillment centers and office space in various locations throughout the United States. Our future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable leases was $15.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
In June 2021, we entered into a Master Subscription Agreement with Palantir Technologies Inc. (“Palantir”) under which we are contracted to pay $20.0 million over five years for access to Palantir’s Foundry platform, $15.0 million of which was due thirty days after the closing of the Business Combination, or on January 8, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, $4.0 million was paid to Palantir, with the approximately $11.0 million due to be paid in January of 2022.
In December 2021, we signed an addendum to a prior service agreement with Google LLC for access to the Google Cloud Platform. Under the addendum, we are required to pay $2.0 million, $4.5 million, and $8.5 million for the first, second, and third commitment periods, respectively. The first commitment period started on the implementation date of December 1, 2021 and will last 12 months. The next two commitment periods begin at the end of the preceding period and each last 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, the total remaining commitment was $15.0 million, with a minimum of $2.0 million due within the next 12 months.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes. Our estimates are based on (i) currently known facts and circumstances, (ii) prior experience, (iii) assessments of probability, (iv) forecasted financial formation, and (v) assumptions that management believes to be reasonable but that are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. We use our best judgment when measuring these estimates, and if warranted, use external advice. On an ongoing basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our Consolidated Financial Statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. In times of economic disruption when uncertainty regarding future economic conditions is heightened, these estimates and assumptions are subject to greater variability.
For a discussion of all of our significant accounting policies, including our critical accounting policies, see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of Item 8 in this Form 10-K. We believe that the accounting estimates and assumptions described below involve significant subjectivity and judgment, and changes to such estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on our financial condition or operating results. Therefore, we consider an understanding of the variability and judgment required in making these estimates and assumptions to be critical in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Software & Services revenue
In the first quarter of 2021, we entered into an agreement with AEON Integrated Business Services Co., Ltd., a wholly-owned subsidiary of AEON, a related party, to license our e-commerce platform through an software licensing arrangement, in which AEON will take possession of the software for usage of our IP, and host that software in an on-premise, or cloud-based infrastructure environment, at AEON’s election. The objective of the agreement is for us to design, develop and support the e-commerce platform customized for the digital marketplace operations of AEON and AEON affiliates. The services provided include implementation services, license of the e-commerce software platform, training, and maintenance and support. Our software license agreement requires the analysis of multiple performance obligations, through the application of ASC 606.
We recognize revenue through the application of the following five-step model:
•Identification of the contract(s) with customers;
•Identification of the performance obligation(s) in the contract;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations(s) in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenue when or as the performance obligation(s) are satisfied.
In line with the model, we recognize revenue as we satisfy each performance obligation. Specifically, implementation revenue is recognized over time using the input method based on percentage of completion, which requires management's judgement in accessing the scope and estimating progress towards a completed product. License revenue is recognized at the point in time at the go-live date of the software; training revenue is recognized when the training is delivered to the customer without regard to a detailed evaluation of the point in time criteria due to the short-term nature of the training services (completed within the same quarterly reporting period); and maintenance and support revenue is recognized over time on a straight-line basis over the contract period. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract price to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices using a cost plus a margin approach.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and record the expense related to stock-based awards based upon the fair value at the date of grant. We estimate the grant date fair value of each common stock option using the Black-Scholes Merton model, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions and management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and management’s judgement. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•Fair value of the underlying common stock - Prior to our common stock being publicly traded, we estimated the fair value of common stock using contemporaneous valuations performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' Accounting & Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Our Board considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock at each meeting in which awards were approved. Since becoming a publicly traded company, the fair value of common stock is determined by taking the closing price per share of common stock as reported on the NYSE.
•Expected volatility - We estimate volatility for option grants by evaluating the average historical volatility of a peer group of companies for the period immediately preceding the option grant for a term that is approximately equal to the options’ expected term.
•Expected term - Derived from the life of the options granted under the option plan and is based on the simplified method which is essentially the weighted average of the vesting period and contractual term.
•Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term that is equal to the options’ expected term at the grant date.
•Dividend yield - We have not declared or paid dividends to date and does not anticipate declaring dividends. As such, the dividend yield has been estimated to be zero.
We estimate expected forfeitures of stock-based awards at the grant date and recognize compensation cost only for those awards expected to vest. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant based on historical experience and revise the estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
Historical Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our Business Combination, the fair value of our common stock prior to the Business Combination was determined by our Board, with input from management, taking into account our most recent valuations from an independent third-party valuation specialist. Our Board intended all stock options granted to have an exercise price per share not less than the per share fair value of our common stock on the date of grant, with limited unique exceptions. The valuations of our common stock were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants' Accounting & Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The assumptions we used in the valuation models were based on future expectations combined with management judgment, and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of the date of each option grant, including the following factors:
•relevant precedent transactions involving our capital stock;
•contemporaneous valuations performed at periodic intervals by unrelated third-party specialists;
•the liquidation preferences, rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock;
•our actual operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions and projections;
•our stage of development;
•the likelihood and timing of achieving a liquidity event for the shares of common stock underlying the stock options, such as an initial public offering, given prevailing market conditions;
•any adjustment necessary to recognize a lack of marketability of the common stock underlying the granted options;
•recent secondary stock sales and tender offers;
•the market performance of comparable publicly-traded companies; and
•the U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock at various dates, our Board determined the equity value of our business using various valuation methods including combinations of income and market approaches with input from management.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
Since a public trading market for our common stock has been established after the Business Combination, it is no longer necessary for our Board to estimate the fair value of our common stock in connection with our accounting for granted stock options and other such awards we may grant, as the fair value of our common stock will be determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock. Future expense amounts for any particular period could be affected by changes in market conditions.
Incentive Award Plan
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, we adopted our Incentive Award Plan, under which we grant restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to certain executives that vest upon the achievement of certain service conditions and upon the achievement of certain share-price and gross profit targets. With respect to the share-price target RSUs, we estimated the grant date fair value of these units using a model based on multiple stock price paths developed through the use of a Monte-Carlo Simulation that incorporates into the valuation the possibility that the stock price may not be satisfied. Provided the executives continue their employment with us, we recognize stock-based compensation expense for the share-price target RSUs over the derived service period produced by the model, regardless of it the targets are achieved. If the stock price goals are met sooner than the derived service period, we will adjust our stock-based compensation expense to reflect the cumulative expense associated with the vested award.
The probability of achievement of gross profit target stock awards and related compensation may vary based on market conditions and overall company performance. Fluctuations in such conditions or company performance could yield variation in our expectation of target performance and in turn impact our stock-based compensation expense. We have not yet granted gross profit target stock awards.
Derivative Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if there are individual instruments or embedded components to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging: Embedded Derivatives. Our identified derivative instruments have been determined to be liability-classified and the fair values of these derivatives are marked-to-market each balance sheet date with the changes in the fair values of these instruments recorded as income or expense in other income (expense), net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For instruments that may be convertible to shares, upon conversion or exercise of the derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the conversion date and then that fair value is reclassified to equity. Our derivative instruments consist of our forward purchase option derivative, Sponsor Earnout Shares, and SPAC warrant liabilities.
The fair value of our derivative instruments are estimated using a Monte-Carlo Simulation, which involves key assumptions that require significant management judgment, summarized as follows:
(i) Forward purchase option derivative - the Forward Purchase Transaction can be settled in a variety of ways over the course of 24 months (as described in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K) and as such, the valuation for the associated liability requires significant management judgment. The key inputs and assumptions management used in the Monte-Carlo Simulation, including volatility, expected term, expected future stock price, and various simulated paths, were utilized to estimate the fair value of the associated liability. The value of the forward purchase option derivative was calculated as the average present value over 50,000 simulated paths. Management evaluated the liability as of Closing and as of December 31, 2021 and will continue to evaluate fair value adjustments at each reporting period.
(ii) Sponsor Earnout Shares - As part of the Business Combination, certain stockholders are entitled to receive additional shares of our common stock (the “Sponsor Earnout Shares”) to be issued when our common stock's price reaches certain market share price milestones within specified periods following the Business Combination. The terms and conditions of the right to receive Sponsor Earnout Shares are described in Note 1 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements (included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). In accordance with the guidance under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, the right to the Sponsor Earnout Shares was classified as a Level 3 fair value measurement liability and the change in the fair value during the reporting period was recognized within other income (expense), net in our Consolidated Statement of Operations. The fair value of the contingent Sponsor Earnout Shares liability was estimated using a Monte-Carlo Simulation of the stock prices based on historical and implied market volatility of a peer group of public companies, as well as the expected term and expected future stock price. Management evaluated the liability at Closing and as of December 31, 2021, and will continue to evaluate fair value adjustments at each reporting period.
(iii) SPAC warrant liabilities - As discussed in Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements (included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form10-K), we accounted for the warrants issued in connection with Seven Oaks' IPO in accordance with ASC 815, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants were measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized within other income (expense), net in our Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period of change. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Acquisitions
Acquired Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, the most critical including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue and cash flows, discount rates and selection of comparable companies. Significant estimation was required in the acquisition of MaxDelivery to determine the fair value of customer relationships, trade names, and internally developed software as well as the contingent consideration included in the purchase price. The significant estimation is primarily due to the judgmental nature of the inputs to the valuation models used to measure the fair value of these intangible assets and the contingent consideration. In selecting the techniques and assumptions noted above, we generally engaged third-party, independent valuation professionals to assist us in developing the assumptions and applying the valuation techniques to a particular business combination transaction. In particular, the discount rates selected were compared to and evaluated with (i) the industry weighted-average cost of capital, (ii) the inherent risks associated with each type of asset and (iii) the level and timing if future cash flows appropriately reflecting market participant assumptions.
To the extent the purchase price of the acquired business exceeds the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, such excess was recognized as goodwill. The goodwill created by the MaxDelivery acquisition was not amortized but will be tested annually, or more often if impairment indicators are present. Due to the proximity of the acquisition to our fiscal year end date, we will begin our annual impairment testing in the following year.
Contingent Consideration
Further, as noted above and in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements (included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), a portion of the total purchase price for the acquisition of MaxDelivery is contingent consideration related to potential future earnout if certain financial metrics are met and as such, the valuation for the associated liability requires significant judgement from management. The key inputs and assumptions management used in the Monte-Carlo Simulation, including various target ranges, volatility, and projected financials, were utilized to estimate the fair value of the associated liability. Management evaluated the liability as of the date of the acquisition and as of December 31, 2021 and will continue to evaluate fair value adjustments at each reporting period.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Therefore, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
Boxed is an emerging growth company. Therefore, we have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act. Accordingly, our financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.