ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere herein. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect,” and the like, and/or future-tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this form. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors.
Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, including any changes that might result from any facts, events, or circumstances after the date hereof that may bear upon forward-looking statements. Furthermore, we cannot guarantee future results, events, levels of activity, performance, or achievements.
Overview
We are an educational technology company that is seeking to become a world leading innovator and integrator of interactive products and software for schools, as well as for business and government learning spaces. We currently design, produce and distribute interactive projectors and distribute interactive technologies, including flat panels, projectors, whiteboards and peripherals to the education market. We also distribute science, technology, engineering and math (or “STEM”) products, including a portable science lab. All our products are integrated into our classroom software suite that provides tools for whole class learning, assessment and collaboration.
To date, we have generated substantially all revenue in the U.S. from the sale of interactive displays and related software to the educational market. In the region encompassing Europe, the Middle East and Africa (collectively, “EMEA”), approximately 92% of our revenues relate to the education sector and the remainder comes from health, government and corporate, including the banking and financials services sector.
We have also implemented a comprehensive plan to reach profitability both from our core business operations and as a result of making strategic business acquisitions. We have already started to implement this strategy as set forth below. Highlights of our plan include:
● Integrating products of the acquired companies and cross training our sales reps to increase their offerings. The combination of products and cross training has already resulted in increased sales. The synergy we have found between the products of Boxlight and Mimio are adding opportunities to resellers for both companies to increase their sales.
● Hiring new sales representatives with significant education technology sales experience in their respective territories and our current pipeline has reached a record high level.
● Seeking to increase demand in the US market for technology sales and have the products and infrastructure in place to handle our expected growth.
Recent Acquisitions
On December 31, 2021, the Company acquired FrontRow Calypso LLC, a California company and a leader in classroom and campus communication solutions for the education market. While purchase accounting was applied to the acquired assets and assumed liabilities of FrontRow, the fiscal 2021 revenues and the results of operations of FrontRow are not included in consolidated results as a result of the acquisitions date.
On March 23, 2021, the Company acquired Interactive Concepts BV, a company incorporated and registered in Belgium and a distributor of interactive technologies (“Interactive”). The company has been Boxlight’s key distributor in Belgium and Luxembourg.
On September 24, 2020, the Company acquired Sahara Holdings, Ltd., a leader in distributed and manufactured AV solutions. Headquartered in the United Kingdom, Sahara is a leader in distributed AV products and a manufacturer of multi-award-winning touchscreens and digital signage products, including the globally renowned Clevertouch and Sedao brands.
On April 17, 2020, the Company acquired MyStemKits and STEM Education Holdings, Pty, an Australian corporation (“STEM”), the largest online collection of K-12 STEM curriculum for 3D printing.
Our Acquisition Strategy and Challenges
Our growth strategy includes acquiring assets and technologies of companies that have products, technologies, industry specializations or geographic coverage that extend or complement our existing business. The process to undertake a potential acquisition is time-consuming and costly. We expect to expend significant resources to undertake business, financial and legal due diligence on our potential acquisition targets, and there is no guarantee that we will complete any acquisition that we pursue.
We believe we can achieve significant cost-savings by merging the operations of the companies we acquire and after their acquisition leverage the opportunity to reduce costs through the following methods:
● Staff reductions - consolidating resources, such as accounting, marketing and human resources.
● Economies of scale - improved purchasing power with a greater ability to negotiate prices with suppliers.
● Improved market reach and industry visibility - increase in customer base and entry into new markets.
As a result, we believe that an analysis of the historical costs and expenses of our Target Sellers (a company that is the subject of an attempted acquisition) prior to their acquisition will not provide guidance as to the anticipated results after acquisition. We anticipate that we will be able to achieve significant reductions in our costs of revenue and selling, general and administrative expenses from the levels currently incurred by the Target Sellers operating independently, thereby increasing our EBITDA and cash flows.
Components of our Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Revenue
The Company’s sales of interactive devices, including panels, projectors and other interactive devices generally include hardware maintenance services, a license to software, and the provision of related software maintenance. In most cases, interactive devices are sold with hardware maintenance services.
The Company’s installation, training and professional development service include third-party products and services and are generally sold separately from the Company's products.
Cost of revenue
Our cost of revenue is comprised of the following:
● third-party logistics costs;
● costs to purchase components and finished goods directly;
● inbound and outbound freight costs and duties;
● costs associated with the repair of products under warranty;
● write-downs of inventory carrying value to adjust for excess and obsolete inventory and periodic physical inventory counts;
● cost of professionals to deliver the professional development training; and
● customs expense.
We outsource some of our warehouse operations and order fulfillment and we purchase products from related entities and third parties. Our product costs vary directly with volume and based on the costs of underlying product components as well as the prices we negotiate with our contract manufacturers. Shipping costs fluctuate with volume as well as with the method of shipping chosen in order to meet customer demand. As a global company with suppliers centered in Asia and customers located worldwide, we have used, and may in the future use, air shipping to deliver our products directly to our customers. Air shipping is more costly than sea or ground shipping or other delivery options and it is rarely used as a result. The Company did not experience material delays in shipping during 2021 that materially negatively impacted our revenues, however has faced specific supply chain challenges with component shortage and increased cost of global shipping and margins.
Gross profit and gross profit margin
Our gross profit and gross profit margin have been, and may in the future be, influenced by several factors including: product, channel and geographical revenue mix; changes in product costs related to the release of projector models; component, contract manufacturing and supplier pricing, foreign currency exchange and most recently, increased shipping costs due to the pandemic and global unrest. As we primarily procure our product components and manufacture our products in Asia, our suppliers incur many costs, including labor costs, in other currencies. To the extent that exchange rates move unfavorably for our suppliers, they may seek to pass these additional costs on to us, which could have a material impact on our future average selling prices and unit costs. Gross profit and gross profit margin may fluctuate over time based on the factors described above.
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expenses into two categories: research and development and general and administrative.
Research and development. Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel related costs, prototype and sample costs, design costs and global product certifications mostly for wireless certifications.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists of personnel related costs, which include salaries, as well as the costs of professional services, such as accounting and legal, facilities, information technology, depreciation and amortization and other administrative expenses. General and administrative expense may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue, notably in the second and third quarters of our fiscal year when we have historically experienced our highest levels of revenue.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest expense associated with our debt financing arrangements, gains (losses) on the settlements of debt and trade payable obligations exchanged for common shares, and the effects of changes in the fair value of derivative liabilities.
Income tax expense
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, United Kingdom, Mexico, Sweden, Finland, Holland, and Germany where we do business. The United Kingdom, Mexico, Sweden, Finland, Holland, and Germany have a statutory tax rate different from that in the United States. Additionally, certain of our international earnings are also taxable in the United States. Accordingly, our effective tax rates will vary depending on the relative proportion of foreign to U.S. income, the absorption of foreign tax credits, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax laws. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from the examination of our tax returns by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or IRS, and other tax authorities to determine the adequacy of our income tax reserves and expense. Should actual events or results differ from our current expectations, charges or credits to our income tax expense may become necessary. Any such adjustments could have a significant impact on our results of operations.
Operating Results - Boxlight Corporation
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The consolidated financials only include the revenues and results of operations for Sahara from the date of acquisition in September 2020.
Revenues. Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $185.2 million as compared to $54.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in a 237.4% increase. The increase in revenues was primarily a result of the acquisition of Sahara in September 2020 and increased demand for our solutions in both the U.S. and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa (together “EMEA”). Sahara made up approximately 68% of revenue in 2021 and 45% in 2020, when it was consolidated for three months. Boxlight revenue alone doubled from 2020 to 2021.
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $138.7 million as compared to $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an 208.0% increase. Cost of revenues consists primarily of product cost, freight expenses, customs expense and inventory adjustments. The increase in cost of revenues was associated with the acquisitions and growth of the business as outlined above and was also due to additional increases in global freight/shipping which the company has experienced (as have many others) as a result of supply chain issues arising as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2021 the cost increase was approximately four times normal costs as compared to pre-pandemic levels.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $46.5 million as compared to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit margin increased from 18% to 25% despite the effects of increased freight and shipping expenses discussed above and product cost increases (which have been partially offset by increased sales prices). Gross profit margin, adjusted for the net effect of acquisition-related purchase accounting, was 26.8% as compared to 27.1%, as adjusted, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Additional pressure on margin has been seen on the cost of manufacturing as a result of component shortages which have had an adverse impact of approximately 3.9% in the twelve months to December 31, 2021.The prior year included certain purchase accounting adjustments stemming from the Sahara acquisition and affecting recognized revenues. Boxlight’s gross profit margin for 2021 ,excluding Sahara, was 17%.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $47.3 million and 26% of revenue as compared to $21.1 million and 39% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase resulted from additional personnel costs associated with the acquisition.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expense was $1.8 million and 1% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.4 million and 3% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Research and development expense primarily consists of costs associated with development of proprietary technology. The increase in research and development expense was primarily driven by an increase in contract services related to software development.
Other income (expense), net. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.9 million as compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other expense increased $3.6 million, primarily due to losses incurred on the settlement of Lind and Sallyport debt obligations with the new Whitehawk debt facility.
Net loss. Net losses were $13.8 million and $16.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in the net loss was primarily due to higher sales volume, higher gross profit margin and the acquisition of Sahara.
To provide investors with additional insight and allow for a more comprehensive understanding of the information used by management in its financial and decision-making surrounding operations, we supplement our consolidated financial statements presented on a basis consistent with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) with EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, both non-GAAP financial measures of earnings.
EBITDA represents net income (loss) before income tax expense, interest income, interest expense, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA, plus stock compensation expense and non-recurring expenses and minus changes in fair value of derivative liabilities. Our management uses EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as financial measures to evaluate the profitability and efficiency of our business model. We use these non-GAAP financial measures to assess the strength of the underlying operations of our business. These adjustments, and the non-GAAP financial measure that is derived from them, provide supplemental information to analyze our operations between periods and over time. We find this especially useful when reviewing results of operations, which include large non-cash amortizations of intangibles assets from acquisitions. Investors should consider our non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and not as a substitute for, financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The following table contains reconciliations of net losses to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented.
Reconciliation of net loss for the year ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020 to EBITDA
Discussion of Effect of Seasonality on Financial Condition
Certain accounts on our balance sheets are subject to seasonal fluctuations. As our business and revenues grow, we expect these seasonal trends to be reduced. The bulk of our products are shipped to our educational customers prior to the beginning of the school year, usually in July, August or September. To prepare for the upcoming school year, we generally build up inventories during the second
quarter of the year. Therefore, inventories tend to be at the highest levels at that point in time. In the first quarter of the year, inventories tend to decline significantly as products are delivered to customers and we do not need the same inventory levels during the first quarter. Accounts receivable balances tend to be at the highest levels in the third quarter, in which we record the highest level of sales.
We have been very proactive, and will continue to be proactive, in obtaining contracts during the fourth and first quarters that will help offset the seasonality of our business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $17.9 million, a working capital position of $53.8 million, and a current ratio of 1.99. This financial position represents a significant improvement from a year ago at December 31, 2020 when we had a working capital position of $21.0 million and $13.5 million of cash and cash equivalents.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had net cash used in operating activities of $2.3 million and $4.7 million, respectively. We had net cash used in investing activities of $34.0 million and $45.3 million, respectively. In addition, we had net cash provided by financing activities of $41.1 million and $65.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In addition to the cash flows generated by our ongoing operating activities we financed our operations during 2021 and 2020 with a $20.0 million tranche of debt funded by our primary lender, and from a pre-existing accounts receivable financing arrangement with another lender who purchases 85% of the eligible accounts receivable of the Company, up to $6.0 million, with the right of recourse. We closed these credit lines in December 2021 and replaced them with our Credit Facility with Whitehawk. Our accounts receivable and our ability to borrow against accounts receivable provides an additional source of liquidity as cash payments are collected from customers in the normal course of business. Our accounts receivable balance fluctuates throughout the year based on the seasonality of the business.
Our cash requirements consist primarily of day-to-day operating expenses, capital expenditures and contractual obligations with respect to facility leases and other operating leases. We lease all our office facilities. We expect to make future payments on existing leases from cash generated from operations. We have limited credit available from our major vendors and are required to prepay for the majority of our inventory purchases, which further constrains our cash liquidity.
The Company had an accumulated deficit of $61.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and net cash used in operations of $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Recent Financing
Whitehawk
To finance the acquisition of FrontRow, the Company and substantially all its direct and indirect subsidiaries, including Boxlight, Sahara and FrontRow as guarantors, entered into a maximum $68.5 million term loan credit facility, dated December 31, 2021 and as amended April 4, 2022 (the “Amended Credit Agreement”), with Whitehawk Finance LLC, as lender (the “Lender”), and White Hawk Capital Partners, LP, as collateral agent. Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, the Company received an initial term loan of $58.5 million on December 31, 2021 (the “Initial Loan”) and was provided with a subsequent delayed draw facility of up to $10 million that may be provided for additional working capital purposes under certain conditions (the “Delayed Draw”). The Initial Loan and Delayed Draw are collectively referred to as the “Term Loans.” The proceeds of the Initial Loan were used to finance the Company’s acquisition of FrontRow, pay off all indebtedness owed to our existing lenders, Sallyport Commercial Finance, LLC and Lind Global Asset Management, LLC, pay related fees and transaction costs, and provide working capital. Of the Initial Loan, $8.5 million was subject to repayment on February 28, 2022, with quarterly principal payments of $625,000 and interest payments commencing March 31, 2022 and the $50.0 million remaining balance plus any Delayed Draw loans becoming due and payable in full on December 31, 2025. The Term Loans will bear interest at the LIBOR rate plus 10.75%; provided that after June 30, 2022, if the Company’s Senior Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) is less than 2.25, the interest rate would be reduced to LIBOR plus 10.25%. Such terms are subject to the Company maintaining a borrowing base in terms compliant with the Credit Agreement.
On March 29, 2022, the Company received a Notice of Events of Default and Reservation of Rights (the “Notice”) from the Collateral Agent, alleging, among other things, defaults as a result of (i) failure to repay $8.5 million of the facility by February 28,
2022, (ii) non-compliance with the borrowing base resulting in the Company being in an over advance position under the Credit Agreement, and (iii) failure to timely provide certain reports and documents. As a result of the Notice, all accrued and unpaid interest owed under the Term Loan, became subject to a post-default interest rate equal to the highest interest rate allowed for under the Credit Agreement plus 2.50% until such time as the Events of Default are either waived or cured. Following the Company’s receipt of the Notice and pursuant to amendment to the Credit Agreement, dated April 4, 2022, the Collateral Agent and Lender agreed to extend the terms of repayment of the $8.5 million originally due on February 28, 2022 until February 28, 2023 and waive and/or otherwise extend compliance with certain other terms of the Credit Agreement in order to allow the Loan Parties adequate time to comply with such terms. The principal elements of the amendment included (a) an extension of time for the Loan Parties to repay $8.5 million of the principal amount of the term loan from February 28, 2022 to February 28, 2023, and (b) forbearance on $3,500,000 of over advances to grant the Loan Parties until May 16, 2022 to allow the Company to come into compliance with the borrowing base requirements set forth in the Credit Agreement. In such connection, the Loan Parties intend to obtain credit insurance on certain key customers whose principal offices are located in the European Union and Australia as their accounts owed to the Loan Parties were deemed ineligible for inclusion in the borrowing base calculation primarily due to the perceived inability of the Collateral Agent to enforce security interests on such accounts.
In addition, the Lender and Collateral Agent agreed to (i) reduce, through June 30, 2022, the minimum cash reserve requirement for the Loan Parties, (ii) reduce the interest rate by 50 basis points (to Libor plus + 9.75%) after delivery of the Loan Parties’ June 30, 2023 financial statements, subject to the Loan Parties maintaining 1.75 EBITDA coverage ratio, and (iii) waive all prior Events of Default under the Credit Agreement. In conjunction with the amendment to the Credit Agreement, the parties entered into an amended and restated fee letter (the “Fee Letter”) pursuant to which the parties agreed to prepayment premiums of (i) 5% for payments made on or before December 31, 2022, (ii) 4% for payments made between January 1, 2023 and December 31, 2023, and (iii) 2% for payments made between January 1, 2024 and December 31, 2025 a. Furthermore, the parties agreed that no prepayment premiums would be payable with respect to the first $5.0 million paid under the Term Loan, any payments made in relation to the $8.5 million due on or before February 28, 2023, any required amortization payments under the Credit Agreement and any mandatory prepayments by way of ECF or casualty events.
The foregoing descriptions of the Amendment to the Credit Agreement, the Notice and the Fee Letter do not purport to describe all of the terms of such agreements. The full details of the Amendment to the Credit Agreement are filed as an Exhibit to the 8-K filed by the Company on April 4, 2022.
Sallyport
On July 20, 2021, Boxlight and Sallyport amended the Accounts Receivable Agreement (the “ARC Amendment”) entered into on September 21, 2020 and described below for purposes of increasing the Maximum Facility Limit Amount to $13,000,000, as well as increasing the minimum monthly sales from $1,250,000 to $3,000,000. In exchange for entry into the ARC Amendment, Boxlight agreed to a fee of $50,000, representing one percent of the increased Maximum Facility Limit Amount. Other terms of the Accounts Receivable Agreement remained unchanged. On August 6, 2021, Boxlight and Sallyport entered into an additional amendment of the Accounts Receivable Agreement (the “Second ARC Amendment”), which further increased the Maximum Facility Limit Amount to $15,000,000. In exchange for entry into the Second ARC Amendment, Boxlight agreed to a fee of $20,000, representing one percent of the increased Maximum Facility Limit Amount. Other terms of the Accounts Receivable Agreement remained unchanged. On August 23, 2021, the Company and Sallyport, as first lien creditor, and Lind Global Macro Fund, LP (“LGMF”) and Lind Global Asset Management, LLC (“Lind Global”), together as second lien creditors, entered into the fourth amended and restated intercreditor agreement (the “Fourth A&R Intercreditor Agreement”) for the sole purpose of increasing the permitted first lien cap thereunder from $6 million to $20 million. On December 31, 2021, the Company obtained funds from its new Credit Agreement with Whitehawk to pay off the remaining $8.4 million in principal. As a result of paying off Sallyport, the Company recorded a loss on settlement of debt of $812,000.
Everest Display (EDI)
On January 26, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Everest Display Inc., a Taiwan corporation (“EDI”), and EDI’s subsidiary, AMAGIC Holographics Inc., a California corporation (“AMAGIC”), pursuant to which $1,983,436 in accounts payable owed by us to EDI was settled in exchange for our issuance of 793,375 shares (the “2021 Shares”) of its Class A common stock to AMAGIC at a $2.50 per share purchase price, which resulted in a loss of $356,000. The 2021 Shares were issued to AMAGIC pursuant to an exemption from registration provided by Rule 506 of Regulation D under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act.
As approved by the Company’s board of directors on June 22, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with EDI and EDI’s subsidiary, AMAGIC, effective June 11, 2020, pursuant to which EDI forgave $1,000,000 in accounts payable owed by the Company to EDI in exchange for the Company’s issuance of 869,565 shares (the “Shares”) of its Class A common stock to AMAGIC which was calculated at a $1.15 per share purchase price. The Shares were issued to AMAGIC pursuant to an exemption from registration provided by Rule 506 of Regulation D under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Lind Global Macro Fund, LP
On February 4, 2020, the Company and Lind entered into a securities purchase agreement pursuant to which the Company received $750,000 in exchange for the issuance to Lind of (1) an $825,000 convertible promissory note, payable at an 8% interest rate, compounded monthly, (2) certain shares of restricted Class A common stock valued at $60,000, calculated based on the 20-day volume average weighted price of the Class A common stock for the period ended February 4, 2020, and (3) a commitment fee of $26,250. The Note was to mature over 24 months, with repayment that commenced on August 4, 2020, after which time the Company made monthly payments of $45,833 plus interest by issuing shares of Class A common stock. The commitment fee in the amount of $26,250 was paid to Lind, along with legal fees in the amount of $15,000. The Company paid Lind $60,000 for closing fees by issuing 44,557 shares of Class A common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid principal of $1.1 million and interest of $32,000 to Lind Global by issuing a total of $671,000 shares of Class A common stock with an aggregate value of $1.5 million to Lind Global and recognized a loss extinguishment of approximately $430,000. The Note was paid off on December 21, 2021.
Lind Global Asset Management
On September 21, 2020, the Company and Lind Global Asset Management, LLC (“Lind Global”) entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Lind SPA”) pursuant to which the Company received $20.0 million in exchange for the issuance to Lind of (1) a $22.0 million convertible promissory note, payable at a 4% interest rate, compounded monthly, (2) 310,399 shares of restricted Class A common stock valued at $900,000, calculated based on the 20-day volume average weighted price of the Class A common stock for the period ended September 21, 2020, and (3) a commitment fee of $400,000. The Note was to mature over 24 months, with repayment commencing on November 22, 2020, after which time the Company became obligated to make monthly payments of $1.0 million, plus interest. Interest accrued during the first two months of the note, after which time the interest payments, including accrued interest was paid monthly in either conversion shares. The commitment fee in the amount of $40,000 was paid to Lind Global, along with legal fees in the amount of $20,000. The Company paid Lind a total of $500,000 in closing fees consisting of commitment and legal fees, by issuing 310,399 shares of Class A common stock. The shares of Class A common stock issuable to Lind under the Note are registered pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3.
All of the Lind Debt was paid off with the proceeds from the term loan credit facility entered into with Whitehawk on December 31, 2021. Aggregate principal due of $8 million was paid off of proceeds of term loan and a settlement loss of $374,000 was recognized which included a write off of the related deferred financing costs.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as payment for the Lind Global convertible notes, the Company repaid principal of $12.0 million and interest of $584,000 to Lind Global by issuing a total of 7.2 million shares Class A common stock with an aggregate value of $15.9 million to Lind and recognized a $3.3 million loss.
In conjunction with our entry into the Lind Global SPA agreement and the issuance of the Convertible Note, on September 21, 2020, the Company and Lind Global Macro Fund, LP, an affiliate of Lind Global(“Lind”), entered into a third amended and restated security agreement (the “Third A&R Security Agreement”) for purposes of amending and restating a prior security agreement, dated as of February 4, 2020, between the Company and Lind in order to incorporate the Lind Global SPA and the Convertible Note therein. In addition, on September 21, 2020, the Company, Sallyport Commercial Finance, LLC (“Sallyport”), as first lien creditor, and Lind and Lind Global, as second lien creditors, entered into a third amended and restated intercreditor agreement (the “Third A&R Intercreditor Agreement”) for purposes of amending and restating the second amended and restated intercreditor agreement, dated as of February 4, 2020, between the Company, Sallyport and Lind, in order to (i) incorporate Lind Global as a second lien creditor and (ii) reaffirm and confirm the relative priority of each creditor’s respective security interests in the Company’s assets, among other matters.
In addition, on February 4, 2020, we and Lind entered into a second amended and restated security agreement for purposes of amending and restating a prior security agreement, dated as of December 13, 2019. Also, Sallyport Commercial Finance, LLC, as first lien creditor, and Lind, as second lien creditor, entered into a second amended and restated intercreditor agreement for purposes of
amending and restating the intercreditor agreement between the parties, dated as of December 13, 2019, in order to reaffirm and confirm the relative priority of each creditor’s respective security interests in our assets,
Maxim Group
On July 28, 2020, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with Maxim Group, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Maxim”), pursuant to which Maxim, as representative of the underwriters, agreed to underwrite the public offering (the “Offering”) of up to 15,000,000 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Stock”), at a public offering price of $2.00 per share, in addition to an overallotment option (the “Overallotment Option”) of 2,250,000 shares of Common Stock. The Offering closed on July 31, 2020, with the sale of all 17,250,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock, including the Overallotment Option, for gross proceeds of $34,500,000. Maxim acted as sole book-running manager, National Securities Corporation acted as a co-manager for the Offering, and A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (“A.G.P.”) acted as financial advisor. As compensation for underwriting the Offering, the underwriters received an underwriting discount of 7%, equaling approximately $2,415,000, in addition to $60,000 in expenses. A.G.P.’s compensation was paid out of the underwriting discount. The Offering was made pursuant to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (SEC File No. 333-239939) (the “Registration Statement”) and the related base prospectus included therein, as supplemented by the prospectus supplement dated July 28, 2020 (the “Preliminary Prospectus”) and the final prospectus supplement, filed July 29, 2020 (the “Final Prospectus” and collectively with the Preliminary Prospectus, the “Prospectus”).
On June 8, 2020, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement (the “June Underwriting Agreement”) with Maxim pursuant to which Maxim agreed to underwrite the public offering (the “June Offering”) of 13,333,333 shares (the “Shares”) of the Company’s Class A common stock at a public offering price of $0.75 per share. National acted as co-manager of the June Offering. The June Offering closed on June 11, 2020, with the Company’s sale of the Shares for gross proceeds of $10,000,000. In addition, the Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,000,000 shares of Class A common stock at the public offering price less discounts and commissions (the “June Over-Allotment Option”). The June Over-Allotment Option was exercised in full on June 24, 2020, for additional proceeds of $1,500,000, through the sale of an additional 1,999,667 shares of Class A common stock. Maxim acted as sole-bookrunner and National acted as co-manager for the Offering. Gross proceeds, before underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses, totaled $11.5 million. As compensation for underwriting the Offering, Maxim and National together received an underwriting discount of 7% of the Offering and the Over-Allotment Option and were reimbursed for up to $85,000 in underwriting expenses. The June Offering was conducted pursuant to the Company’s registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-238634) previously filed with and subsequently declared effective by the SEC.
On February 4, 2020, we and Lind Global Marco Fund, LP (the “Investor” or “Lind”) entered into a purchase agreement (the “2020 SPA”) pursuant to which we received $750,000 in exchange for the issuance to Lind of (1) an $825,000 convertible promissory note, payable at an 8% interest rate, compounded monthly (the “2020 Note”), (2) certain shares of restricted Company Class A common stock valued at $60,000, calculated based on the 20-day volume average weighted price of the Class A common stock for the period ended February 4, 2020, and (3) a commitment fee of $26,250. The Note matures over 24 months, with repayment to commence August 4, 2020, after which time the Company will be obligated to make monthly payments of $45,833 (the “Monthly Payments”), plus interest. Interest payments owed under the 2020 Note (the “Interest Payments”) accrue beginning on the one-month anniversary of the issuance of the Note, however such Interest Payments accrued during the first six months of the Note, after which time the Interest Payments, including such accrued Interest Payments, shall be payable on a monthly basis in either conversion shares or in cash. We may make the Monthly Payments and any Interest Payments in shares of the Company’s Class A common stock so long as such shares are either registered for resale under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or may be sold without restriction pursuant to Rule 144 thereunder. As such, the Monthly Payments may be subject to reduction in any month by any amounts converted into the Company’s Class A common stock. In connection with this transaction the Company and Lind amended and restated the $4,400,000 note and the $1,375,000 note referred to below that we issued to Lind in March and December 2019, respectively, to provide that we would not make any payments under the Lind notes in the form of Class A Common Stock if such payments could cause the Company to violate any rules of the Nasdaq Capital Market.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity and capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles accepted in the United States. In connection with the preparation of our financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and the related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in in detail Note 1 to the enclosed consolidated financial statements, and briefly summarized below. We believe that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain:
1. Revenue recognition
2. Business Acquisitions
3. Goodwill and Intangible assets
4. Share-based Compensation
REVENUE RECOGNITION
In accordance with the FASB’s Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers) (“Topic 606”), the Company recognizes revenue at the amount to which it expects to be entitled when control of the products or services is transferred to its customers. Control is generally transferred when the Company has a present right to payment and the significant risks and rewards of ownership of products or services are transferred to its customers. Product revenue is derived from the sale of projectors, interactive panels, audio and communication equipment and related software and accessories to distributors, resellers, and end users. Service revenue is derived from hardware maintenance services, product installation, training, software maintenance, and subscription services.
The Company’s sales of interactive devices, including panels, projectors, audio and communication equipment and other interactive devices generally include hardware maintenance services, a license to software, and the provision of related software maintenance. Interactive devices are generally sold with hardware maintenance services with terms ranging from 36-60 months. Software maintenance includes technical support, product updates on a when and if available basis, and error correction services. At times, non-interactive projectors are also sold with hardware maintenance services with terms ranging from 36-60 months. The Company also licenses software independently of its interactive devices, in which case it is bundled with software maintenance, and in some cases, subscription services that include access to on-line content, access to replacement parts, and cloud-based applications. The Company’s software subscription services provide access to content and software applications on an as needed basis over the Internet, but do not provide the right to take delivery of the software applications.
The Company’s product sales, including those with software and related services, generally include a single payment up front for the products and services, and revenue is recorded net of estimated sales returns and rebates based on the Company’s expectations and historical experience. For most of the Company’s product sales, control transfers, and therefore, revenue is recognized when products are shipped at the point of origin. When the Company transfers control of its products to the customer prior to the related shipping and handling activities, the Company has adopted a policy of accounting for shipping and handling activities as a fulfillment cost rather than a performance obligation. For other software product sales, control is transferred when the customer receives the related access code or interactive hardware since the customer’s access code or connection to the interactive hardware activates the software license at which time the software is made available to the customer. For the Company’s software maintenance, hardware maintenance, and subscription services, revenue is recognized ratably over time as the services are provided since time is the best output measure of how those services are transferred to the customer.
The Company’s installation, training and professional development services are generally sold separately from the Company’s products. Control of these services is transferred to our customers over time with hours/time incurred in providing the service being the best depiction of the transfer of services since the customer is receiving the benefit of the services as the work is performed.
For contracts with multiple performance obligations, each of which represent promises within a contract that are distinct, the Company allocates revenue to all distinct performance obligations based on their relative stand-alone selling prices (“SSPs”).
BUSINESS ACQUISITIONS
The Company’s business acquisitions are accounted for as a business combination, in accordance with Topic 350 “Business Combinations”, which requires, among other things, that assets acquired, and liabilities assumed be recognized at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date on the consolidated balance sheet. Transaction costs are expensed as incurred. Any excess of the consideration transferred over the assigned values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Income taxes, where applicable, are recognized and measured in accordance with Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. For transactions occurring on or after January 1, 2021, contract liabilities acquired in a business combination are recognized and measured in accordance with Topic 606. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgement and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue, costs and cash flows, and discount rates.
GOODWILL and INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Goodwill represents the cost in excess of the fair value of the net assets of acquired businesses. Goodwill is not amortized and is not deductible for tax purposes. Under ASC Topic 350 “Business Combinations”, we have an option to perform a “qualitative” assessment of the Company to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. If an entity believes, as a result of its qualitative assessment, that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the business is less than carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test is required. Otherwise, no further testing is required. If we determine that the Company meets these criteria, we perform a qualitative assessment. In this qualitative assessment, we consider the following items: macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, overall financial performance and other entity specific events. In addition, we assess whether the most recent fair value determination results in an amount that exceeds the carrying amount of the Company. Based on these assessments, we determine whether the likelihood that a current fair value determination would be less than the current carrying amount is not more likely than not.
Because the qualitative assessment is an option, we may bypass it for any reporting unit in any period as begin our analysis with the quantitative impairment test. We may elect to perform a quantitative impairment test based on the period of time that has passed since the most recent determination of fair value, even when we do not believe that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the business is less than carrying amount.
In analyzing goodwill for potential impairment in the quantitative impairment test, we use a combination of the income and market approaches to estimate the fair value. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value based on estimated future discounted cash flows. The assumptions we use are based on what we believe a hypothetical marketplace participant would use in estimating fair value. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue or earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization for benchmark companies. If the fair value exceeds carrying value, then no further testing is required. However, if the fair value were to be less than carrying value, we would then determine the amount of the impairment charge, if any, which would be the amount that the carrying value of the goodwill exceeded its implied value.
Intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated period of benefit. We evaluate the recoverability of intangible assets periodically and take into account events or circumstances that warrant revised estimates of useful lives or that indicate that impairment exists. No material impairments of intangible assets have been identified during any of the periods presented. Intangible assets are tested for impairment on an annual basis, and between annual tests if indicators of potential impairment exist, using a fair-value-based approach.
SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
The Company estimates the fair value of each stock compensation award at the grant date by using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value determined represents the cost for the award and is recognized over the vesting period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award. Accordingly, stock compensation expense is recognized based on
the estimated fair value of the awards which is amortized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Total expense related to the award is reduced by the fair value of the options that are forfeited by the employees that leave the Company prior to vesting.
INCOME TAXES
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes pursuant to the pertinent guidance issued by the FASB. Deferred income taxes are recorded to reflect the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets, liabilities, operating losses, and tax credit carry forwards using the tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. Valuation allowances, if any, are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount management considers more likely than not to be realized. Such valuation allowances are recorded for the portion of the deferred tax assets that are not expected to be realized based on the levels of historical taxable income and projections for future taxable income over the periods in which the temporary differences will be deductible.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Accordingly, certain specified reporting and other regulatory requirements for public companies are reduced for businesses that meet the qualifications for emerging growth companies.
These provisions include:
(1) an exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal controls over financial reporting required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002;
(2) an exemption from the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards until they would apply to private companies;
(3) an exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, or the PCAOB, requiring mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report in which the auditor would be required to provide additional information about our audit and our financial statements; and
(4) reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements.