Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References in this report (the “Annual Report”) to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to Bullpen Parlay Acquisition Company. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, references to the “Sponsor” refer to BPAC Partners LLC. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of Cayman Islands on April 1, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, and forward purchase securities, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Our sponsor is BPAC Partners LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. Our registration statement for the initial public offering became effective on December 7, 2021. We consummated the initial public offering of 23,000,000 units on December 7, 2021. Each unit consisted of one Class A ordinary shares and one-half of one redeemable warrant (“Public Warrant”), including the issuance of 3,000,000 Units as a result of the underwriter’s exercise of their over-allotment option in full. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class A Ordinary Shares”), and one-half of one redeemable warrant of the Company (each whole warrant, a “Warrant”), with each Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one Class A Ordinary Share for $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $230,000,000 and incurred $12,650,000 in underwriting fees (inclusive of $8,050,000 in deferred underwriting fees).
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering on December 7, 2021, we completed the closing of the private placement of an aggregate 11,700,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant to the sponsor, generating proceeds of $11,700,000.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering, the over-allotment and the private placements, $234,600,000 ($10.20 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the initial public offering, the over-allotment and the private placements were placed in the trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management and our board of directors have broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering, the over-allotment and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
If we have not completed our initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the initial public offering, or June 7, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, the Company’s search for a target business with which to complete a Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed Transactions. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $846,224, which consists of formation and operating costs of $382,412, transaction costs allocated to derivative warrant liability of $473,807, change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $(464,000) and share based arrangement with directors expenses of $454,005.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants, Class A ordinary shares underlying the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the initial public offering to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On December 7, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a working capital surplus of $1,054,292. Of the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering and associated Private Placement, $234,600,000 of cash was placed in the Trust Account. Cash of $2,504,134 was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for the Company’s working capital purposes.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor, or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
If the Company’s estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to an Initial Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete an Initial Business Combination or because it becomes obligated to redeem a significant number of its public shares upon completion of an Initial Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Initial Business Combination.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, the Company lacked the liquidity it needed to sustain operations for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statement. The Company has since completed its Initial Public Offering at which time capital in excess of the funds deposited in the Trust Account and/or used to fund offering expenses was released to the Company for general working capital purposes. Accordingly, management has since reevaluated the Company’s liquidity and financial condition and determined that sufficient capital exists to sustain operations one year from the date of this filing and therefore substantial doubt has been alleviated.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares is classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Shares
Net income (loss) per ordinary shares is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in our initial public offering and Private Placement to purchase shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per ordinary shares, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per ordinary shares is the same as basic earnings per ordinary shares for the periods presented.
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”). Earnings are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares as long as an Initial Business Combination is consummated. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued 11,500,000 warrants to purchase Class A ordinary shares to investors in our Initial Public Offering and issued 11,700,000 Private Placement Warrants. All of our outstanding Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
The Class A ordinary shares and warrants comprising the units began separate trading on the 52nd day following the date of the IPO. Holders have the option to continue to hold units or separate their units into the component securities. Holders will need to have their brokers contact our transfer agent in order to separate the units into Class A ordinary shares and warrants. No fractional warrants will be issued upon separation of the units and only whole warrants will trade. Accordingly, unless you purchase a multiple of two units, the number of warrants issuable to you upon separation of the units will be rounded down to the nearest whole number of warrants.
Additionally, the units will automatically separate into their component parts and will not be traded after completion of our initial business combination.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company’s management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement.
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, to reduce the complexity of accounting for convertible debt and other equity-linked instruments. For certain convertible debt instruments with a cash conversion feature, the changes are a trade-off between simplifications in the accounting model (no separation of an “equity” component to impute a market interest rate, and simpler analysis of embedded equity features) and a potentially adverse impact to diluted EPS by requiring the use of the if-converted method. The new standard will also impact other financial instruments commonly issued by both public and private companies. For example, the separation model for beneficial conversion features is eliminated simplifying the analysis for issuers of convertible debt and convertible preference shares. Also, certain specific requirements to achieve equity classification and/ or qualify for the derivative scope exception for contracts indexed to an entity’s own equity are removed, enabling more freestanding instruments and embedded features to avoid mark-to-market accounting. The new standard is effective for companies that are SEC filers (except for Smaller Reporting Companies) for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within that year, and two years later for other companies. Companies can early adopt the standard at the start of a fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2020. The standard can either be adopted on a modified retrospective or a full retrospective basis. The Company has adopted and the effects, if any, are immaterial to the Company’s financial statement.