Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the ‘‘Risk Factors’’ section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results or timing of certain events could differ materially from the results or timing described in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements.
Information pertaining to fiscal year 2019 was included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 on pages 86 through 107 under Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Position and Results of Operations,” which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 17, 2021.
Overview
We are a global precision therapy company that is inventing life-changing medicines for people with cancer and blood disorders. Applying an approach that is both precise and agile, we create therapies that selectively target genetic drivers, with the goal of staying one step ahead across stages of disease. Since 2011, we have leveraged our research platform, including expertise in molecular targeting and world-class drug design capabilities, to rapidly and reproducibly translate science into a broad pipeline of precision therapies. Today, we are delivering our approved medicines, AYVAKIT®/AYVAKYT® (avapritinib) and GAVRETO® (pralsetinib), to patients in the U.S. and Europe, and we are globally advancing multiple programs for SM, lung cancer and other genomically defined cancers, and cancer immunotherapy.
Our drug discovery approach combines our biological insights with our proprietary compound library and chemistry expertise to design highly selective and potent precision therapies, with the goal of delivering significant and durable clinical benefit to patients based on the genetic driver of their disease. This uniquely targeted, scalable approach is designed to empower the rapid design and development of new treatments and increase the likelihood of success. In addition, our business model integrates our research engine with robust clinical development and commercial capabilities in oncology and hematology to create a cycle of innovation.
Systemic Mastocytosis and other Mast Cell Disorders - AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT (avapritinib) and BLU-263
Avapritinib
We are developing and commercializing avapritinib for the treatment of advanced SM, and developing avapritinib for the treatment of non-advanced SM. SM is a rare hematologic disorder that causes an overproduction of mast cells and the accumulation of mast cells in the bone marrow and other organs, which can lead to a wide range of debilitating symptoms and, in advanced forms of the disease, organ dysfunction and failure. Nearly all cases of SM are driven by the KIT D816V mutation, which aberrantly activates mast cells.
In June 2021, the FDA approved avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKIT for the treatment of adult patients with advanced SM, including ASM, SM-AHN, and MCL. In January 2022, the CHMP of the EMA adopted a positive opinion recommending marketing authorization for avapritinib as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with ASM, SM-AHN or MCL, after at least one systemic therapy. Pending the European Commission’s final decision on our MAA, we anticipate obtaining regulatory approval from the EMA and launching avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKYT for advanced SM in Europe in the second quarter of 2022.
In addition, through our distribution agreement with Neopharm Israel Ltd., a marketing authorization application in Israel was submitted in June 2021 for avapritinib for patients with advanced SM and PDGFRA exon 18 mutant GIST. In the future, we plan to pursue the regulatory approval and commercialization of avapritinib in additional global geographies, including through additional potential distribution agreements.
We are evaluating avapritinib in an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 1 clinical trial in advanced SM, which we refer to as our EXPLORER trial, and an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 2 clinical trial in advanced SM, which we refer to as our PATHFINDER trial. In April 2021, we presented registration-enabling data from the PATHFINDER trial at the virtual AACR Annual Meeting.
In addition, we are evaluating avapritinib in an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 2 clinical trial in non-advanced SM, which we refer to as our PIONEER trial. In January 2022, we announced that the PIONEER trial was fully enrolled. We plan to report top-line data for Part 2 of the PIONEER trial in mid-2022 and to submit an sNDA to the FDA for avapritinib in non-advanced SM in the second half of 2022.
The FDA has granted breakthrough therapy designation to avapritinib for (i) the treatment of advanced SM, including the subtypes of ASM, SM-AHN and MCL, and (ii) the treatment of moderate to severe indolent SM. In
addition, the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to avapritinib for the treatment of mastocytosis, and the European Commission has granted orphan medicinal product designation to avapritinib for the treatment of mastocytosis.
BLU-263
We are developing BLU-263, an investigational, orally available, potent and highly selective KIT inhibitor, for the treatment of non-advanced SM and other mast cell disorders. BLU-263 is designed to have equivalent potency as avapritinib, with low off-target activity and lower CNS penetration relative to avapritinib based on preclinical data, which we believe will enable development of BLU-263 in a broad population of patients with non-advanced SM, including patients with lower disease burden and potentially patients with other mast cell disorders.
In April 2021, we presented results from a Phase 1 trial of BLU-263 in healthy volunteers at the virtual AACR Annual Meeting, which showed that BLU-263 was well-tolerated at all doses tested. Based on these data, we initiated the Phase 2/3 HARBOR trial of BLU-263 in patients with non-advanced SM in the second quarter of 2021. We anticipate presenting initial data from the HARBOR trial in the second half of 2022.
RET-Altered Cancers - GAVRETO® (pralsetinib)
We are developing and commercializing pralsetinib for the treatment of RET fusion-positive NSCLC, and for the treatment of RET-altered thyroid carcinoma, including MTC. We are also developing pralsetinib for the treatment of other RET-altered solid tumors. We have granted exclusive licenses to Roche and CStone to develop and commercialize pralsetinib in their respective territories. See “-Collaborations and Licenses Summary” below.
Pralsetinib received accelerated approval in the U.S. under the brand name GAVRETO for the treatment of (i) adult patients with metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC as detected by an FDA approved test, (ii) adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic RET-mutant MTC who require systemic therapy, and (iii) adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer who require systemic therapy and who are radioactive iodine-refractory (if radioactive iodine is appropriate).
In November 2021, Roche announced that the European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization for GAVRETO as a monotherapy for the treatment of adults with RET fusion-positive advanced NSCLC not previously treated with a RET inhibitor. Roche submitted a Type II variation MAA to the EMA for pralsetinib for RET-altered thyroid cancers in December 2021, as well as marketing applications for pralsetinib for RET-altered NSCLC and thyroid cancers across multiple global geographies in 2021. Marketing applications are planned for pralsetinib for RET-altered NSCLC and thyroid cancers across additional global geographies in 2022.
In March 2021, China’s NMPA approved GAVRETO for the treatment of RET fusion-positive NSCLC patients previously treated with platinum-based chemotherapy. In April 2021, China’s NMPA accepted CStone’s new drug application, or NDA, with Priority Review designation, for pralsetinib for the treatment of RET-mutant MTC and RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer.
We are currently evaluating pralsetinib in an ongoing registration-enabling Phase 1/2 clinical trial in patients with RET-altered NSCLC, MTC and other advanced solid tumors, which we refer to as the ARROW trial. In addition, Roche is conducting multiple ongoing studies, including a registration-enabling Phase 3 clinical trial in treatment-naïve patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC, which is referred to as the ACCELERET-Lung trial; and a registration-enabling Phase 3 clinical trial in patients with locally advanced or metastatic RET-mutated MTC who have not previously received a standard of care multi-kinase inhibitor therapy, which is referred to as the ACCELERET-MTC trial. In June 2021, we reported updated data from the ARROW trial in metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC and other advanced solid tumors at the 2021 ASCO Annual Meeting. The ARROW trial was fully enrolled in December 2021. Pursuant to our collaboration with Roche, we are co-developing pralsetinib globally in RET-altered solid tumors, including NSCLC, MTC and other thyroid cancers, as well as other solid tumors.
The FDA has granted breakthrough therapy designation to pralsetinib for (i) the treatment of patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC that has progressed following platinum-based chemotherapy, and (ii) the treatment of patients
with RET mutation-positive MTC that requires systemic treatment and for which there are no acceptable alternative treatments. In addition, the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to pralsetinib for the treatment of RET-rearranged NSCLC, JAK1/2-positive NSCLC or TRKC-positive NSCLC.
PDGFRA-Driven Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors - AYVAKIT/ AYVAKYT (avapritinib)
We are commercializing avapritinib for the treatment of patients with PDGFRA exon 18 GIST, a rare disease that is a sarcoma, or tumor of bone or connective tissue, of the gastrointestinal tract. Avapritinib is approved in the U.S. under the brand name AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations, and is approved in Europe with conditional marketing authorization under the brand name AYVAKYT as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA D842V mutation.
In March 2021, CStone announced that China’s NMPA approved AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations. AYVAKIT received accelerated approval in April 2021 from the TFDA and approval in Hong Kong in December 2021, both for adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring PDGFRA D842V mutations.
The FDA has granted breakthrough therapy designation for avapritinib for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring the PDGFRA D842V mutation. In addition, the FDA has granted orphan drug designation to avapritinib for the treatment of GIST, and the European Commission has granted orphan medicinal product designation to avapritinib for the treatment of GIST.
EGFR-Mutated NSCLC - BLU-701, BLU-945 and BLU-451
We are developing three investigational EGFR inhibitors, BLU-701, BLU-945 and BLU-451, which was formerly known as LNG-451, with the goal of addressing the nearly all activating mutations (>90 percent) in EGFR-driven NSCLC. The introduction of EGFR-targeted therapies, including osimertinib, has transformed the care of patients with EGFR-driven NSCLC; however, there remains a significant need for new treatment options designed to prevent a broad range of resistance mechanisms before they emerge, with the goal of prolonging patient benefit. In addition, there are no approved targeted therapies for patients with disease progression following osimertinib, and limited treatment options for patients with EGFR exon 20 insertion-positive NSCLC.
BLU-701 and BLU-945 were specifically designed to provide comprehensive coverage of common activating and on-target resistance mutations, spare wild-type EGFR and other kinases to limit off-target toxicities, and treat or prevent CNS metastases, which occur frequently in patients with EGFR-driven NSCLC. We believe these profiles may enable BLU-701 and BLU-945 to become the backbones of a range of combination strategies with the potential to address important medical needs for patients with EGFR-driven NSCLC, including in early line treatment settings. We plan to develop BLU-701 and BLU-945 in combination with each other and other therapies, including osimertinib, as an initial treatment designed to prevent resistance from emerging. In addition, we plan to develop BLU-701 and BLU-945 as monotherapies in certain biomarker-selected patient populations.
In December 2021, we completed our acquisition of Lengo Therapeutics, Inc., along with its lead compound LNG-451, which we now refer to as BLU-451. BLU-451 is an oral precision therapy in development for the treatment of NSCLC in patients with EGFR exon 20 mutations.
EGFR-Positive NSCLC - BLU-701
BLU-701 is a selective and potent investigational inhibitor of EGFR harboring either the activating L858R or exon 19 deletion mutations combined with the acquired C797S mutation, the most common on-target resistance mutation to osimertinib. In preclinical data presented at the virtual AACR Annual Meeting in April 2021, BLU-701 showed strong and durable inhibition of tumor growth at doses that are EGFR wild-type sparing, and the potential to be used in both first- and second-line settings. BLU-701 indicated significant CNS penetration in preclinical models, with comparable exposure in the plasma and brain, which illustrates its potential to treat or prevent CNS metastases in patients with EGFR-driven tumors. Based on these preclinical data, we initiated a Phase 1/2 trial of BLU-701 in EGFR-
mutant NSCLC, which we refer to as our HARMONY trial, in the fourth quarter of 2021. We plan to present initial clinical data from the HARMONY trial in the second half of 2022.
EGFR-Positive NSCLC - BLU-945
BLU-945 is a selective and potent investigational inhibitor of EGFR harboring either the activating L858R or exon 19 deletion mutations combined with the acquired T790M and C797S mutations, the most common on-target resistance mutations to first-generation EGFR inhibitors and osimertinib, respectively. In preclinical data presented at the virtual AACR Annual Meeting in April 2021, BLU-945 demonstrated potent antitumor activity in osimertinib-resistant tumor models, as well as activity in an intracranial patient-derived xenograft model. Both preclinical models harbored activating mutations combined with the T790M and C797S mutations. Based on these preclinical data, we initiated a Phase 1/2 trial of BLU-945 in patients with EGFR-driven NSCLC, which we refer to as our SYMPHONY trial, in the second quarter of 2021. We plan to present initial clinical data from the SYMPHONY trial in the second quarter of 2022.
EGFR-Positive NSCLC - Combinations with BLU-701 and/or BLU-945
Based on their differentiated selectivity profiles and potency against on-target EGFR activating and resistant mutants, we believe BLU-701 and BLU-945 have the potential to become backbone therapies for a range of combination strategies for EGFR-positive NSCLC across multiple treatment lines, potentially including combinations of BLU-701 or BLU-945 with other EGFR therapies or treatment modalities, as well as BLU-701 and BLU-945 together. In preclinical data presented at the virtual AACR Annual Meeting in April 2021, the combination of BLU-945 with either gefitinib or osimertinib showed enhanced antitumor activity when compared with either gefitinib or osimertinib alone. At the BTOG Annual Conference in January 2022, we reported preclinical data supporting the development of BLU-701 and BLU-945 combination therapy in EGFR-driven NSCLC. Based on these results, we plan to develop BLU-701 and BLU-945 in combination with each other and other agents.
EGFR Exon 20 Insertion-Positive NSCLC - BLU-451
BLU-451 is a selective and potent investigational inhibitor under development for the treatment of EGFR exon 20 insertion-positive NSCLC. Based on preclinical data, BLU-451 potently inhibited all common EGFR exon 20 insertion variants with marked selectivity over wild-type EGFR and off-target kinases, and has shown significant CNS penetration. We recently received clearance for an IND application for BLU-451 for EGFR exon 20 insertion-positive NSCLC. In the first quarter of 2022, we plan to initiate a Phase 1/2 trial of BLU-451 in EGFR exon 20 insertion-positive NSCLC, and we expect to present preclinical data for BLU-451 in the second quarter of 2022.
Cyclin E Aberrant Cancers - BLU-222
We are developing an investigational inhibitor, BLU-222, targeting CDK2 for the treatment of patients with cyclin E aberrant cancers. In subsets of patients across multiple cancer types, aberrant CCNE1 hyperactivates CDK2, resulting in cell cycle dysregulation and tumor proliferation. Aberrant CCNE1 has been observed as a primary driver of disease, as well as a mechanism of resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors and other therapies
At the virtual AACR Annual Meeting in April 2021, we presented preclinical data showing that selective CDK2 inhibition arrested the cell cycle and blocked tumor proliferation in CCNE1-amplified cell lines, and demonstrated robust and sustained antitumor activity in vivo in models of CCNE1-amplified ovarian, breast and gastric cancer. A selective CDK2 inhibitor also showed improved tolerability compared to a pan-CDK inhibitor and chemotherapy, as measured by animal body weight.
We recently received FDA clearance for an IND application for BLU-222 for cyclin E aberrant cancers. We plan to initiate a Phase 1/2 trial of BLU-222 in cyclin E aberrant cancers, which we refer to as our VELA trial, in the first quarter of 2022, and to present preclinical data for BLU-222 in the second quarter of 2022. BLU-222 is being developed as a single agent and in combination with chemotherapy in gyneocological cancers, and in combination with hormonal and the approved CDK 4/6-inhibitor ribociclib for hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer.
Advanced Cancers - BLU-852
BLU-852 is a selective and potent investigational inhibitor of MAP4K1, a well-characterized immunokinase involved in the regulation of immune cells. Preclinical data presented at the virtual AACR Annual Meeting in April 2021 show that MAP4K1 inhibition enhanced intratumoral immune cell activation, overcame Treg mediated T cell suppression, and reduced tumor burden both as a monotherapy and in combination with checkpoint inhibition. These preclinical data support the continued development of BLU-852. Under our ongoing cancer immunotherapy collaboration, we expect Roche to initiate a Phase 1 trial of BLU-852, as a single agent and in combination with atezolizumab, in advanced cancers in 2023.
Fisogatinib - Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Fisogatinib is an investigational, orally available, potent and highly selective inhibitor that targets FGFR4, a kinase that is aberrantly activated in a defined subset of patients with HCC. Following a strategic evaluation of the evolving HCC treatment landscape and prioritization of resources across our broad precision therapy pipeline, we have decided to deprioritize our clinical development of fisogatinib for the treatment of advanced HCC. We have discontinued further enrollment the Blueprint Medicines-sponsored clinical trial of fisogatinib as a monotherapy and in combination with sugemalimab, an anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy being developed by CStone. CStone continues to retain development and commercial rights to fisogatinib in the CStone territory.
Discovery Platform
We plan to continue to leverage our discovery platform to systematically and reproducibly identify kinases that are drivers of diseases in genomically defined patient populations, and craft drug candidates that potently and selectively target these kinases. In addition, we plan to expand our discovery platform by building capabilities, supported by external collaborations, for targeted protein degradation of both kinase and non-kinase targets in precision oncology, with the goal of advancing transformative therapies to patients and further broadening the significant productivity of our research engine. Beyond the discovery programs described above, we have multiple pre-development candidate programs for undisclosed kinase targets. In 2022, we plan to nominate two development candidates from our discovery programs. We also plan to share our vision for our expanded discovery platform at an R&D Day in the second half of 2022.
Under our immunotherapy collaboration with Roche, we are conducting activities for up to two discovery programs, including BLU-852. See “-Collaborations and Licenses Summary” below.
Collaborations and Licenses
Roche-Immunotherapy Collaboration. In March 2016, we entered into a collaboration with Roche to discover, develop and commercialize small molecule therapeutics targeting kinases believed to be important in cancer immunotherapy (including the kinase target MAP4K1, which is believed to play a role in T cell regulation), as single products or possibly in combination with other therapeutics.
Roche-Pralsetinib Collaboration. In July 2020, we entered into a collaboration with Roche to develop and commercialize pralsetinib for the treatment of RET-altered cancers. Under the collaboration, we and Genentech are co-commercializing GAVRETO in the U.S., and Roche has exclusive commercialization rights for pralsetinib outside of the U.S., excluding the CStone territory. We and Roche are also co-developing pralsetinib globally in RET-altered solid tumors, including NSCLC, MTC and other thyroid cancers, and expanding development of pralsetinib in multiple treatment settings.
CStone. In June 2018, we entered into a collaboration with CStone to develop and commercialize avapritinib, pralsetinib and fisogatinib, as well as back-up forms and certain other forms, in the CStone territory either as a monotherapy or as part of a combination therapy.
Clementia. In October 2019, we entered into a license agreement with Clementia Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Clementia, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Ipsen S.A., and granted Clementia an exclusive, worldwide, royalty-bearing license to develop and commercialize BLU-782, as well as specified other compounds related to the BLU-782 program. BLU-782 is an investigational, orally available, potent and highly selective inhibitor that targets mutant ALK2 in development for the treatment of FOP. The FDA has granted a rare pediatric disease designation, orphan drug
designation and fast track designation to BLU-782, each for the treatment of FOP. Clementia initiated patient dosing in a Phase 2 clinical trial of BLU-782, now referred to as IPN60130, in the first quarter of 2022.
Zai Lab. In November 2021, we entered into a collaboration with Zai Lab to develop and commercialize BLU-701 and BLU-945 for the treatment of EGFR-driven NSCLC in Greater China, including Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. The collaboration aims to accelerate and expand global development of BLU-701 and BLU-945.
Mergers & Acquisitions Summary
Lengo Therapeutics. In December 2021, we completed our acquisition of Lengo Therapeutics, Inc., along with its lead compound LNG-451, now known as BLU-451, which is in development for the treatment of NSCLC in patients with EGFR exon 20 insertion mutations. The acquisition also brought additional undisclosed preclinical precision oncology programs and research tools, including a catalog of covalent, highly brain penetrant kinase inhibitors that we plan to add to our proprietary compound library to further enable future drug discovery efforts.
We will continue to evaluate additional collaborations, acquisitions, partnerships and licenses that could maximize the value of our programs and allow us to leverage the expertise of strategic collaborators, partners and licensors, including in additional geographies where we may not have current operations or expertise. We are also focused on engaging in collaborations, acquisitions, partnerships and license agreements to capitalize on or expand our discovery platform.
Note on the COVID-19 Pandemic
Due to the continued evolution and uncertain global impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and the identification of new variants of COVID-19, we cannot precisely determine or quantify the impact this pandemic will have on our business, operations and financial performance. In 2020, we initially established a work-from-home policy for all employees, other than those performing or supporting business-critical activities, such as certain members of our laboratory and facilities staff. Since we implemented this policy in 2020, we have continued to evaluate and update this policy from time to time for each of our locations and field-based employees based on guidance from federal, state and local government authorities and the severity of the pandemic. We currently offer our office-based employees a certain degree of flexibility of in their work location and we intend to maintain this policy for the foreseeable future. For our ongoing and planned clinical trials, while we anticipate and have experienced some delays or disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular with respect to activation of additional clinical trial sites and patient enrollment rates, we have continued to work with any impacted clinical trial sites to ensure study continuity, enable medical monitoring, facilitate study procedures and maintain clinical data and records, including the use of local laboratories for testing and tumor imaging, home delivery of study drug and remote data and records monitoring. In addition, we currently have sufficient supply or plans for supply to meet our anticipated global commercial and clinical development needs for our approved drugs and clinical-stage drug candidates through 2022. However, depending on the duration and impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on local and global supply chains, our suppliers could be adversely impacted, which may result in delays or disruptions in our current or future supply chain. COVID-19 may also impact and has impacted our commercial activities for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and GAVRETO, including patient access to testing and identification. We are committed to continuing to serve the needs of healthcare providers, patients and other stakeholders during this critical time, including by conducting commercial and medical affairs field activities across our portfolio in virtual formats where in-person interactions are not feasible. We will continue to assess the duration, scope and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic as it evolves and the existing and potential impacts on our business, operations and financial performance, and we will continue to work closely with our third-party vendors, collaborators and other parties in order to seek to advance our pipeline of targeted therapies as quickly as possible, while making the health and safety of our employees and their families, healthcare providers, patients and communities a top priority. Please refer to our Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financial Operations Overview
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public offerings of our common stock, private placements of our convertible preferred and common stock, collaborations and a license agreement. Through December 31, 2021, we have received an aggregate of $3.0 billion from such transactions, including $1.9 billion in
aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of common stock in our initial public offering, or IPO, follow-on public offerings, through our “at the market” stock offering program and the equity investment by Roche, $115.1 million in gross proceeds from the issuance of convertible preferred stock, $996.3 million in upfront and milestone payments under our collaborations with Roche, CStone and Zai Lab, our license agreement with Clementia and our former collaboration with Alexion Pharma Holding, or Alexion. In addition, since January 2020, we have also generated revenue through the sales of our approved drug products.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses, with the exception of the year ended December 31, 2020. Our net loss was $644.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our net income was $313.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the collaboration revenue recorded under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1,275.4 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses over the next few years. We anticipate that our expenses will continue to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we:
● maintain and expand our sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to continue to commercialize our drug and any current or future drug candidates for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● seek marketing approval for our drug candidates, including avapritinib and pralsetinib in additional indications or avapritinib in additional geographies;
● continue to advance clinical development activities for avapritinib and pralsetinib and initiate or advance clinical development activities for other current or future drug candidates;
● continue to discover, validate and develop additional drug candidates or development candidates, including BLU-701, BLU-945, BLU-451 and BLU-222;
● continue to manufacture increasing quantities of drug substance and drug product material for use in preclinical studies, clinical trials and commercialization;
● conduct development and commercialization activities for companion diagnostic tests for our drugs and drug candidates;
● conduct research and development activities under our collaborations with Roche, CStone and Zai Lab;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● acquire or in-license additional businesses, technologies, drugs or drug candidates, form strategic alliances or create joint ventures with third parties; and
● hire additional research, clinical, quality, manufacturing, regulatory, commercial and general and administrative personnel.
Revenue
In January 2020, the FDA granted approval of avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations. In September 2020, the European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization to AYVAKYT as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring the PDGFRA D842V mutation. In June 2021, the FDA granted a subsequent approval for AYVAKIT, expanding the labeled indications to include adult patients with advanced SM, including aggressive SM, SM with an associated hematological neoplasm and mast cell leukemia.
In September 2020, the FDA granted accelerated approval to pralsetinib under the brand name GAVRETO for the treatment of adult patients with metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC as detected by an FDA approved test. In
December 2020, the FDA granted a subsequent accelerated approval for GAVRETO, expanding the labeled indications to include adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic RET-mutant MTC who require systemic therapy, or with advanced or metastatic RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer who require systemic therapy and who are radioactive iodine-refractory (if radioactive iodine is appropriate).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenue mainly consisted of product sales of our drugs as well as collaboration revenue under our collaborations with Roche, CStone and Zai Lab. We recorded net product revenue from the U.S. product sales of GAVRETO through June 30, 2021, and on July 1, 2021, we transferred certain responsibilities associated with product sales to customers, pricing and distribution matters related to U.S. product sales of GAVRETO to Roche and did not record any net product revenue from product sales of GAVRETO during the second half of 2021. Products sales of GAVRETO were reflected as part of collaboration loss sharing in the consolidated financial statements. For additional information, see Note 11, Collaboration and License Agreements, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K. Collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily includes amounts that were recognized related to milestone and upfront payments, amounts due to us for supply of inventory (under our collaboration agreements) and research and development services, and royalties on drug sales.
In the future, we expect to generate revenue from a combination of sources, including sales of our current drug product and any current or future drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval, royalties on drug sales, upfront, milestone, profit sharing and other payments, if any, under any current or future collaborations and licenses, including revenues related to the supply of our drug candidates or approved drugs to our various collaboration partners. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing and amount of product sales, license fees, research and development services, payments for manufacturing services, and option fees, milestone payments or other payments under our collaboration or license agreements, if any.
Cost of sales
Our cost of sales includes the cost of producing and distributing inventories that are related to product revenue as well as the sales of drug substance and drug product to our collaboration partners during the respective period, including salary related expenses and stock-based compensation expense for employees involved with production and distribution, freight, and indirect overhead costs. In addition, shipping and handling costs for product shipments are recorded in cost of sales as incurred.
Prior to receiving the initial FDA approval for AYVAKIT and GAVRETO in January 2020 and September 2020, respectively, and subsequent approval for AYVAKIT in June 2021, we manufactured inventory to be sold upon commercialization and recorded approximately $37.7 million related to this inventory as research and development expense. As a result, the manufacturing costs related to the inventory build-up incurred before FDA approval were expensed in a prior period and are therefore excluded from the cost of goods sold for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We estimate our cost of goods sold related to product revenue as a percentage of net product revenue will continue to be positively impacted as we sell through certain inventory that was previously expensed prior to FDA approval. We expect to utilize low cost inventory for an extended period of time. Cost of goods sold related to sales of drug products to our collaboration partners are at lower margins and will partially offset the positive impact of the previously expensed inventory.
Expenses
Collaboration Loss Sharing
On July 1, 2021, Roche took over certain responsibilities associated with product sales to customers, pricing and distribution matters related to GAVRETO in the U.S. and became the principal for recording product sales to customers in the U.S. Collaboration loss sharing consists of our share of the losses incurred from sales of GAVRETO to customers in the U.S. under our collaboration for pralsetinib with Roche. For additional information, see Note 11,
Collaboration and License Agreements, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K. We expect collaboration loss sharing will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the timing and amount of GAVRETO sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research and development activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our drug candidates, which include:
● expenses incurred to acquire in-process research and development asset with no alternative future use;
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties that conduct research and development, preclinical activities, clinical activities and manufacturing on our behalf;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties for the development and commercialization of companion diagnostic tests;
● expenses incurred in connection with research and development activities under our immunotherapy collaboration with Roche, and development activities under our collaboration for pralsetinib with Roche;
● the cost of consultants in connection with our research and development activities;
● the cost associated with regulatory quality assurance and quality control operations;
● the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study materials, clinical trial materials and commercial supply materials; and
● facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other operating costs in support of research and development activities.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are capitalized. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
The successful development of our drug candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of these drug candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from the sale of our current or future drug candidates for which we received marketing approval. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
● successful initiation, enrollment in, and completion of clinical trials;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and our drug candidates;
● commercializing AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and our drug candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● market acceptance of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and any future drug we may commercialize; and
● continued acceptable safety profile of the drugs following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our drug candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that drug candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our drug candidate development programs progress and as we conduct and continue our clinical trials to evaluate our approved drugs for additional indications. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our approved drugs or drug candidates for which we may receive marketing approval, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. In addition, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
A significant portion of our research and development expenses have been external expenses, which we track on a program-by-program basis following nomination as a development candidate. Our internal research and development expenses are primarily personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense. Except for internal research and development expenses related to collaboration agreements, we do not track our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they are deployed across multiple projects under development.
The following table summarizes our external research and development expenses by program for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Other development and pre-development candidate expenses, unallocated expenses and internal research and development expenses have been classified separately.
*
Pralsetinib external expenses includes reimbursable expenses under our collaboration for pralsetinib with Roche, and other development and pre-development candidate expenses includes reimbursable expenses under our other collaboration agreements.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in future periods as we expand our operations and incur additional costs in connection with our clinical trials and preparing regulatory filings. These increases will likely include the costs related to the implementation and expansion of clinical trial sites and related
patient enrollment, monitoring, program management and manufacturing expenses for active pharmaceutical ingredient, or API, drug product and drug substance for current and future clinical trials and commercial inventory. In addition, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase in future periods as we incur additional costs in connection with research and development activities under our immunotherapy collaboration with Roche, development activities under our collaboration for pralsetinib with Roche and development activities for companion diagnostic tests for any current and future drug candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits, including stock-based compensation, for commercial operations and for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, commercial, business development, information technology, legal and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, commercial development activities, legal fees related to intellectual property and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the future to support additional research and development activities and commercialization activities, including expanding our sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any drugs for which we may obtain marketing approval for additional indications or in additional geographies and expanding our operations globally. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel, legal, auditing and filing fees and general compliance and consulting expenses, among other expenses. We have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company and expanding the scope of our operations.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest income (expense), net consists primarily of income earned on cash equivalents and investments.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency transaction gains or losses.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists primarily of income taxes related to our product sales in the state jurisdictions where we conduct business and foreign withholding income taxes incurred.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex, and consequently actual results could differ from those estimates. For any given individual estimate or assumption we make, it is possible that other people applying reasonable judgment to the same facts and circumstances could develop different estimates. We believe that, given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any such other reasonable judgment would cause a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position, or liquidity for the periods presented in this report. We evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience on an ongoing basis.
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates that, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Management has determined that our most critical accounting estimates are those relating to revenue recognition, accrued research and development expenses and acquisitions. We have
reviewed our critical accounting estimates with our audit committee. For further discussion about our general accounting policies, see Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements included in the Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of goods or services to our customers. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for goods and services. We generate revenue from product sales and revenue transactions with our collaboration partners.
Product Revenue
For product sales to customers, provisions for returns, rebates and discounts are established in the same period the related product sales are recognized. To determine the appropriate transaction price for our product sales at the time we recognize a sale to a direct customer, we estimate any rebates, chargebacks or discounts that ultimately will be due to the direct customer and other customers in the distribution chain under the terms of our contracts. Significant judgments are required in making these estimates. The largest of our sales rebate and discount amounts are rebates associated with sales covered by Medicare, Medicaid, and chargeback contracts in the U.S. We utilize the expected value method to determine the appropriate amount for estimates based on factors such as historical rebate payments for these programs, the current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and sales trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns, the percentage of our products that are sold via these programs, and our product pricing. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results vary from our estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Collaboration Revenue
Revenue recognized from collaborations and other arrangements will include royalties on drug sales, upfront, milestone, profit sharing and other payments, if any, under any current or future collaborations and licenses, including revenues related to the supply of our drug candidates or approved drugs to our various collaboration partners under these types of contracts.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Acquisitions
To determine whether acquisitions or licensing transactions should be accounted for as a business combination or as an asset acquisition, we make certain judgments, which include assessing whether the acquired set of activities and assets would meet the definition of a business under the relevant accounting rules.
If the acquired set of activities and assets meets the definition of a business, assets acquired and liabilities assumed are required to be recorded at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the acquired net assets, where applicable, is recorded as goodwill. If the acquired set of activities and assets does not meet the definition of a business, the transaction is recorded as an acquisition of assets and, therefore, any acquired in-process research and development assets that does not have an alternative future use is charged to research and development expense at the acquisition date, and goodwill is not recorded.
The judgments made in determining estimated the fair values of the identifiable intangible assets acquired, the assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, as well as estimated asset lives, can materially affect our consolidated results of operations. The fair values of intangible assets, including acquired in-process research and development assets, are determined using information available near the acquisition date based on estimates and assumptions that are deemed reasonable by management. Significant estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, probability of technical success, revenue growth and discount rate. When significant identifiable intangible assets are acquired, we generally engage an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in determining the fair values of these assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in those items in dollars and as a percentage.
Product Revenue, Net
Product revenue, net increased by $35.6 million from $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $57.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We started generating revenue from sales of AYVAKIT in the first quarter of 2020 following FDA approval of AYVAKIT for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations. In September 2020, the European Commission granted conditional marketing authorization to avapritinib under the brand name AYVAKYT as a monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or metastatic GIST harboring the PDGFRA D842V mutation. In June 2021, the FDA granted a subsequent approval for AYVAKIT, expanding the labeled indications to include adult patients with advanced SM, including aggressive SM, SM with an associated hematological neoplasm and mast cell leukemia.
We started generating revenue from sales of GAVRETO in the third quarter of 2020 following the initial FDA approval of GAVRETO. GAVRETO was originally approved for the treatment of adult patients with metastatic RET fusion-positive NSCLC and subsequently approved for adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with advanced or metastatic thyroid cancer who require systemic therapy and who are radioactive iodine-refractory (if radioactive iodine is appropriate). We recorded net product revenue from the U.S. product sales of GAVRETO through June 30, 2021, and on July 1, 2021, we transferred certain responsibilities associated with product sales to customers, pricing and distribution matters related to U.S. product sales of GAVRETO to our collaboration partner and did not record any net product revenue from product sales of GAVRETO during the second half of 2021. Products sales of GAVRETO were reflected as part of collaboration loss sharing in the consolidated financial statements. For additional information, see Note 11, Collaboration and License Agreements, to our consolidated financial statements included in the Form 10-K.
The following table summarizes revenue recognized from sales of AYVAKIT/AYVAKIT and GAVRETO during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 (in thousands):
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue decreased by $649.2 million from $771.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $122.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The following table summarizes the revenue recognized from our collaboration and license agreements during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenue recognized under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $50.0 million in specified regulatory milestone payments and $6.0 million associated with services related to Roche territory-specific activities. Revenue recognized under our CStone collaboration for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of $24.4 million associated with royalties on drug sales and the manufacturing services related to CStone territory-specific activities during the year, including supply of drug products to CStone for sale in their territory, and $9.0 million in milestone revenue related to development milestones that were achieved during the year. Revenue recognized under our Zai Lab collaboration for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of a $25.0 million upfront cash payment. We recognized $7.6 million in revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily related to the amortization of the total $68.5 million of upfront and milestone payments received as of such period.
Revenue recognized under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $695.7 million upfront cash payment including the $20.7 million premium associated with the $100.0 million equity investment by Roche, $55.0 million in specified regulatory and commercialization milestone payments and $2.4 million associated with services related to Roche territory-specific activities. Revenue recognized under our CStone collaboration for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $2.0 million in milestone revenue related to a development and regulatory milestones that were achieved during the year and $1.6 million associated with drug supply related to CStone territory-specific activities. We recognized $14.6 million in revenue under our cancer immunotherapy collaboration with Roche for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily related to the amortization of the total $64.5 million of upfront and milestone payments received during such period.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of sales increased by $17.5 million from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was related to manufacturing costs associated with our product sales
as well as costs associated with the sale of drug product to our collaboration partners. The following table summarizes the cost of sales by type during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The increase in costs of product sales was primarily driven by the lower margin product sales to our collaboration partners. Costs associated with product revenue, net remain at higher margins as costs associated with the manufacture of our drugs prior to FDA approval were recorded as research and development expenses and, therefore, were not included in cost of sales during such period.
Collaboration Loss Sharing
Our loss sharing under the collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib was $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $274.2 million from $326.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $601.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in research and development expense was primarily related to $260.0 million incurred to acquire in-process research and development compounds through the acquisition of Lengo, an increase of approximately $8.6 million in costs related to early discovery efforts, a decrease of $9.3 million in reimbursement from the global development cost sharing arrangement under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib, as well as increased costs and personnel expenses, including an increase of $6.0 million in stock-based compensation expense. These increases in research and development expense were primarily offset by a decrease of $8.8 million in expenses associated with the manufacturing of clinical supply.
Selling, general and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $37.6 million from $157.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $195.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense was primarily related to increased costs and personnel expenses, including an increase of $10.1 million in stock-based compensation expense, as well as an increase of $17.1 million in commercial expenses to expand our commercial infrastructure for commercialization of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and GAVRETO. The increase in selling, general and administrative expense was partially offset by $8.1 million increase in reimbursement in connection with the commercialization of GAVRETO in the U.S. under our collaboration with Roche for pralsetinib.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net decreased by $4.2 million from $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to a combination of lower cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance and lower rate of return on investments in the capital markets.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net increased by $1.1 million from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily related to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased by $1.9 million from $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily related to an increase in foreign withholding income tax, which is partially offset by a decrease in state income taxes in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public offerings of our common stock, private placements of our convertible preferred and common stock, collaborations and a license agreement. Through December 31, 2021, we have received an aggregate of $3.0 billion from such transactions, including $1.9 billion in aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of common stock in our IPO, follow-on public offerings, through our “at the market” stock offering program and the equity investment by Roche, $115.1 million in gross proceeds from the issuance of convertible preferred stock, $996.3 million in upfront payments and milestone payments under our collaborations with Roche and CStone, Zai Lab and our license agreement with Clementia and our former collaboration with Alexion. In addition, since January 2020, we have generated limited product revenue.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1,034.6 million.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, the $685.7 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to a $958.0 million decrease in net income. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net income of $313.9 million which was driven by the $753.1 million collaboration revenue recognized under our collaboration agreement with Roche for pralsetinib.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, the $208.4 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a $466.5 million decrease in net purchases of available-for-sale investments offset by $258.1 million of cash used to acquire an in-process research and development asset.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, the $567.0 million decrease in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the $503.2 million in proceeds received from our common stock offerings net of issuance costs and the $79.3 million received from the issuance of common stock related to the collaboration agreement with Roche for Pralsetinib in 2020, partially offset by a $15.5 million increase in net proceeds received from stock option exercises and the issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, initiate or continue clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for our drug candidates,
including marketing approval for avapritinib and pralsetinib for additional indications or avapritinib in additional geographies, to the extent these expenses are not the responsibility of our collaborators. In addition, we expect to incur additional significant commercialization expenses for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO and other drug candidates, if approved, related to drug sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators or licensors. We will also incur additional significant costs if we choose to pursue additional indications or geographies for any of our approved drugs or drug candidates or otherwise expand more rapidly than we presently anticipate. Accordingly, we may seek to obtain additional funding from time to time in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we may be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate certain of our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1,034.6 million. Based on our current operating plans, we anticipate our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, together with anticipated future product revenues, will provide sufficient capital to enable us to achieve a self-sustainable financial profile.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the success of our commercialization efforts and market acceptance for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT, GAVRETO or any of our current or future drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs of maintaining, expanding or contracting for sales, marketing and distribution capabilities in connection with commercialization of AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and any of our current or future drug candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs of securing manufacturing, packaging and labeling arrangements for development activities and commercial production, including API, drug substance and drug product material for use in preclinical studies, clinical trials, our compassionate use program and for use as commercial supply, as applicable;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of drug discovery, preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our approved drugs and drug candidates;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of marketing applications for our drug candidates, including seeking marketing approval for avapritinib and pralsetinib for additional indications or avapritinib in additional geographies;
● the success of our collaborations with Roche, CStone and Zai Lab and our license agreement with Clementia, as well as our ability to establish and maintain additional collaborations, partnerships or licenses on favorable terms, if at all;
● the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under our existing collaboration or license agreements, or any collaboration, partnership or license agreements that we may enter into in the future;
● the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, research and development, clinical or other costs under future collaboration agreements, if any;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other approved drugs, drug candidates or technologies and the terms of any such arrangements;
● the success of our current or future collaborations for the development and commercialization of companion diagnostic tests;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
● the costs of continuing to expand our operations.
Identifying potential drug candidates, conducting preclinical development and testing and clinical trials and, for any drug candidates that receive marketing approval, establishing and maintaining commercial infrastructure is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain additional marketing approvals, including for avapritinib and pralsetinib in additional indications or avapritinib in additional geographies, and achieve substantial revenues for any of our drugs that receive marketing approval, including for AYVAKIT/AYVAKYT and GAVRETO. In addition, our drugs and any current or future drug candidates that receive marketing approvals, including avapritinib and pralsetinib for additional indications or avapritinib in additional geographies, may not achieve commercial success. Accordingly, we may need to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial drug revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs primarily through a combination of public and private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds, other than our collaborations with Roche, CStone and Zai Lab and the license agreement with Clementia, which are limited in scope and duration and subject to the achievement of milestones or royalties on sales of licensed products, if any. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of common stock or securities convertible or exchangeable into common stock, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that materially adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, would increase our fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our intellectual property, future revenue streams, research programs, drugs or drug candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug and drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into arrangements that contractually obligate us to make payments that will affect our liquidity and cash flows in future periods. Our contractual obligations primarily consist of our obligations under non-cancellable operating leases and unconditional purchase obligations related to certain commercial manufacturing agreements. The aggregate amount of future minimum purchase obligations under these manufacturing agreements over the period of next five years is approximately $34.2 million as of December 31, 2021, of which $16.7 million are expected to be paid within one year. The aggregate amount of future operating lease obligations over the term of our leases, excluding net sublease receivables, is $148.3 million as of December 31, 2021. For additional information on our leases and timing of future payments, see Note 16, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
In the normal course of business, we enter into agreements with contract research organizations for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies, synthetic chemistry and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the contractual obligations above since the contracts are generally cancelable at any time by us upon less than 180 days’ prior written notice. Certain of these agreements require us to pay milestones to such third parties upon achievement of certain development, regulatory or commercial milestones. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory approval and commercial milestones, which may not be achieved.
We also have obligations to make future payments to third parties that become due and payable on the achievement of certain milestones, including future payments to third parties with whom we have entered into agreements to develop and commercialize companion diagnostic tests for certain of our drug candidates. We have not
included these commitments on our balance sheet or in the contractual obligations above because the achievement and timing of these milestones is not fixed and determinable.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.