ITEM 7. TRUSTEE’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Background. The Trust is a passive entity. The Trustee’s activities are limited to collecting and distributing the revenues from the Royalty Interest and paying liabilities and expenses of the Trust. Generally, the Trust has no source of liquidity and no capital resources other than the revenues attributable to the Royalty Interest that it receives from time to time. See the discussion under “THE ROYALTY INTEREST” in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report for a description of the calculation of the Per Barrel Royalty, and the discussion under “THE PRUDHOE BAY UNIT AND FIELD - Reserve Estimates” in Part I, Item 1 for information concerning the estimated future net revenues of the Trust. However, the Trust Agreement gives the Trustee power to borrow, establish a cash reserve, or dispose of all or part of the Trust property under limited circumstances. See the discussion under “THE TRUST - Sales of Royalty Interest; Borrowings and Reserves” in Part I, Item 1.
Cash Reserve. In July 1999, the Trustee established a cash reserve to provide liquidity to the Trust during future periods in which the Trust does not receive sufficient revenues from the Royalty Interest. The Trustee has drawn funds from the cash reserve account during the quarters in which the quarterly revenues received by the Trust did not exceed the liabilities and expenses of the Trust, and has replenished the reserve from deductions from quarterly distributions made to Unit holders during periods when the Trust received revenues from the Royalty Interest and Unit holders received distributions.
In December 2018, the Trust announced that the Trustee had determined to gradually increase the Trustee’s existing cash reserve for the payment of future expenses and liabilities of the Trust from $1,000,000 to $1,270,000, as permitted by the Trust Agreement. Commencing with the distribution to Unit holders payable in April 2019, the Trustee began withholding the greater of $33,750 or 0.17% of the funds otherwise available for distribution each quarter to gradually increase existing cash reserves.
Due in part to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the markets experienced a decline in oil prices in response to oil demand concerns and global storage considerations. As a result of, among other things, lower oil prices and the increase in Chargeable Costs, the Trust received no revenues from the Royalty Interest attributable to the four quarters of 2020 or the first quarter of 2021. Consequently, the Trust was unable to make any additions to the funds on deposit in the cash reserve account since the January 2020 distribution made for revenues from the Royalty Interest attributable to the fourth quarter of 2019. In December 2020, the remaining funds on deposit in the cash reserve were insufficient to pay the Trustee’s Administrative Expenses in 2020 and the Trustee made a demand for indemnity and reimbursement of expenses upon HNS in accordance with the Trust Agreement in the amount of $537,835, representing the Trust’s unpaid expenses through December 18, 2020.
Since the receipt of the indemnity payment from HNS in December 2020, the Trust continued to accrue Administration Expenses but did not receive any revenues from the Royalty Interest until July 2021, when the Trust received a quarterly payment of approximately $3.2 million attributable to the quarter ended June 30, 2021. After deducting the Trust’s expenses accrued through June 30, 2021, the Trustee deducted approximately $1.6 million and added that amount to the cash reserve in July 2021 and then distributed the remaining amount to Unit holders.
During the second, third and fourth quarters 2021, the average daily closing WTI price was above the “break-even” price resulting in a quarterly payment with respect to the Royalty Interest of approximately $3.2 million, $6.1 million and $12.8 million, respectively. In July 2021, the Trust announced that the Trustee had determined to increase the Trustee’s existing cash reserve by $500 thousand, funding the full amount of the cash reserve from the Royalty Payment attributable to the second quarter of 2021. In October 2021, the Trust decided to increase the Trustee’s existing cash reserve to $6.0 million, which was fully funded from the Royalty Payment attributable to the third quarter of 2021. As previously disclosed by the Trust, the Trustee has increased and funded the cash reserve to a level it believes is sufficient to provide funding to pay the Administrative Expenses for a two year period commencing when the sum of the net revenues from the Royalty Interest for two successive years are less than $1 million per year, and to carry out an orderly termination of the Trust as set forth in Article IX of the Trust Agreement. Depending on the facts and circumstances at the time, the expenses of the termination process may include, without limitation, costs related to a professional evaluation of the value of the Royalty Interest, any and all other costs and expenses necessary to terminate the Trust, sell the Trust assets and provide for the orderly distribution of the remaining proceeds to the Unit holders, the costs of one or more consent solicitations of the Unit holders, legal fees and expenses, and all other professional services necessary to comply with the requirements of the Trust termination process.
The total amount added to the cash reserve takes into account that (i) the Trust had not received any revenues attributable to 2020 or the first quarter of 2021 and therefore had been unable to make any additions to the cash reserve for the last five quarters, (ii) the likelihood of future revenue from the Royalty Interest, (iii) the increase in Trust Administrative Expenses in 2020, (iv) the reset of the earliest potential termination date of the Trust, and (v) the expected expenses associated with the future termination of the Trust.
Given the uncertainty with respect to the amount or timing of any future revenue from the Royalty Interest combined with the expenses of operating the Trust prior to termination and the limited ability to terminate the Trust in accordance with its terms, the Trustee has determined to withhold amounts necessary, when received by the Trust, to maintain the cash reserve at its current level of approximately $6,000,000 at this time. This cash reserve level assumes an orderly termination of the Trust sometime in the future based on current facts and circumstances, and if the receipt of additional Royalty Payments resets that time line, the Trustee will re-evaluate the adequacy of the cash reserve balance and may increase or decrease it without notice to Unit holders. Accordingly, even if the Trust receives revenues from the Royalty Interest during 2022 or beyond, it is possible that Unit holders will not receive a distribution on outstanding Units during such periods, because the Trust may need to withhold funds from any such revenue to first pay accrued Administrative Expenses and to replenish or add to the cash reserve, before distributing any funds to Unit holders. Although the Trust received revenues attributable to the quarters ended June 30, 2021, September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, there can be no assurance that WTI prices will be at levels sufficient to result in revenues to the Trust in any future quarter. Furthermore, as previously disclosed, although the Trust did not receive revenues from the Royalty Interest attributable to the first quarter of 2020 through the first quarter of 2021, in part due to the decline in WTI Prices, notwithstanding recent increases in WTI Prices, the increase in Chargeable Costs and the payment of Production Taxes (which increases the “break-even” price as compared to prior periods), coupled with decreased Royalty Production from the Prudhoe Bay Field, may also reduce the amount or likelihood of material distributions to Unit holders in subsequent periods.
The Trustee will continue to review and reassess the adequacy of the cash reserve on an on-going basis based on the facts and circumstances at the time of such evaluations and may increase or decrease the targeted
cash reserve or the rate at which it is withholding funds to build the cash reserve at any time, without advance notice to the Unit holders. At December 31, 2021, the balance of the cash reserve was $6.0 million.
The Trustee intends to keep the cash reserve program in place until termination of the Trust.
Cash held in reserve will be invested as required by the Trust Agreement. Any cash reserved in excess of the amount necessary to pay or provide for the payment of accrued Administrative Expenses and future known, anticipated or contingent expenses or liabilities eventually will be distributed to Unit holders, together with interest earned on the funds. Any amounts set aside for the cash reserve are invested by the Trustee in U.S. government or agency securities secured by the full faith and credit of the United States, or mutual funds investing in such securities.
Indemnity Payments. In December 2020, the remaining funds on deposit in the cash reserve were insufficient to pay Administrative Expenses and the Trustee made a demand for indemnity and reimbursement of expenses upon HNS in accordance with the Trust Agreement in the amount of $537,835, representing the Trust’s unpaid expenses through December 18, 2020. Although HNS agreed to make an indemnity payment to reimburse the Trust for Administrative Expenses incurred by the Trustee on behalf of the Trust through December 18, 2020, there can be no assurance that HNS will make any further indemnification payments if demanded by the Trustee, and in such case, the Trustee will continue to review its options under the Trust Agreement and Support Agreement, including obtaining a loan for the Trust, selling a portion of the Trust assets, selling all of the Trust assets, or enforcing such indemnity, if necessary in the event the available amounts in the cash reserve are insufficient to pay the Administrative Expenses of the Trust and the fees, costs, and expenses related to an orderly termination of the Trust.
Other Sources of Liquidity. In light of the Trust’s cash shortfall in December 2020, the Trust began to explore the options available under the Trust Agreement to address the issue. These steps included efforts to obtain a loan for the Trust, selling a portion of the Trust assets, or selling all of the Trust assets and taking the necessary steps to terminate the Trust. The Trustee engaged a firm with expertise in the oil industry to provide financial advisory, investment banking, valuation, and consulting services to assist the Trust in identifying potential lenders or potential purchasers of Trust assets, and to advise the Trust with respect to the timing of its potential termination pursuant to the Trust Agreement. The Trust was unsuccessful in its initial attempt to secure a loan; however, because the Trust received additional revenues from the Royalty Interest such that the cash reserve is funded to the targeted level, a loan is no longer necessary, even if available on terms acceptable to the Trust. While these efforts are currently on hold, there can be no assurance in the future that the Trust will be able to secure a loan or arrange for the sale of Trust assets should it become necessary, or if it does secure a loan or arrange a sale, that any loan or sale would be on terms that are acceptable to the Trust.
Termination of the Trust. There is no set termination date for the Trust. As a general matter, the Trust is expected to terminate at such time the net revenues from the Royalty Interest for two successive years are less than $1,000,000 per year. Net revenues to the Trust are calculated daily by HNS using the WTI Price, Production Taxes, and other variables as prescribed by the Overriding Royalty Conveyance applicable on that specific day. In 2020, the net revenues from the Royalty Interest were less than $1,000,000. As a result, it was possible that the Trust could have terminated as early as sometime in 2022 under this provision of the Trust Agreement.
Since the beginning of 2021 through the end of the year, the WTI Price has fluctuated from a low of $47.62 on January 4, 2021 to a high of $84.65 on October 26, 2021, and exceeded the estimates originally used to evaluate the likelihood of the Trust receiving Royalty Payments in 2021. As a result of the increase in WTI Prices during the second, third and fourth quarters, there were Royalty Payments to the Trust in 2021. The receipt of net revenues from the Royalty Interest in 2021 in excess of $1,000,000, has resulted in a reset of the earliest termination date. Based on the 2021 SEC-defined twelve-month average WTI Price of $66.56 per barrel (the unweighted average of first-day-of-the-month WTI Price over the period January through December of the respective year in accordance with SEC guidelines), WTI Prices,
Production Taxes, and the Chargeable Costs adjusted as prescribed by the Overriding Royalty Conveyance, HNS has estimated that production of the proved reserves would result in no Royalty Payments to the Trust in 2022 and beyond.
Although the Trust received net revenues attributable to the quarters ended June 30, 2021, September 30, 2021, and December 31, 2021, there can be no assurance that WTI Prices will remain at levels sufficient to result in Royalty Payments to the Trust in any future quarter. Given the uncertainty around the continued regular receipt of net revenues from the Royalty Interest combined with the expenses of operating the Trust and the fees, costs and expenses related to the limited ability to terminate the Trust in accordance with its terms, the Trustee may explore options to terminate the trust. These options may include seeking consent of the Unit holders for an early termination of the Trust, among other things. A time line for termination cannot be accurately predicted.
Cash held in reserve will be invested as required by the Trust Agreement. Any cash reserved in excess of the amount necessary to pay or provide for the payment of future known, anticipated or contingent expenses or liabilities eventually will be distributed to Unit holders, together with interest earned on the funds. Any amounts set aside for the cash reserve are invested by the Trustee in U.S. government or agency securities secured by the full faith and credit of the United States, or mutual funds investing in such securities.
Results of Operations
Relatively modest changes in oil prices significantly affect the Trust’s revenues and results of operations. Crude oil prices are subject to significant changes in response to fluctuations in the domestic and world supply and demand and other market conditions as well as the world political situation, particularly the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, as it affects OPEC+ and other producing countries. The effect of changing economic conditions on the demand and supply for energy throughout the world and future prices of oil cannot be accurately projected.
Royalty revenues are generally received on the Quarterly Record Date (generally the fifteenth day of the month) following the end of the calendar quarter in which the related Royalty Production occurred. The Trustee, to the extent possible, pays all expenses of the Trust for each quarter on the Quarterly Record Date on which the revenues for the quarter are received. For the statement of cash earnings and distributions, revenues and Trust expenses are recorded on a cash basis and, as a result, distributions to Unit holders in each calendar year ending December 31 are attributable to HNS’s operations during the twelve-month period ended on the preceding September 30.
When HNS’s average net production of oil and condensate per quarter from the 1989 Working Interests exceeds 90,000 barrels a day, the principal factors affecting the Trust’s revenues and distributions to Unit holders are changes in WTI Prices, scheduled annual increases in Chargeable Costs, changes in the Consumer Price Index and changes in Production Taxes. However, it is likely that the Trust’s revenues in future periods also will be affected by increases and decreases in production from the 1989 Working Interests. HNS’s net production of oil and condensate allocated to the Trust from proved reserves was less than 90,000 barrels per day on an annual basis during 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021. The Trustee has been advised that HNS expects that average net production allocated to the Trust from the proved reserves will be less than 90,000 barrels a day on an annual basis in future years.
HNS estimates Royalty Production from the 1989 Working Interests for purposes of calculating quarterly royalty payments to the Trust because complete actual field production data for the preceding calendar quarter generally is not available by the Quarterly Record Date. To the extent that average net production from the 1989 Working Interests is below 90,000 barrels per day, calculation by HNS of actual Royalty Production data may result in revisions of prior Royalty Production estimates.
Revisions by HNS of its Royalty Production calculations may result in quarterly royalty payments by HNS which reflect adjustments for overpayments or underpayments of royalties with respect to prior quarters. Such adjustments, if material, may adversely affect certain Unit holders who buy or sell Units between the Quarterly Record Dates for the Quarterly Distributions affected. See Note 7 of Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8. Because the annual statement of cash earnings and distributions of the Trust is prepared on a modified cash basis, royalty revenues for the calendar year do not include the amounts of underpayments or overpayments affecting payments received during the fourth quarter of the year.
During the years 2018 and 2019, WTI Prices were above the level necessary for the Trust to receive a Per Barrel Royalty. However, during, 2020 and through the first quarter of 2021, WTI Prices were below the level necessary for the Trust to receive a Per Barrel Royalty. WTI Prices were above the “break-even” WTI price (the price at which all taxes and prescribed deductions are equal to the WTI price) for the Trust to receive a positive Per Barrel Royalty with respect to a particular day’s production through the fourth quarter of 2021, and as a result, the Trust received Per Barrel Royalties attributable to the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021. Whether the Trust will be entitled to future royalties during 2022 will depend on, among other things, WTI Prices prevailing during the remainder of the year.
From the beginning of the first quarter of 2022 through March 9, 2022, the WTI crude oil spot price fluctuated between a high of $123.70 per barrel on March 8, 2022, and a low of $75.20 per barrel on January 1, 2022. The WTI crude oil spot price on March 9, 2022 was $108.70 per barrel. The quarterly royalty payment by HNS to the Trust is the sum of the individual revenues attributed to the Trust as calculated each day during the quarter. Any single calculation of a calendar day will not reflect the value of the dividend paid to the Trust for the quarter, nor will it reflect the estimated future value of the Trust. However, if a low oil price environment should occur for a protracted period, quarterly royalty payments are likely to be insignificant or be zero.
As explained in Note 3 of Notes to Financial Statements below, the financial statements of the Trust are prepared on a modified cash basis and differ from financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in that (a) revenues are recorded when received (generally within 15 days of the end of the preceding quarter) and distributions to Trust Unit holders are recorded when paid and (b) Trust expenses are recorded on an accrual basis. As a consequence, Trust royalty revenues for the fiscal year are based on Royalty Production during the twelve months ended September 30 of the fiscal year.
2021 Compared to 2020
Average WTI prices during the twelve months ended September 30, 2021, increased by 37.2 percent compared to the preceding twelve-month period. Average monthly WTI prices during this period ranged from a high of $72.82 during the month of July 2021 to a low of $39.44 during the month of October 2020. The increase in the Consumer Price Index used to calculate the Cost Adjustment Factor, as well as the scheduled increase in Chargeable Costs from $26.50 in calendar 2020 to $29.25 in calendar 2021, resulted in the 14.3 percent increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs during the twelve months ended September 30, 2021. The increase in the average Per Barrel Royalty for the 2021 period resulted primarily from the increase in WTI prices, reduced by the increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs. As provided in the Trust Agreement, the payment with respect to the
Royalty Interest for any calendar quarter may not be less than zero. See Note 6 of Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
In the second quarter of 2021, the Trust resumed receiving royalty revenue following a cessation of royalty revenue for the five previous quarters. This resumption of royalty revenues was due to a significant increase in WTI Prices after WTI Prices had fallen to historic lows. Royalty revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 1.6 percent as compared to royalty revenues for the prior year. Royalty revenues were negatively affected by increases in the Adjusted Chargeable Costs and the decline in net production that continued in 2021. The period-to-period declines in cash earnings and cash distributions are primarily due to the significantly lower average WTI Prices that prevailed during 2020 compared to 2021. Cash distributions were also negatively impacted by deductions used to fund the cash reserve, which had been almost completely depleted during 2020 due to the lack of royalty revenues. Administrative expenses decreased slightly as a result of timing differences in payment of expenses. The increase in the Trust corpus reflects the impacts of cash earnings exceeding cash distributions as amounts were retained to increase the cash reserve amount to $6,000,000 during 2021.
2020 Compared to 2019
Average WTI prices during the twelve months ended September 30, 2020, decreased by 24.8 percent compared to the preceding twelve-month period. Average monthly WTI prices during this period ranged from a high of $59.84 during the December 2019 to a low of $18.20 during April 2020. The increase in the Consumer Price Index used to calculate the Cost Adjustment Factor, as well as the scheduled increase in Chargeable Costs from $23.75 in calendar 2019 to $26.50 in calendar 2020, resulted in the 14.7 percent increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs during the twelve months ended September 30, 2020. The decrease in the average Per Barrel Royalty for the period resulted primarily from the significant decrease in WTI prices and the increase in Adjusted
Chargeable Costs. As provided in the Trust Agreement, the payment with respect to the Royalty Interest for any calendar quarter may not be less than zero. See Note 6 of Notes to Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
The period-to-period decreases in royalty revenues, cash earnings and cash distributions are due to the substantial decline in the average Per Barrel Royalty as a result of the lower average WTI Price, the increase in Adjusted Chargeable Costs and the decline in average net production that prevailed during 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in administrative expenses reflects an increase in overall expenses relating to the Trust’s efforts to address the diminished amount of cash available to fund expenses and lack of royalty revenues attributable to the 2020 calendar year, including an increase in professional fees, and timing differences in accruals of expenses. The decrease in the Trust corpus reflects the increase in accrued expenses for the period and significant decline in revenue.