Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Broad Capital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on April 16, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private placement, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
All activity through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and preparation of our IPO which closed on January 1, 2022.
Presently, we are incurring significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from April 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from April 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $20,095, which consisted of formation costs and other professional expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $2,164. Until the consummation of our IPO, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by our initial stockholders and loans from our initial stockholders.
On January 13, 2022, we consummated our IPO of 10,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $100,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, pursuant to the Unit Subscription Agreement, the Company completed the private sale of 446,358 placement units to the Sponsor at a purchase price of $10.00 per placement unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $4,463,580.
On February 9, 2022, the Underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and on February 10, 2022, purchased an additional 159,069 Units from the Company (the “Over-Allotment Units”), generating gross proceeds of $1,558,876.20, and forfeited the remainder of the option. The Company completed the private sale of 4,772 private units at a purchase price of $10.00 per placement unit, to the Company’s sponsor generating gross proceeds to the Company of $47,720.70 for a total of $5,218,358 from the placement units.
In connection with the closing and sale of the Over-Allotment Units and the additional private placement units (together, the “Over-Allotment Closing”), a total of $1,606,596.90 in proceeds from the Over-Allotment Closing (which amount includes $31,813.80 of the Underwriters’ deferred discount) was placed in a U.S.-based trust account established for the benefit of the Company’s public shareholders, maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock currently authorized and outstanding, to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from this IPO held outside of the trust account or from interest earned on the funds held in our trust account and released to us for this purpose. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the trust account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we will have available to us the approximately $650,000 of proceeds held outside the trust account. We will use these funds to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our CEO or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds on a non-interest bearing basis as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we will repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment.
Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender, upon consummation of our initial business combination. The units would be identical to the placement units. Other than as described above, the terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our CEO as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during the 18-month period subsequent to our IPO to include approximately $390,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting successful business combinations; $60,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $180,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support; and approximately $20,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed initial business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the placement units, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Related Party Transactions
On May 7, 2021, our sponsor purchased 2,875,000 insider shares for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000, which include up to an aggregate of 375,000 shares of common stock that were subject to forfeiture by our insiders to the extent that the underwriters’ over-allotment option was not exercised in full or in part. A portion of the insider shares (335,233 shares of common stock) were forfeited since the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option only in part.
On April 16, 2021, Broad Capital LLC agreed to loan us up to an aggregate amount of $300,000 to cover expenses related to our IPO of our units. Following the closing of our IPO on January 13, 2022, a total of $133,533 under the promissory note was repaid on January 19, 2022. We entered into an Administrative Services Agreement pursuant to which we pay to an affiliate of our CEO, a total of $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following this offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our insiders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. In the event that the initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Such loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be paid upon consummation of our initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of the notes may be converted upon consummation of our business combination into additional placement units at a price of $10.00 per unit. If we do not complete a business combination, any other outstanding loans from our insiders or their affiliates will be repaid only from amounts remaining outside our trust account, if any. We believe the purchase price of these units will approximate the fair value of such units when issued. However, if it is determined that, at the time of issuance, the fair value of such units exceeds the purchase price, we would record compensation expense for the excess of the fair value of the units on the day of issuance over the purchase price in accordance with ASC 718 - Compensation - Stock Compensation.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.10 per unit ($1,015,906.9 as the underwriters’ over-allotment option was exercised in full) in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies