Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” “Black Rifle Coffee Company,” “BRCC” and the “Company” in this section are to the business and operations of Authentic Brands LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries (d/b/a Black Rifle Coffee Company). The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited annual consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in this Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could cause BRCC’s actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors which could cause such differences are discussed herein and set forth in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Report.
Overview
BRCC is a rapidly growing, veteran-controlled and led coffee and media company with an incredibly loyal and quickly expanding community of more than 2 million lifetime consumers, more than 287,000 active Coffee Club subscribers, and 11.7 million social media followers across BRCCs, co-founders’, and key media personalities’ accounts as of December 31, 2021. At Black Rifle Coffee, we develop our roast profiles with the same mission focus we learned as military members serving our country. We produce creative and engaging, cause-related media content, self- produced podcasts, and digital and print journalism in-house to inform, inspire, entertain, and build our community. We also sell Black Rifle Coffee-brand apparel, coffee brewing equipment, and outdoor and lifestyle gear that our consumers proudly wear and use to showcase our brand. At the heart of everything we do is our commitment to supporting active military, veterans, first responders, and those who love America.
We utilize a three-pronged approach to craft a unique brand that resonates with our customer base and enhances brand loyalty: Inform, Inspire, and Entertain. We want our audience to love coffee as much as we do, so we strive to inform them on all the awesome facets to coffee. Every day we work to inspire our customers; we take pride in the coffee we roast, the veterans we employ and the
causes we support. We give back to the community and are committed to support those who serve. Our “Entertain” marketing strategy drives brand excitement, along with valuable customer insights and data.
We own two roasting facilities, one focused on large batch and the other on small batch. Our coffee beans are primarily roasted in-house in the United States to ensure consistency and quality of product. Our coffee beans have an 83-point grade or higher and are sourced only from the highest quality suppliers. Our state-of-the-art equipment guarantees freshness and offers significant capacity for expansion.
We have experienced strong revenue growth since inception. Revenue increased to $233.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $163.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing growth of 42%. Revenue increased to $163.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $82.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing growth of 100%. Growth in the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by a significant expansion of our customer base, increasing Wholesale stores, and new Outpost openings. Growth in the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by a significant expansion in the DTC sales channel.
We are a digitally native brand with an established omnichannel business model, reaching our customers through one reportable segment that is comprised of three channels: DTC, Wholesale, and Outposts. Our DTC channel includes our e-commerce business, through which consumers order our products online and products are shipped to them. Our Wholesale channel includes products sold to an intermediary such as convenience, grocery, drug, and mass merchandise stores, as well as outdoor, DIY, and lifestyle retailers, who in turn sell those products to consumers. Our Outpost channel includes revenue from our company-operated and franchised Black Rifle Coffee retail coffee shop locations.
The Business Combination
On February 9, 2022, we completed the Business Combination contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement. As a result of the Business Combination Agreement and following the consummation of a series of mergers pursuant thereto, Authentic Brands became a subsidiary of BRC Inc., with BRC Inc. acting as sole managing member thereof. The Business Combination was accounted for under ASC 805, Business Combinations as a reverse acquisition and a recapitalization of Authentic Brands. Accordingly, the Business Combination is expected to be reflected as the equivalent of Authentic Brands issuing stock for the net assets of SilverBox, accompanied by a recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, SilverBox is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. The net assets of SilverBox are stated at fair value (which is expected to approximate historical cost), with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. This accounting treatment was determined as the individual controlling Authentic Brands prior to the Business Combination also controlled the combined company post business combination.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted global economies, resulting in travel restrictions, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, reduced economic activity, and changes in consumer behavior.
Despite these COVID-19 pandemic disruptions, which have affected the businesses of our consumers, wholesale partners, and suppliers, our business has been positively affected by the increase in e-commerce spending and strengthening of our company brand. As we entered 2020, great momentum from 2019 continued to be reflected in the strong sales performance throughout the first quarter of 2020. Our revenue was positively impacted during the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the increase in consumer e-commerce spending and temporary store closures attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. During the second quarter of 2020, our DTC revenues significantly benefited from a demand surge for in-home coffee products as we saw consumers change their coffee consumption experience, as well as more consumers shopping online while sheltering-in-place. The unprecedented demand continued throughout the remainder of the year. Conversely, our wholesale revenues were temporarily adversely impacted due to temporary store closures for our customers attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. Offsetting the impact related to these temporary store closures was revenue related to a new product sales and marketing agreement with a large retailer to sell select coffee products and merchandise items to the retailer to be sold in their stores and website. In addition, we introduced a new canned RTD coffee product in early 2020, which expanded our product offering and further strengthened our revenue. This canned RTD coffee product is primarily sold through our Wholesale channel. We have continued to experience revenue growth throughout 2021. This revenue growth has primarily been driven by our Wholesale channel as we expanded our market with businesses and retailers. Revenue growth of our DTC channel has normalized as consumers return to the office.
To date, we have experienced minimal supply-chain disruptions as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, restrictions or disruptions of transportation did not result in significantly higher costs or delays for us during 2020. We increased in-house production of our products and increased inventory purchase orders to align with demand forecasts at the time and safeguard against potential supply chain disruptions. These actions contributed to higher -than -expected inventory levels throughout the year to meet overall demand in our DTC channel and Wholesale channel, particularly in the fourth quarter of 2020. As we continue to expand our business, we have continued to maintain sufficient inventory levels throughout 2021.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our Ability to Increase Brand Awareness
Our ability to promote and maintain brand awareness and loyalty is critical to our success. We believe we have created a highly efficient marketing strategy that provides us the ability to increase brand awareness and drive consumer interaction. Consumer appreciation of our brands is primarily reflected in the increase of our DTC channel and the additional retail accounts in our Wholesale channel. We expect to continue to develop and implement forward-looking brand strategies that leverage social media and employ targeted digital advertising to expand the reach of our brand.
Our Ability to Grow Our Customer Base in Our DTC, Outposts, and Wholesale Channels
We are currently growing our customer base through our DTC, Outposts, and Wholesale channels. Today we have over 287,000 Coffee Club subscribers and that number continues to grow through various offerings. We continue to grow our retail footprint through company-owned and franchised Outposts. Our products are also sold through a growing number of physical retail channels. Wholesale customers include large national retailers, regional retailers, distributors, and dealers.
Our Ability to Acquire and Retain Customers at a Reasonable Cost
We believe our ability to consistently acquire and retain customers at a reasonable cost will be a key factor affecting our future performance. While we have a strong presence in major markets, we still have the opportunity to grow brand awareness, with less than 20% aided awareness in any region of the country today. To accomplish this goal, we intend to grow our brand awareness through various avenues such as national television and radio advertising, and through select sponsorship opportunities. In addition, we will strive to strengthen our social media footprint across various platforms such as Facebook, Google, and YouTube, even as some of these platforms, such as Apple, have implemented operating system changes that negatively impact our ability to measure and target advertising. Our digital capabilities provide a distinct advantage and enable us to form direct relationships with our customers and capture valuable customer data and insights. We utilize digital marketing tools to optimize our marketing initiatives and drive our brand reach.
Our Ability to Drive Repeat Usage of Our Products
We accrue substantial economic value from repeat users of our products who consistently re-order our products. The pace of our growth rate will be affected by the repeat usage dynamics of existing and newly acquired customers.
Our Ability to Expand Our Product Line
Our goal is to substantially expand our product line over time to increase our growth opportunity and reduce product-specific risks through diversification into multiple products each designed around daily use. Our pace of growth will be partially affected by the cadence and magnitude of new product launches over time. As an example, we launched RTD coffee products in March 2020 with two 11-ounce SKUs. We have since added two high-caffeine, boldly-flavored 15-ounce SKUs. All four items have grown to become top-25 products in the RTD coffee category on a dollar to percent average cost value basis and can be found in more than 42,000 locations across the country. Moving forward, we believe that it is important to our business that we continue innovating with new products and flavors and continue to explore the world to find the highest quality beans possible to deliver to our customers.
Our Ability to Manage Our Supply Chain
Our ability to grow and meet future demand will be affected by our ability to properly plan for and source inventory from a variety of suppliers located inside and outside the United States. The majority of our green coffee beans come from Colombia and
Brazil, but since 2020, we have also sourced green coffee beans from over ten countries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia to diversify our supply chain and offer our customers specialty and limited-time-only roasts. Quality control is also a critically important part of our manufacturing and supply chain operations. 99% of our bagged roasted coffee is roasted in-house. Our licensed, Coffee Quality Institute-certified grader and former Green Beret, Edwin Parnell, leads cupping, grading, scoring, and sourcing of our coffees.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue, net
We sell our products both directly and indirectly to our customers through a broad set of physical and online platforms. Our revenue, net reflects the impact of product returns, as well as discounts for certain sales programs, promotions, and loyalty rewards.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold primarily includes raw material costs, labor costs directly related to producing our products, including wages and benefits, shipping costs, lease expenses and other overhead costs related to certain aspects of production, warehousing, fulfillment, shipping, and credit card fees.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of marketing and advertising expenses related to brand marketing campaigns through various online platforms, including email, digital, website, social media, search engine optimization, as well as performance marketing efforts, including retargeting, paid search and product advertisements, as well as social media advertisements and sponsorships. Operating expenses also consist of salaries, wages, and benefits of payroll and payroll related expenses for labor not directly related to producing our products. Payroll expenses include both fixed and variable compensation. Variable compensation includes bonuses and stock-based compensation for our finance, legal, human resources, and general corporate personnel. Also included are other professional fees and services, and general corporate infrastructure expenses, including utilities and depreciation and amortization.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our borrowing arrangements, the amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs, and extinguishment of debt costs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
The following table represents the selected results of operations for BRCC for the periods indicated.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue, net
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $69.2 million, or 42%, to $233.1 million as compared to $163.9 million for the corresponding period in 2020.
The increase was driven by continued growth in our DTC channel, new products sold and increased points of distribution in our Wholesale channel, and the opening of new company-owned Outposts. DTC channel net revenue increased in aggregate by $27.6 million, or 20%, to $165.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $137.7 million for the corresponding period in 2020 due to an increase in number of customers and sales of new products on subscription.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net revenue for our Outpost channel increased $9.2 million, or 329%, to $12.0 million as compared to $2.8 million for the corresponding period in 2020. We opened a total of seven new company-operated Outposts in Texas, Tennessee, and Utah in 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net revenue from our Wholesale channel increased $32.4 million, or 139%, to $55.8 million as compared to $23.4 million for the corresponding period in 2020. The largest increase came from RTD drink product sales through national distributors and retail accounts, and product sales with a large retail chain.
Cost of goods sold
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of goods sold increased $48.9 million, or 52%, to $143.4 million as compared to $94.5 million over the corresponding period prior year. The increase was partially driven by higher sales and product mix shift, as RTD has higher product costs and lower margins as compared to bagged coffee. In addition, shipping costs, which includes inbound freight, outbound freight, and intracompany freight, increased due to carrier and courier rate increases. Gross margin decreased 380 basis points to 38.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 42.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $37.6 million, or 59%, to $101.3 million as compared to $63.6 million for the corresponding period in 2020.
Salaries, wages and benefits increased $14.5 million, or 60%, to $38.7 million for the year ended, December 31, 2021, compared to $24.2 million for the corresponding period in 2020. We increased employee headcount to respond to our significant sales growth and invested in existing channels as we built out additional revenue streams and expanded products lines, which resulted in higher salaries, wages and benefits. In addition, in 2021, we continued to strengthen our marketing and advertising capabilities with national radio, television, and billboard advertising placements and in-house production of content. This resulted in increased marketing and advertising expenses of $10.8 million, or 43%, to $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $25.5 million for the corresponding period in 2020. In addition, General and Administrative expenses increased $12.2 million, or 88%, to $26.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $13.9 million for the same period 2020. The increase is due to the addition of corporate infrastructure to support the growth of our business across multiple channels. We also experienced increased costs related to travel related expenses as the Company re-opened corporate offices and the government loosened travel restrictions.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $1.0 million, or 94%, to $2.0 million as compared to $1.0 million for the corresponding period in 2020.
The increase in interest expense was primarily attributed to a loss on the extinguishment of debt incurred in August 2021 of $0.7 million. The additional increase was related to the Company entering into several debt agreements to finance its purchases of property and equipment for corporate office locations, Outposts, and manufacturing facilities.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue, net
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $81.8 million, or 100%, to $163.9 million as compared to $82.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase was primarily due to the rapid growth in our DTC channel, a sales and marketing agreement with a large retailer in our Wholesale channel, and a newly opened company-operated store in our Outpost channel. DTC net revenue increased $64.1 million, or 87%, to $137.7 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to net revenues of $73.6 million in fiscal 2019, due to continued growth in DTC sales fueled by a surge for in-home coffee products as consumers changed their coffee consumption experience
attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. Concurrently, we expanded our subscription offerings that included new products on subscription.
Outpost net revenue increased $2.0 million, or 245%, to $2.8 million for fiscal 2020 as compared to $0.8 million in fiscal 2019, primarily due to a newly opened company-operated retail store in San Antonio, TX.
Wholesale net revenue increased $15.6 million, or 203%, to $23.4 million for fiscal 2020 as compared to $7.7 million in fiscal 2019. We launched the RTD product line, which experienced rapid growth and adoption through a national distributor network. In addition, we entered into a product sales and marketing agreement with a large retailer to sell our products in their locations and on their website.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $48.1 million, or 104%, to $94.5 million as compared to $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase is partly driven by product mix as RTD has higher product costs and lower gross margins as compared to bagged coffee. In addition, shipping costs, which includes inbound freight, outbound freight, and intracompany freight, increased due to significant carrier and courier rate increases. Gross margin decreased 120 basis points to 42.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher shipping cost, partially offset by improved margins and leverage in e commerce and merchant fees.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $27.8 million, or 78%, to $63.6 million as compared to $35.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
For year ended December 31, 2020, salaries, wages and benefits increased $11.1 million, or 84%, to $24.2 million as compared to $13.1 million for fiscal 2019. In 2020, we experienced significant growth related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We increased employee headcount to be responsive to this growth, which resulted in higher salaries, wages, and benefits costs. In addition, General and Administrative expenses increased $4.6 million, or 49%, to $13.9 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to $9.3 million in fiscal 2019. The increase is due to the addition of corporate personnel and infrastructure to support the growth of our business across multiple channels.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $0.3 million, or 43%, to $1.0 million as compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase in interest expense is primarily attributed to increase in our long-term debt. In 2020, we entered into a loan and security agreement, several mortgages to purchase leased buildings, and an equipment financing arrangement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal use of cash is to support operational expenses associated with non-capitalizable start-up costs, which largely consist of working capital requirements related to inventories, accounts payable, accounts receivable, and general and administrative expenses. Furthermore, we use cash to fund our debt service commitments, capital equipment acquisitions, stores buildout and other growth-related needs.
Our primary sources of cash are (1) cash on hand, (2) cash provided by operating activities, and (3) net borrowings from our credit facilities. As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $18.3 million, working capital of $(6.0) million, and $19.1 million of available borrowings under our credit facilities. The Company had $12.0 million of borrowings outstanding classified as current debt as of December 31, 2021. The Company also received $126.8 million in net cash proceeds from the Business Combination. Our ability to draw from the credit facilities is subject to a borrowing base and other covenants. We believe that these
sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our working capital requirements and to meet our commitments in the ordinary course of business and under the current market conditions for at least the next twelve months.
We expect we may continue to incur net operating losses and negative cash flows from operations, and we expect our general and administrative expenses and capital expenditures will continue to increase as we continue to expand our operations, product offerings and customer base.
Mortgages, Equipment Line, Revolving Line of Credit, and Promissory Note
In July 2020, we entered into mortgage loan agreements to refinance the purchase of buildings for a total of $5.5 million at an interest rate of 3.67% per annum. The loans are secured by the real property financed. The loans mature on July 29, 2025. The loans are payable in monthly installments of principal and interest commencing on August 29, 2020. The loans are subject to quarterly covenants related to fixed charge coverage, cash flows, and dividends and distributions.
In April 2021, we entered into mortgage loan agreement to purchase a building for a total of $2.2 million at an interest rate of 3.60% per annum. The loan is secured by the real property financed. The loan matures on April 29, 2026. The loan is payable in monthly installments of principal and interest commencing on May 29, 2021.
The loans are subject to quarterly covenants related to cash flows, dividends and distributions and the Company was in compliance with all covenants related to these mortgage loan agreements as of December 31, 2021.
In July 2020, we entered into an equipment financing agreement which provided a credit line totaling $3.3 million at an interest rate of LIBOR plus 3.50% (the “Equipment Line”). The Equipment Line was amended in April 2021 to include additional availability of $10.0 million. Further, in July 2021, an additional $6.0 million was added to the availability of the Equipment Line. In September 2021, $2.0 million outstanding on the Equipment Line was converted to a 60-month term loan to be utilized for retail expansion (the “Retail Facility”). The Equipment Line is secured by the equipment financed. The Equipment Line matures the earlier of (i) five years subsequent to the equipment project completion or (ii) August 1, 2026. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has available credit under the Equipment Line and the Retail Facility of $8.2 million and $4.1 million, respectively.
In April 2021, we entered into a $10.0 million revolving line of credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”). The Credit Facility earns a floating interest rate calculated at the prime rate plus zero percent.
In November 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to increase the available line under the Credit Facility to $25 million. Interest only payments are due and payable in installments commencing November 30, 2021 and continue regularly until the entire amount outstanding is due on June 30, 2023. Borrowings under the Credit Facility are subject to a borrowing base on qualified collateral values. As of December 31, 2021, the balance of the Credit Facility was $8.0 million. The interest rate for the Credit Facility was the Prime rate plus 1% and the amount of borrowings available was $1.8 million.
In November 2021, the Company entered into a revolving loan agreement to borrow an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $15 million (the Promissory Note). The Promissory Note matures on June 30, 2022 (Initial Maturity) with an option to extend the term by one year to June 30, 2023 (Extended Maturity). The Promissory Note accrues interest of 7% per annum until Initial Maturity and then 12% per annum until the Extended Maturity date. As of December 31, 2021, the amount of borrowings available was $5 million.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $2.8 million of outstanding note payable agreements with a weighted average interest rate of 1.01%. The notes are payable in annual installments scheduled to be paid in full in 2025.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities is primarily generated from revenue from our DTC and Wholesale channels.
Net cash used in operating activities was $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $19.2 million decrease was primarily due to a net loss from operations of $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net income of $4.3 million for the same period in 2020. In addition, the change in prepaid expenses and other assets increased $4.2 million compared to the same period in 2020 mainly due to an increase in prepaid marketing expenses of $2.0 million and an additional increase in transaction costs. The increases were slightly offset by higher non-cash depreciation, amortization and equity-based compensation expenses in 2021.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $9.5 million increase in net cash used was primarily due to continued spend on capital expenditure projects for our Outpost locations, roasting facilities, and corporate offices.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $19.1 million decrease in net cash from financing activities was primarily due to repayments of long-term debt and Series A preferred distributions during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $7.4 million increase was primarily due to net income from operations of $4.3 million, increase in accounts payable due to timing of payables and cash payments of $7.0 million, increase in accrued liabilities of $6.4 million due to timing of expenditures and invoice receipts, and an increase in deferred revenue and gift card liability of $3.3 million primarily due to increase in revenue volumes and the establishment of a loyalty reward program. Offsetting these activities are cash used for purchases of inventory of $10.9 million to address inventory levels to meet growth due to customer demands.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $8.7 million increase was primarily due to purchases of property and equipment related to our Outpost locations, roasting facilities, and corporate offices.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $31.0 million increase was primarily due to issuance of Series A preferred equity, net of $145.1 million and issuance of long-term debt of $16.4 million. Offsetting these activities are cash used to repurchase member units in the amount of $125 million and cash used for payments of long-term debt of $7.3 million.
Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet debt or arrangements, except for operating leases entered into in the normal course of business and purchase commitments relating to inventory as discussed below.
In September 2021, the Company entered into a manufacturing and purchase agreement to purchase canned beverage product from a third-party supplier. The initial term ends on December 31, 2023, and automatically renews for two consecutive year periods, unless either party provides notice of cancellation at least 120 days prior to the end of the current term. The minimum purchase amount carries a minimum surcharge of approximately $2.25 million through December 31, 2022.
In November 2021, the Company entered into a manufacturing and purchase agreement to purchase coffee product from a third-party supplier. The term remains in effect until December 31, 2023. The minimum purchase amount is based on quantity and will range from approximately $8.8 million to $10.4 million on an annual basis.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those accounting policies and estimates that are both the most important to the portrayal of our net assets and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These estimates are developed based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Critical accounting estimates are accounting estimates where the nature of the estimates are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and the impact of the estimates on financial condition or operating performance is material.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 606. Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of products or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which we received, or expect to receive, in exchange for those goods or services. We are required to identify our contracts with customers, identify the performance obligations in a contract, determine the transaction price, allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
The majority of our revenue is derived from the sale of our products. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment to determine the net consideration to which we expect to be entitled.
Revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when our performance obligation is satisfied), which is defined by the commercial terms of each purchase but typically occurs at the date of delivery of the merchandise to the customer. As such, customer orders are recorded as deferred revenue prior to delivery of products. In determining whether control has transferred, we considered whether risks and rewards of ownership have transferred to the customer. We estimate which shipments
have been delivered and recognize corresponding revenue at the end of the period. Delivery date estimates are based on average transit times calculated based on factors such as the type of carrier, the fulfillment source, the delivery destination and historical transit time experience. Actual shipping times may differ from our estimates.
Loyalty Rewards Program
We have a loyalty points rewards program (the “Loyalty Program”) that is primarily a spend-based program. Customers can earn 1% or 3% on purchases depending on whether the purchase is a subscription or non-subscription. BRCC reserves the right in its sole discretion to modify, change, add, or remove activities which can be accomplished to earn points at any time. Under the Loyalty Program, customers may redeem rewards as they reach minimum thresholds per reward. Loyalty points will expire if there is no account activity (i.e., if there is no new purchase made or order placed) in a period of twelve months. Conversion of rewards are non-changeable after redemption, have no cash value, and are non-transferrable.
The Company defers revenue associated with the points earned through purchases that are expected to be redeemed, net of estimated unredeemed loyalty points. Loyalty points that are estimated to be unredeemed is based on a historical percentage of expired points. When a customer redeems an earned reward, the Company recognizes revenue for the redeemed product and reduces the related deferred revenue liability. The deferred revenue liability is included in deferred revenue and gift card liability on the consolidated balance sheets.
For those points that are earned through other activities, the Company recognizes the redemption of these points as a discount to the transaction price at time of sale.
Equity Based Compensation
The Company grants equity-based awards to certain employees and non-employee directors. The Company records equity-based compensation expense based on the fair value of equity awards at the grant date and recognizes compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The assumptions used to calculate the fair value of equity awards granted are evaluated and revised, as necessary, to reflect the Company’s historical experience and current market conditions.
The Company engages a third-party appraiser (the “Appraiser”) to assist management in estimating the fair value of common stock and incentive units. The Appraiser considers all three valuation approaches to value the Company’s total equity: the income approach, market approach and cost approach but typically relies primarily on the income and market approaches. The Appraiser then weights the selected approaches considering the reliability of each approach as of the grant date. Subsequently, the Appraiser allocates the total equity value to the classes of shares. Discounts for lack of marketability are considered based on the facts and circumstances of the class of shares at each grant date.
Applying these valuation and allocation approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding the Company’s expected future revenue, expenses and cash flows, as well as discount rates, valuation multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and comparable transactions and the probability of future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions, or the relationships between these assumptions, impact the Company’s valuation as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of the Company’s equity and equity awards. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and, if different assumptions had been used, equity-based compensation expense could have been materially different from the amounts recorded.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this 10-K for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent it has made one, of their potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies for up to five years or until we are no longer an emerging growth company. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not
publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to those of companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.