Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 8, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Report as our “initial business combination”. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering and the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares of Class A common stock, Opco Units (and corresponding shares of our Class V common stock) or shares of preferred stock:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the founder shares resulted in an increase in the number of Class A Units of Opco into which the Class B Units of Opco will convert;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our Class A common stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions and fund other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements and execution of our strategy; and
•
other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Public Offering, described below, and since the closing of our Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after our Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $281,753, which resulted from operating and formation costs of $105,070 and franchise tax expense of $178,142, offset in part by interest income on investments held in the trust account of $1,459.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 29, 2021, we consummated a Public Offering of 23,000,000 units, including 3,000,000 units issued pursuant to the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option in full, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $230,000,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of our Public Offering, we completed the private sale of 12,225,000 warrants to our sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $12,225,000. The proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Public Offering held in a trust account. If we do not complete an initial business combination within 18 months (or 21 months, as applicable) from the closing of the Public Offering, the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the private placement warrants will expire worthless.
For the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $808,058, which was due to changes in working capital of $524,846, our net loss of $281,753, and interest and dividend income on investments held in the trust account of $1,459.
For the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $234,625,500 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from our Public Offering being deposited to the trust account.
For the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $237,166,332 was comprised of $225,400,000 in proceeds from the issuance of units in our Public Offering net of underwriter’s discount paid and $12,225,000 in proceeds from the issuance of warrants in a private placement to our sponsor, $256,359 in proceeds from the issuance of a promissory note to our sponsor, $118,328 in
proceeds from an advance from an affiliate of our sponsor, and $25,000 in proceeds from the issuance of our Class V common stock and units in our majority-controlled operating subsidiary, Opco, to an affiliate of our sponsor and our sponsor, offset in part by the payment of $483,754 for offering costs associated with the Public Offering, repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to our sponsor of $256,359, and repayment of the advance from an affiliate of our sponsor of $118,242.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,732,774 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination or to finance possible costs in connection with the contribution of an addition amount to be held in the trust account if we extend our time to complete an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans and up to $2,300,250 of such extension funding loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account. Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. We may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing to complete our business combination, either because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in our trust account or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we do not complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Related Party Transactions
Administrative Support Agreement
We have entered into an Administrative Support Agreement pursuant to which we will reimburse our sponsor or an affiliate thereof in an amount equal to $25,000 per month for administrative support made available to us, of which $16,667 per month will be to reimburse our sponsor or an affiliate thereof for payments to Ms. James, our Chief Financial Officer. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Our sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsor, officers, directors or their affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on our behalf.
Related Party Loans
On February 9, 2021, the sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Public Offering pursuant to the Promissory Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) August 8, 2021 (as subsequently extended to February 9, 2022) or (ii) the consummation of the Public Offering. On November 30, 2021, the Company repaid the Promissory Note in full. As of December 31, 2021, there was no balance outstanding under the Promissory Note.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination or possible costs in connection with the contribution of an additional amount to be held in the Trust Account if we extend our time to complete an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans and up to $2,300,250 of such extension funding loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Private Placement Warrants
Our sponsor has purchased an aggregate of 12,225,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant or $12,225,000 in the aggregate in a private placement that occurred simultaneously with the closing of our Public Offering. Each private placement warrant is exercisable to purchase for $11.50 one share of our Class A common stock. Our sponsor will be permitted to transfer the private placement warrants held by it to certain permitted transferees, including their officers and directors and other persons or entities affiliated with or related to them, but the transferees receiving such securities will be subject to the same agreements with respect to such securities as the sponsor. Otherwise, these warrants will not, subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferable, assignable or saleable until 30 days after the completion of our business combination. The private placement warrants will be non-redeemable so long as they are held by our sponsor or their permitted transferees. The private placement warrants may also be exercised by the sponsor or their permitted transferees for cash or on a cashless basis. Otherwise, the private placement warrants have terms and provisions that are identical to those of the warrants being sold as part of the units in our Public Offering, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights Agreement
The holders of the founder shares, sponsor shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any shares of our Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or exchange of the founder shares issued upon exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and upon exchange of the founder shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on the effective date of our Public Offering, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after the founder shares become exchangeable for the shares of Class A common stock). The holders of these securities, having at least $25 million in the aggregate, are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial business combination and
rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter purchased 3,000,000 units to cover over-allotments at the Public Offering price, less the underwriting commissions.
The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering, or $4,600,000. Additionally, the underwriter will be entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of 3.5%, or $8,050,000, of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering held in the trust account upon the completion of our initial business combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding. For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The public warrants and private placement warrants are equity classified.
Class A common stock subject to redemption
All of the 23,000,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of the units in our Public Offering and the 1,250 shares of Class A common stock purchased by an affiliate of our sponsor on February 9, 2021 contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such shares in connection with our liquidation if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with our initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require shares of common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in retained earnings, or in the absence of retained earnings, in additional paid-in capital.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 23,725,000 shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the Class A common stock and Class V common stock, we first considered the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares. This is calculated using the total net income (loss) less any dividends paid. For purposes of calculating net income (loss) per share, any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the holders of the Class A common stock. Subsequent to calculating the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares, the Company split the amount to be allocated pro rata between Class A and Class V common stock for the period from February 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, reflective of the respective participation rights.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method of transition. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.