Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and other factors set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business
Bird’s mission is to provide environmentally friendly transportation for everyone. We believe in leading the transition to clean, equitable transportation through innovation and technology. In partnership with cities, Bird’s proprietary technology and operations are revolutionizing the existing transportation paradigm by making lightweight electric vehicles readily available to rent or own around the world.
Since our first shared ride in 2017, we have facilitated over 130 million trips on Bird vehicles through our Sharing business. Today, Bird offers riders an on-demand, affordable, and cleaner alternative for their short-range mobility needs in over 400 cities worldwide. We believe that Bird is uniquely positioned to capture share in this market due to (i) our founder-led, visionary management team, (ii) our advanced technology and data platform, (iii) aligned incentives in the mutually beneficial operating model in which we utilize third-party logistics providers-Fleet Managers-to store, charge, maintain, and repair our vehicles, and (iv) our strong year-round unit economics.
COVID-19 accelerated the adoption of environmentally conscious, socially distanced transportation alternatives such as Bird. As the world enters a new, post-pandemic “normal,” we are continuing to work with cities to increase micromobility access and infrastructure investments to ensure that the shift to sustainable urban transportation continues.
Business Model
We categorize our offerings into Sharing and Product Sales. Centered on our proprietary technology and vehicle designs, our offerings are aimed at revolutionizing urban mobility.
Sharing
We generate the substantial majority of our revenue from our Sharing business. Sharing provides riders with on-demand access to Bird vehicles, enabling them to locate, unlock, and pay for rides through our mobile application. Bird generates revenue from trips taken on our shared vehicles. For a single ride, riders typically pay a fixed unlock fee to access the vehicle in addition to a market-level, per-minute price for each minute the vehicle is in use.
Local in-market operations for our Sharing business are either managed In-House or with the support of a network of Fleet Managers. Prior to the second quarter of 2020, substantially all of our in-market operations were conducted via the In-House operating model. After temporarily pausing operations at the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020, we rapidly shifted to the Fleet Manager operating model as a way to quickly relaunch and provide safe and socially distanced transportation options for our global city partners.
Fleet Managers typically manage logistics for fleets of 100 or more Bird-owned vehicles in their local markets, driving meaningful scale on a hyper-local level. With the support of our central operations team and advanced technology platform, Fleet Managers manage the day-to-day logistics responsibilities required for proper fleet management, including deploying, repairing, rebalancing, and sanitizing Bird vehicles. Through a revenue share model, Fleet Managers make money on rides taken on the vehicles in their care, creating built-in economic incentives to ensure these vehicles are properly maintained, frequently cleaned, and strategically placed to align with local demand. There are no upfront fees to Bird associated with becoming a Fleet Manager, and Fleet Managers typically utilize existing tools and resources to manage their fleet. As such, the Fleet Manager program provides economic advancement opportunities to local businesses, many of which were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Product Sales
Our Product Sales business consists primarily of vehicle sales to retail customers. In order to scale our mission and provide greater access to micromobility solutions, we sell several Bird-designed vehicle models through select retail channels. In addition to increasing brand awareness, sales of our products bolster our top-line revenue while leveraging existing investment in vehicle R&D. These products are typically purchased, stored, sold, and delivered to retail partners by a network of contracted distributors.
The Business Combination
On November 3, 2021, as contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, Switchback reincorporated to the State of Delaware by merging with and into Bird Global, with Bird Global surviving the Domestication Merger as the sole owner of Merger Sub. At the effective time of the Domestication Merger, by virtue of the Domestication Merger: (a) each then-outstanding share of common stock of Bird Global was redeemed for par value; (b) each then-outstanding Class A ordinary share of Switchback was canceled and converted, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of our Class A Common Stock; (c) each then-outstanding Class B ordinary share of Switchback was canceled and converted, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Bird Global (the “Class B Common Stock”) (with each such share of Class B Common Stock thereafter converting, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of Class A Common Stock in connection with the Acquisition Merger); (d) each then-outstanding warrant of Switchback was assumed and converted automatically into a Warrant, pursuant to that certain warrant agreement by and between Switchback and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company; and (e) each then-outstanding unit of Switchback, each consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth of one warrant of Switchback , was canceled and converted into a unit of Bird Global, each consisting of one share of Class A Common Stock and one-fifth of one Warrant.
On November 4, 2021, as contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Bird Rides, with Bird Rides surviving the Acquisition Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Bird Global. Substantially concurrently with the consummation of the Acquisition Merger, certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”) purchased an aggregate of 16,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Financing”) pursuant to subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”).
On November 4, 2021, as contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, immediately prior to the effective time of the Acquisition Merger, each then-outstanding share of preferred stock of Bird Rides converted automatically into a number of shares of common stock of Bird Rides at the then-effective conversion rate as calculated pursuant to the certificate of incorporation of Bird Rides (the “Conversion”).
At the effective time of the Acquisition Merger, pursuant to the Acquisition Merger: (a) each then-outstanding share of common stock of Bird Rides, including shares of common stock resulting from the Conversion, but excluding then-outstanding shares of restricted stock of Bird Rides, were canceled and automatically converted into the right to receive (i) (A) with respect to Travis VanderZanden, the number of shares of Class X Common Stock and (B) with respect to any other persons who held common stock of Bird Rides, the number of shares of Class A Common Stock, in each case, equal to the applicable exchange ratio (determined in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement) (the “Exchange Ratio”) and (ii) the contingent right to receive certain Earnout Shares (as defined below); (b) each then-outstanding and unexercised warrant of Bird Rides was automatically assumed and converted into a Warrant based on the Exchange Ratio and at an adjusted exercise price per share (determined in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement); (c) each then-outstanding and unexercised option of Bird Rides was converted into (i) an option exercisable for shares of Class A Common Stock based on the Exchange Ratio and (ii) the contingent right to receive certain Earnout Shares; (d) each then-outstanding award of restricted stock of Bird Rides was converted into (i) an award covering shares of Class A Common Stock based on the Exchange Ratio and (ii) the contingent right to receive certain Earnout Shares; and (e) each then-outstanding award of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) of Bird Rides was converted into (i) an award covering shares of Class A Common Stock based on the Exchange Ratio and (ii) the contingent right to receive certain Earnout Shares. At the effective time of the Acquisition Merger and in connection with the Acquisition Merger, each outstanding share of Class B Common Stock was converted, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of Class A Common Stock and each unit of Bird Global separated into one share of Class A Common Stock and one-fifth of one Warrant.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our financial position and results of operations depend to a significant extent on the following factors:
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic. In response to the pandemic and corresponding health risks, we temporarily paused operations throughout Europe and in several cities in the United States to safeguard the health and safety of our customers and employees. In the United States, we continued to operate a limited number of reduced fleets in cities in which Bird was deemed an “essential service.” After ensuring our fleets could operate safely and in compliance with local guidelines, we resumed broader market operations starting in the second quarter of 2020 with the expanded goal of providing an affordable transportation option to communities in need of socially distanced forms of transportation.
The COVID-19 pandemic reduced global travel and altered daily commutes, which significantly impacted demand for shared micromobility. Furthermore, global supply chain disruptions impacted our vehicle supply in certain markets. In an effort to quickly relaunch our fleets and provide a safe transportation alternative, we accelerated our operating model evolution from In-House to Fleet Manager. We believe COVID-19 has accelerated the adoption of our offerings and created additional tailwinds for shared micromobility as people seek out socially distanced and environmentally conscious modes of transportation. However, as the situation continues to evolve, the existence of new variants, additional restrictions, or other actions taken to mitigate the pandemic could harm our results of operations.
Ability to continue to expand our rider base
We grow our business by attracting new riders to our offerings and increasing their usage of these offerings over time. We believe our global brand, offerings, and superior vehicle design heighten brand awareness and generate significant demand. To grow our business, we frequently expand into new markets, including smaller, long-tail markets, which we believe Bird is uniquely positioned to serve. In new and existing markets, we offer incentives for first-time riders to try our vehicles and a referral program to drive ridership growth. Once riders begin using Bird, we provide a quality experience to retain riders and encourage repeat usage. If we fail to continue to attract riders to our platform and grow our rider base or expand riders’ usage of our platform over time, our results of operations would be harmed.
Regulatory environment for shared micromobility
The shared micromobility industry is relatively nascent and rapidly evolving. As such, we are subject to changes in local laws and regulations that can permit or limit our ability to provide shared micromobility in certain markets, which may then in turn impact our financial performance. Each market has unique regulatory dynamics that directly or indirectly impact our ability to operate profitably and effectively, including, but not limited to, permit fees (both fixed and variable), vehicle caps, permit duration limits, employment requirements, and vehicle deployment mandates. The COVID-19 pandemic galvanized cities across the globe to enact favorable regulatory changes, resulting in the opening of new cities to shared micromobility and expansion of bike lane infrastructure. However, regulatory standards for shared micromobility are constantly evolving, both to the benefit and detriment of our business, and can vary significantly by jurisdiction.
We actively partner with cities to ensure our offerings, products and services are in compliance with local regulations. We develop programs alongside cities to maximize the positive impact of micromobility and provide customized tools and technology to assist in identifying and addressing transportation-related issues. Certain markets, such as smaller, long-tail markets, typically offer more favorable regulatory environments for our Sharing businesses. These long-tail markets are a key component of our growth strategy.
Ability to attract and retain the services of the best-in-class Fleet Managers
In the markets in which we operate via the Fleet Manager model, we must ensure we work with an adequate number of Fleet Managers to match the local demand for our Sharing businesses. When we enter a new market, we often need to invest in acquisition channels and sales efforts to drive sufficient scale of Fleet Managers in order to ensure ample vehicle supply for our riders. We also actively monitor the contractual performance of Fleet Managers and focus on retaining the services of best-in-class Fleet Managers, which can impact our financial performance and results of operations.
Vehicle performance
Our portfolio of Bird-designed vehicles benefits from our vehicle engineering team’s unique experience as the innovators of the shared electric scooter industry. New vehicle models deliver significant improvements across key vectors, including durability, ease of maintenance and repair, and battery life. Our ability to generate revenue from our Deployed Vehicles (as defined below) is dependent on sustaining strong vehicle performance and limiting vehicle depreciation, which is directly related to a vehicle’s useful life. We anticipate future investments in R&D, including investments in new and existing form factors, to increase adoption of our products and services and yield further cost improvements.
Fleet expansion and vehicle supply
Our business is dependent on ensuring sufficient supply of our vehicles to satisfy demand from new markets, to meet increased demand in existing markets, or to replace churned vehicles. We are also reliant upon availability of spare parts to repair our vehicles. We rely on a limited number of international suppliers to produce and manufacture our vehicles and vehicle components. As such, material changes in trade policy, increases in materials and logistics costs, or global supply chain disruptions have impacted and could materially impact our results of operations. While we believe we have a robust supply chain, our financial results would be impacted if the supply or cost of vehicles or vehicle components were to change materially.
Seasonality
We experience different levels of seasonality in each market in which we operate. Each market has unique seasonality, events, and weather that can increase or decrease rider demand for our shared micromobility offerings. For example, seasonality can be correlated to changes in the number of local residents and visitors, which may in turn be impacted by weather. Certain holidays have the potential to impact ride demand on the holiday itself or during the preceding and subsequent weekends. Additionally, inclement weather, including rain, snow, extreme temperatures, and natural disasters, tends to reduce the demand for our offerings. In order to mitigate the impact of seasonality and ensure our vehicles are protected, vehicles are proactively placed in reserve when we expect rider demand to decrease. When weather conditions improve or other seasonal factors increase demand for our services, we act quickly to redeploy vehicles and capture the upside. The seasonality of our businesses can also create cash flow management risks if we do not adequately anticipate and plan for periods of decreased activity, which can impact our financial performance, and results of operations.
Ability to compete effectively
The shared micromobility industry is highly competitive; thus, our ability to improve our results of operations and achieve our profitability goals are dependent upon our ability to compete effectively. We face competition from companies who may have greater brand recognition or more financial and marketing resources than we do, as well as potential future entrants. In certain markets, increased competition may impede our ability to receive operating permits, prevent us from operating at our desired capacity, or result in pricing pressure. In the future, we believe that industry consolidation could reduce the number of operators but result in larger competitors in certain markets. Despite these competitive dynamics, we believe that our superior vehicles (designed specifically for shared micromobility), operating model, and advanced technology and data platform differentiate our offerings from those of our competitors in a meaningful way.
Acquisitions and strategic partnerships
As part of our business strategy, we have made and intend to continue to make strategic acquisitions to expand our global footprint, add complementary technologies or services, or grow our customer base. Our acquisitions may significantly impact our future financial and operational performance and affect comparability of our financial statements from period to
period. Additionally, we have and will continue to enter into strategic partnerships with complementary brands and companies to increase brand awareness and drive rider engagement.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Sharing Revenue
Our revenue is primarily generated from our Sharing business. Customers generally pay for their ride from their preloaded wallet balance on a per-ride basis, and revenue is typically recognized at the completion of the ride.
Product Sales Revenue
We also generate revenue from Product Sales, primarily consisting of sales of our vehicles to retail customers. Our retail customers include our distributors, retailers, and direct customers.
Cost of Sharing Revenue, Exclusive of Depreciation
Cost of Sharing revenue, exclusive of depreciation, primarily consists of variable costs. These costs have changed as our business model has migrated from reliance on the In-House operating model to the Fleet Manager program established in early 2020. Within both business models, costs of revenue include payment processing fees, network infrastructure, vehicle count adjustments, and city permit fees.
Payment processing fees include merchant fees and chargebacks. Network infrastructure includes the costs to host our mobile application, as well as our mobile data fees. Vehicle count adjustments include costs recognized from vehicle adjustments during quarterly hard counts at our regional distribution centers and in-market resource centers based on reporting from Fleet Managers.
Through early 2020, all of our Sharing business was supported by our In-House operating model. Costs related to In-House operations primarily include payments to contingent workers, service center overhead, and independent contractors for vehicle maintenance, including consumption of spare parts, and certain ancillary tasks, and service center and distribution network expenses. The service center and distribution network expenses are associated with charging, repairing, hibernating, and maintaining the vehicles.
In 2020, we launched our Fleet Manager program. The Fleet Manager operating model leverages support from local service providers to provide logistics for, and maintain fleets of, Bird-owned vehicles. Costs included within the Fleet Manager operating model primarily consist of the revenue share payments made to Fleet Managers.
Cost of Product Sales Revenue
Cost of Product Sales revenue primarily consists of the amount paid for the vehicles, freight to the customer, customs and duties, certain insurance costs, refurbishments, and any adjustments to inventory on hand.
Depreciation on Sharing Vehicles
We capitalize expenses incurred to bring a vehicle to a condition where it can be initially deployed within our Sharing business. The costs include the amount paid for the vehicles, freight from the manufacturer, customs and duties, and specific tariff costs imposed by the United States on China. All models after our first model, Bird Zero, have been shipped as finished goods.
We depreciate released vehicles using a usage-based depreciation methodology based on the number of rides taken by customers.
Gross Margin
Gross margin represents our revenue less cost of revenue and any depreciation recognized on Sharing vehicles.
General and Administrative
General and administrative costs represent costs incurred by us for executive and management overhead and administrative and back-office support functions. These costs primarily consist of salaries, benefits, travel, bonuses, and stock-based compensation expense (“personnel expenses”), software licenses and hardware, network and cloud, and IT services (“technology services”), professional service providers, off-site storage and logistics, certain insurance coverage, and an allocation of office rent and utilities (“facilities expenses”) related to our general and administrative divisions. General and
administrative costs are generally expensed as incurred. We incurred additional general and administrative expense during 2021, the year in which we consummated the Business Combination, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with the issuance of public company RSUs recognized under the accelerated attribution method for certain service-based and market-based awards.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing costs represent costs incurred by us to source new Fleet Managers and customers. These costs primarily consist of personnel expenses, advertising expenses, brand and creative services, promotional vehicles, and an allocation of certain technology services and facilities expenses related to our selling and marketing divisions. Selling and marketing costs are generally expensed as incurred. We incurred additional selling and marketing expense during 2021, the year in which we consummated the Business Combination, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with the issuance of public company RSUs recognized under the accelerated attribution method for certain service-based and market-based awards.
Research and Development
Research and development costs represent costs incurred by us to develop, design, and enhance our hardware and software products, services, technologies, and processes. These costs primarily consist of personnel expenses, professional service providers, mechanical engineering, and an allocation of certain technology services and facilities expenses related to our research and development divisions. Research and development costs are generally expensed as incurred. We incurred additional research and development expense during 2021, the year in which we consummated the Business Combination, as a result of the stock-based compensation expense associated with the issuance of public company RSUs recognized under the accelerated attribution method for certain service-based and market-based awards.
Tariff Reimbursement
The U.S. government imposed Section 301 tariffs on certain goods imported from China into the United States, including our vehicles. Amounts were refunded in 2020 and recorded as tariff reimbursements. The refund had a material non-recurring impact in the first half of 2020. There were no similar refunds in 2021.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on our money market accounts.
Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred and paid and amortization of deferred costs on our debt, and costs associated with extinguishment of debt.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of foreign currency exchange gains and losses, costs associated with the issuance of derivative instruments, and mark-to-market adjustments of derivative liabilities.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes primarily consists of income taxes in foreign jurisdictions and U.S. state income taxes. As we expand the scale of our international business activities, any changes in the U.S. and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
We have a valuation allowance for our U.S. deferred tax assets, including federal and state NOLs, as well as the majority of our foreign deferred tax assets. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparisons of financial results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
** Percentage not meaningful
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
** Percentage not meaningful
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
Sharing Revenue
Sharing revenue increased by $107.4 million in 2021, or 134.3%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to an increase in the number of Rides (as defined below).
Product Sales Revenue
Product Sales revenue increased by $3.2 million in 2021, or 21.5%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to the sale of new product offerings, such as the launch of our retail e-bikes in the second half of 2021.
Cost of Sharing Revenue, Exclusive of Depreciation
Cost of Sharing revenue, exclusive of depreciation, increased by $29.4 million in 2021, or 41.1%, as compared to the previous year, primarily due to an increase of $43.0 million in Fleet Manager operation costs offset by a decrease of $16.1 million in In-House operation costs as we shifted operating models in the first half of 2020. Other increases include $5.7 million in transaction processing fees and $2.0 million in network and cloud services driven by increases in Rides (as defined below) and Sharing revenue, which was partially offset by decreases of $4.9 million in vehicle production costs and vehicle count adjustments and $1.4 million in personnel expenses.
Cost of Product Sales Revenue
Cost of Product Sales revenue decreased by $5.4 million in 2021, or 23.7%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to a $5.7 million decrease in vehicle production costs.
Depreciation on Sharing Vehicles
Depreciation on Sharing vehicles increased by $23.5 million in 2021, or 99.0%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to increased Ride volumes that drove $25.8 million in increased revenue, partially offset by a decrease in vehicle mix and other of $2.3 million. The increase related to volume was primarily attributable to higher vehicle deployments and an increase in RpD (as defined below). The decrease related to vehicle mix and other was driven by improvements in vehicle expected lifetime Rides (as defined below), as we continue to shift our vehicle mix into more modern generations of Bird-designed vehicles.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $57.1 million in 2021, or 37.3%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to an increase of $64.9 million in personnel expenses, partially offset by decreases of $6.2 million in facilities expenses and $1.2 million in business insurance expenses. Personnel expenses consist of an increase of $74.4 million in stock-based compensation expense due to the issuance of public company RSUs recognized under the accelerated attribution method for certain service-based and market-based awards, offset by a decrease of $9.5 million of other personnel expenses due to a decrease in headcount.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses decreased by $0.5 million in 2021, or 2.7%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to decreases of $0.5 million in technology services expenses, $0.5 million in depreciation and amortization expenses, and $0.4 million in personnel expenses. Personnel expenses consist of a decrease of $2.2 million of other personnel expenses due to a decrease in headcount, offset by an increase of $1.8 million in stock-based compensation expense due to the issuance of public company RSUs recognized under the accelerated attribution method for certain service-based and market-based awards.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $2.9 million in 2021, or 8.6%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to decreases of $1.0 million in mechanical engineering expenses, $1.0 million in personnel expenses, and $0.6 million in facilities expenses. Personnel expenses consist of a decrease of $5.3 million of other personnel expenses due to a decrease in headcount, offset by an increase of $4.3 million in stock-based compensation expense due to the issuance of public company RSUs recognized under the accelerated attribution method for certain service-based and market-based awards.
Tariff Reimbursement
Tariff reimbursement expenses decreased by $25.0 million in 2021, or 100.0%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to a nonrecurring refund recognized in 2020 for tariffs paid on vehicles purchased and imported into the United States prior to 2020.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $0.5 million in 2021, or 7.5%, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to a reduction in the outstanding debt balance.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased by $27.2 million in 2021, as compared to the previous year, primarily attributable to $51.0 million of income resulting from mark-to-market adjustments of liability-classified equity instruments, including derivative liabilities assumed in connection with the senior preferred stock financing (through which we raised net proceeds of $207.8 million) and the Business Combination and the PIPE Financing (through which we raised net proceeds of $217.1 million), partially offset by $13.2 million of transaction costs allocated to derivative liabilities assumed in connection with the Business Combination and $7.5 million in net currency exchange losses.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included in our final prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) (No. 333-256187) on October 7, 2021 under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Bird.”
Key Operating Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We review the following key operating metrics and non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Operating Metrics
Rides: Rides is a key indicator of the usage and scale of our Sharing business. We calculate Rides as the total number of trips completed by customers of our Sharing business. Rides have increased significantly as we have scaled our operations and witnessed the rapid adoption of shared micromobility by both riders and cities. Rides are seasonal to a certain degree. We typically experience higher levels of activity in the second and third quarters as a result of improved weather conditions in the Northern Hemisphere and lower levels of activity in the first and fourth quarters as conditions worsen.
Rides per Deployed Vehicle per Day (“RpD”): RpD represents the rate at which our shared vehicles are utilized by riders. We calculate RpD as the total number of Rides divided by total Deployed Vehicles (as defined below) in our Sharing business each calendar day.
Deployed Vehicles: Deployed Vehicles represent the number of vehicles available to riders through our Sharing business. We calculate Deployed Vehicles on a pro-rata basis over a 24-hour period, wherein two vehicles deployed for a combined period of 24 hours equate to one Deployed Vehicle. Deployed Vehicles constitute a portion of our total fleet, and we strategically deploy vehicles depending on a variety of factors, including weather, historical demand, time of day, and day of the week. If a vehicle is charging, under repair, or temporarily missing, it is not considered deployed. During the winter months, we proactively place portions of our fleet in reserve to align with seasonal demand and preserve our asset base. Therefore, Deployed Vehicle volumes tend to fluctuate seasonally.
Gross Transaction Value (“GTV”): GTV reflects the total dollar value, excluding any applicable taxes, of Rides in our Sharing business and vehicle sales to retail customers in our Product Sales business, in each case without any adjustment for retail discounts or refunds. In order to calculate GTV, we add back contra revenues from both our Sharing and Product Sales businesses and adjustments to the Bird Platform revenue we recognize. GTV is a key indicator of the scale of our business and ultimately drives revenue.
The following table presents a breakdown of our calculation of GTV:
(1) Represents the difference between the full amount charged to Bird Platform partner riders (excluding applicable taxes) and the revenue recognized by Bird.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Ride Profit: Ride Profit reflects the profit generated from Rides in our Sharing business after accounting for direct Ride expenses, which primarily consist of payments to Fleet Managers. Other Ride costs include payment processing fees, network infrastructure, and city permit fees. We calculate Ride Profit (i) before vehicle depreciation to illustrate the cash return and (ii) after vehicle depreciation to illustrate the impact of the evolution of our vehicles. We calculate Ride Profit Margin as Ride Profit divided by the revenue we generate from our Sharing business. We believe that Ride Profit is a useful indicator of the economics of our Sharing business as it excludes indirect, unallocated expenses such as research and development, selling and marketing, and general and administrative expenses.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Ride Profit (before Vehicle Depreciation) and Ride Profit (after Vehicle Depreciation) to gross margin, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the periods indicated:
(1) We exclude vehicle depreciation as these costs are non-cash in nature. Vehicle depreciation excludes tariff depreciation and other adjustments, which were $(2.5) million and $(2.0) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) We exclude vehicle count adjustments as these adjustments are made based on results of physical inventory counts, which are non-cash in nature.
(3) We exclude the revenue and cost of revenue associated with vehicle sales to retail customers and Bird Platform partners.
Adjusted EBITDA: Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of operating performance used to inform management decisions for the business. It may also be useful to investors in evaluating our performance on a relative basis to other comparable businesses as it excludes impact from items that are non-cash in nature, non-recurring, or not related to our core business operations. We experience seasonality in Adjusted EBITDA typically tied to periods of increased demand in the summer months in the Northern Hemisphere. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net profit or loss, adjusted to exclude (i) interest expense (income), net, (ii) provision for (benefit from) income taxes, (iii) depreciation and amortization, (iv) vehicle count adjustments, (v) stock-based compensation expense, (vi) tariff refunds, (vii) other income (expense), net, (viii) legal settlements and reserves, and (ix) other non-recurring, non-cash, or non-core items.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the periods indicated:
(1) Depreciation and amortization excludes tariff depreciation and other adjustments, which were $(3.3) million and $(2.9) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) Consists of a refund for import duties that were charged to import our products from China into the United States. We exclude this as it is non-recurring in nature and not indicative of our core operating performance.
(3) Consists of $1.4 million of non-recurring costs incurred in connection with the Business Combination, including a one-time IPO-related bonus to Fleet Managers, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity have historically consisted of cash generated from our operations and from financing activities, in particular proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and debt. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $128.6 million. Cash equivalents consist primarily of money market securities and all cash and money market investments are deposited with institutions management believes are of high credit quality.
In April 2021, our wholly owned consolidated special purpose vehicle entity (the “SPV”) entered into a credit agreement (the “Apollo Credit Agreement”) with Apollo Investment Corporation, as a lender, and MidCap Financial Trust, as a lender and administrative agent, allowing the SPV to borrow up to $40.0 million (the “Vehicle Financing Facility”). The Vehicle Financing Facility includes a repayment mechanism tied directly to revenue generation by vehicles on lease by the SPV to Bird Rides under an intercompany lease agreement (the “Scooter Lease”). We intend to use the Vehicle Financing Facility to finance the majority of our future vehicle capital expenditures.
In October 2021, the SPV entered into Amendment No. 2 to the Apollo Credit Agreement which, among other things, increased the commitments provided by the lenders from $40.0 million to $150.0 million, with any extension of credit above $40.0 million subject to the consummation of the Business Combination. In November 2021, the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement were consummated, resulting in proceeds of $217.1 million, net of transaction costs, and access to extensions of credit up to $150.0 million under the Vehicle Financing Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had $101.2 million of availability under the Vehicle Financing Facility.
We believe that our sources of funding and available borrowing capacity under the Vehicle Financing Facility will be sufficient to satisfy our currently anticipated cash requirements, including working capital requirements, capital expenditures, debt service, and other liquidity requirements, through at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, which we anticipate will continue for the foreseeable future. Our ability to fund working capital, make capital expenditures, and service our debt will depend on our ability to generate cash from operating activities, which is subject to our future operating success, and obtain financing on reasonable terms, which is subject to factors beyond our control, including general economic, political, and financial market conditions. The capital markets have in the past, and may in the future, experience periods of upheaval that could impact the availability and cost of equity and debt financing.
Until we can generate sufficient revenue to fund working capital, make capital expenditures, and service our debt, we expect to primarily fund cash needs through a combination of equity and debt financing. Furthermore, in the future, we may
enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies, and we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing to consummate such transactions. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
We intend to continue to evaluate and may, in certain circumstances, take preemptive action to preserve liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic. As the circumstances around the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain, we continue to actively monitor the pandemic’s impact on us worldwide, including our financial position, liquidity, results of operations, and cash flows.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $131.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $196.3 million of net loss, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily consisted of $86.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, $51.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $7.2 million of non-cash vehicle expenses, $2.8 million of bad debt expense, $2.3 million of loss on extinguishment of debt, and $1.7 million of debt discount accretion, offset by $37.8 million of expensed transaction costs and mark-to-market adjustments of derivative liabilities and $50.3 million of changes in working capital. The cash used in working capital was primarily driven by increases in accounts receivable, inventory, and prepaid expenses and other current assets and decreases in accounts payable and other liabilities, offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $150.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $208.2 million of net loss, adjusted for certain non-cash items, which primarily consisted of $32.5 million of depreciation and amortization, $12.0 million of non-cash vehicle expenses, $6.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, $3.4 million of loss on disposal of property and equipment, $2.6 million of debt discount accretion, and $1.2 million of changes in working capital. The cash provided by working capital was primarily driven by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets and increases in accrued expenses and other current liabilities and deferred revenue, offset by decreases in accounts payable and other liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $215.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $214.9 million of cash used in the purchases of vehicles.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $56.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $68.7 million of cash acquired in business combinations, partially offset by $11.9 million of cash used in the purchases of vehicles.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $443.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of $249.6 million of proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, $207.8 million of proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible senior preferred stock and derivatives, net of issuance costs, and $52.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of debt, net of issuance costs, partially offset by $40.6 million of payments for settlement of debt and $25.9 million for the transactions costs incurred in connection with the Business Combination and PIPE Financing.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of $51.7 million of proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs, partially offset by $18.8 million of payments for settlement of debt and $2.0 million of payments for settlement of warrants.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)As of December 31, 2021, our software and hosting purchase commitments primarily pertained to the purchase of network and cloud services. The purchase commitments end on various dates that extend into 2025. These purchase commitments are not recorded as liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 as we had not yet incurred the related services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have based our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from our estimates.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. For additional information, see the disclosure included in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Bird’s Sharing business provides seamless, on-demand access to Bird vehicles, enabling riders to locate, unlock, and pay for rides through the Bird App. The Company’s revenue is principally derived from service fees paid by end-users for access to Bird vehicles in connection with its Sharing solutions. The rentals of vehicles by end-users are considered to be leases pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 840, Leases, in which we are the lessor. We treat any credit, coupon, or rider incentive as a reduction to the revenue for the ride in the period to which it relates. Sales taxes, including value added taxes, are excluded from reported revenue.
We also have revenues pursuant to ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, related to retail sales of vehicles direct to end-users, retailers, and distributors. We consider our only performance obligation in these transactions to be to provide the customer with the ordered vehicle.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, allocation of the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, we may record adjustments to the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. After the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is not subject to amortization but is tested for impairment, at a reporting unit level, on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the goodwill may not be recoverable. As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, we first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. If, as a result of our qualitative assessment, it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, the quantitative impairment test will be required.
For the qualitative analysis, we consider financial performance, industry and market conditions, macroeconomic conditions, reporting unit-specific events, and the timing of the last performance of a quantitative assessment. For quantitative assessments, we estimate the fair value of the selected reporting units primarily through the use of a discounted cash flow model based on our best estimate of amounts and timing of future revenues and cash flows and our most recent business and strategic plans, economic projections, and marketplace data, and compare the estimated fair value to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. The discounted cash flow model requires estimates, assumptions and judgments about projected revenue growth, future operating margins, discount rates, and terminal values over a multi-year period. We have elected to make the first business day of the first month in our fiscal fourth quarter the annual impairment assessment date for goodwill. Changes in economic and operating conditions impacting these estimates, assumptions and judgments could result in goodwill impairment in future periods.
The Company conducted its annual goodwill impairment test during the fourth quarter of 2021 and determined that the fair value of the reporting units exceeded its carrying value. No impairment charge was recorded in any of the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized primarily from RSUs and stock options granted under the Bird Global, Inc. Amended and Restated 2017 Stock Plan (the “2017 Plan”) and the Bird Global, Inc. 2021 Incentive Award Plan (the “2021 Plan”). Stock-based compensation expense is measured based on the grant-date fair value of the stock-based awards and is recognized over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. For awards with only service-based vesting conditions, we recognize compensation cost using the straight-line method. For awards with service-based vesting conditions as well as performance-based or market-based vesting conditions, we recognize compensation cost using the accelerated attribution method. The Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur.
Common Stock
Prior to November 2021, our management and board of directors considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of the underlying common stock as of each grant date. The factors considered by our management and board of directors included the following:
•contemporaneous valuations performed at periodic intervals;
•rights, preferences, and privileges of our preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•our actual and expected operating and financial performance;
•pricing and timing of transactions in our equity;
•likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering;
•market multiples of comparable companies in our industry;
•stage of development;
•industry information, such as market size and growth;
•illiquidity of stock-based awards involving securities in a private company; and
•macroeconomic conditions.
Our board of director’s assessments of the fair value of our common stock for grant dates between the dates of the valuations were based in part on the currently available financial and operational information and our common stock value in the most recent valuation analysis as compared to the timing of each grant. For financial reporting purposes, we considered the amount of time between the valuation date and the grant date to determine whether to use the latest common stock valuation. This determination included an evaluation of whether the subsequent valuation indicated that any significant change in valuation had occurred between the previous valuation and the grant date.
We have used the Probability Weighted Expected Return Method (“PWERM”) to determine the fair value of our common stock. Under PWERM, several valuation approaches were used and then combined into a single probability weighted valuation. The approaches included the use of initial public offering scenarios and a scenario assuming continued operation as a private entity.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those estimates and assumptions could impact our valuations as of each valuation date and could have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
For valuations after the consummation of the Business Combination, our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying Class A Common Stock based on the closing price of our Class A Common Stock as reported on the date of grant.
Stock Options
We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to estimate the grant-date fair value of stock option grants. The Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model requires management to make a number of key assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends. Prior to November 2021, our common stock was not publicly traded and, after November 2021, our common stock does not have sufficient trading history. As a result, expected volatility is estimated based on the average historical volatility of similar entities with publicly traded shares over the relevant vesting or estimated liquidity period. The expected term represents the period of time that the options are expected to be outstanding and is estimated using the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the option. The risk-free interest rate is estimated using the rate of return on U.S. treasury notes with a life that approximates the expected term.
RSUs
Prior to the consummation of the Business Combination in November 2021, we generally granted RSUs that vest upon the satisfaction of both a service-based vesting condition and a liquidity event-related performance vesting condition. The fair value of the RSUs is recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period, using the accelerated attribution method, once the achievement of the liquidity event-related performance vesting condition becomes probable. The service-based vesting condition is generally satisfied by the award holder providing services to us over a four-year period. The liquidity event-related performance vesting condition was deemed probable in November 2021. Since November 2021, with the exception of the Management Award RSUs discussed below, we have generally granted RSUs that vest upon only the satisfaction of a service-based vesting condition and the compensation expense for these RSUs is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
Management Award RSUs
In November 2021, our board of directors granted RSU awards to certain employees (the “Management Award RSUs”), which vest upon the satisfaction of a service-based vesting condition and the achievement of certain stock price goals. We estimated the grant-date fair value of the Management Award RSUs using a model based on multiple stock price paths developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation that incorporates into the valuation the possibility that the stock price goals may not be satisfied. The Monte Carlo simulation considers several variables and assumptions in estimating the grant-date fair value, including the per-share fair value of the underlying common stock, expected term, risk-free interest rate, expected stock price volatility over the expected term, and expected annual dividend yield. We will recognize stock-based compensation expense over the derived service period of each of the three stock price goals. If the stock price goals are met sooner than the derived service period, we will adjust our stock-based compensation expense to reflect the cumulative expense associated with the vested award. Subject to continued service by these employees, we will recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period, regardless of whether the stock price goals are achieved.
Vehicles, net
Vehicles consist of vehicles that are used within the Company’s Sharing business. The capitalized cost of vehicles includes freight from manufacturers and any customs or duties incurred. The vehicles balance is comprised of those vehicles that are in transit from the contract manufacturer to Bird, held by Bird but not yet deployed in market, and those that are deployed in market and available for use in our Sharing business. We recognize depreciation related to the vehicles used in our Sharing business using a usage-based depreciation methodology based on the number of rides taken by customers. The estimated total number of lifetime rides of our vehicles are based on many factors, including historical ride information and any anticipated changes to future vehicle utilization. Spare parts are expensed as a cost of revenue when used by the Company for vehicle maintenance and repairs.
The Company updates its estimated useful life assumption based on changes in activity of the vehicles and accelerates depreciation on vehicles that have been determined to be no longer active.
Derivative Liabilities
Earnout Shares
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company designated 30,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock (“Earnout Shares”) to be issued to all Eligible Equity Holders (as defined below), subject to occurrence during the Earnout Period (as defined below) of the Earnout Triggering Events (as defined below). An “Eligible Equity Holder” means a holder of a share of common stock, including a share of restricted stock, a stock option or an RSU of Bird Rides, in each case, immediately prior to the consummation of the Business Combination. The “Earnout Period” means the five-year period ending on November 4, 2026. The “Earnout Triggering Events” are tied to the daily volume-weighted average sale price of one share of Class A Common Stock quoted on the NYSE for any ten trading days within any 20 consecutive trading day period within the Earnout Period.
Of the 30,000,000 Earnout Shares, 27,925,828 shares are designated for the holders of common stock of Bird Rides immediately prior to the consummation of the Business Combination and are not subject to a continued service requirement. This portion of the Earnout Shares is classified as a liability due to failure to meet the equity classification criteria under ASC 815-40. The Company calculates the fair value of the liability-classified Earnout Shares based on multiple stock price paths on a monthly basis over the Earnout Period, developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation model. A Monte Carlo simulation model requires the use of various assumptions, including the underlying stock price, volatility, and the risk-free interest rate as of the valuation date.
Switchback Founder Earn Back Shares
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, NGP Switchback II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”), and certain officers and directors of Switchback entered into an amendment to the letter agreement, dated January 7, 2021 (the “Letter Agreement Amendment”), pursuant to which, among other things, the parties agreed, effective upon the consummation of the Business Combination, to subject to potential forfeiture (on a pro rata basis) an aggregate of 1,976,563 shares of Class A Common Stock held by them (“Switchback Founder Earn Back Shares”), which will cease to be subject to potential forfeiture based upon events tied to the average reported last sale price of one share of our Class A Common Stock quoted on the NYSE for any ten trading days within any 20 consecutive trading day period within the Earnout Period.
The Switchback Founder Earn Back Shares are classified as a liability due to failure to meet the equity classification criteria under ASC 815-40. The Company calculates the fair value of the liability-classified Switchback Earn Back Shares based on multiple stock price paths on a monthly basis over the Earnout Period, developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation model. A Monte Carlo simulation model requires the use of various assumptions, including the underlying stock price, volatility, and the risk-free interest rate as of the valuation date.
Private Placement Warrants and C-1 Warrants
Immediately after giving effect to the Business Combination, the Company assumed 6,550,000 private placement warrants from Switchback (the “Private Placement Warrants”). Each warrant entitles the registered holder to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock at the exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to certain redemption rights. In addition, there were 59,908 warrants outstanding to purchase shares of Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $13.36 per share (the “C-1 Warrants”).
The Private Placement Warrants and C-1 Warrants are classified as a liability due to failure to meet the equity classification criteria under ASC 815-40. The Company calculates the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and C-1 Warrants based on the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model considers several variables and assumptions in estimating the fair value of financial instruments, including the per-share fair value of the underlying common stock, exercise price, expected term, risk-free interest rate, expected stock price volatility over the expected term, and expected annual dividend yield. The Company calculated the expected term as the contractual expiration period. The risk-free interest rate is estimated using the rate of return on U.S. treasury notes with a life that approximates the expected term. The Company’s Class A Common Stock does not have sufficient trading history and, therefore, the Company used the historical volatility of the stock prices of similar publicly traded peer companies. The Company utilized a dividend yield of zero, as it had no history or plan of declaring dividends on its common stock.
Public Warrants
Immediately after giving effect to the Business Combination, the Company assumed 6,324,972 public warrants from Switchback (the “Public Warrants”). Each warrant entitles the registered holder to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock at the exercise price of $11.50 per share.
The Public Warrants are classified as a liability due to failure to meet the equity classification criteria under ASC 815-40. The Public Warrants liability was measured at fair value at the effective time of the Acquisition Merger, and will be remeasured at fair value through other income (expense) at each subsequent reporting period. The Company calculates the fair value of the Public Warrants based on the publicly traded price of the Public Warrants on the measurement date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012
Under the JOBS Act, an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different transition dates for public and private companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We meet the definition of an emerging growth company and have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company, or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements and the reported results of operations contained therein may not be directly comparable to those of other public companies.