ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with these financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on March 2, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
On December 15, 2021, we completed the IPO of 28,750,000 units, including 3,750,000 units from the full exercise of the overallotment option by the underwriters, at $10.00 per unit (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one Class A common stock and one redeemable warrant (the “Public Warrants”). Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, we consummated the private placement of 898,250 units (the “Private Placement Units”) to our sponsor, including 93,750 units from the full exercise of the overallotment option by the underwriters, at a price of $10.00 per units, generate an aggregate of $8,982,500 proceeds.
We will have only 15 months from the closing of the IPO (the “Combination Period”) to complete the initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete the initial business combination within the Combination Period (and the stockholders have not approved an amendment to our charter extending this time period), we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) above to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete the initial business combination within the Combination Period.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our initial public offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from March 2, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $65,892, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $66,791 and interest and dividend income of $899.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Management's Plan
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.5 million in its operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $1.2 million.
Prior to the IPO, our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from our sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $144,746. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Transaction costs associated with our IPO totaled $16,919,619, consisting of $2,875,000 of underwriting fees, $10,062,500 of deferred underwriting fees, $3,456,652 fair value of the Class A common stock issued to the underwriters and $525,467 of other offering costs.
The Sponsors agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the IPO. These loans are non-interest bearing, unsecured and due at the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the closing of the IPO. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had borrowed $144,746 under the promissory note.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of these financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of these financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 28,750,000 Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1, SEC Staff Accounting bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”, and SEC Staff Accounting bulletin Topic 5T - “Accounting for Expenses or Liabilities Paid by Principal Stockholder(s)”. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the IPO. Offering costs directly attributable to the issuance of an equity contract to be classified in equity are recorded as a reduction of equity. Offering costs for equity contracts that are classified as assets and liabilities are expensed immediately. We incurred offering costs amounting to $16,919,619 as a result of the IPO (consisting of $2,875,000 of underwriting fees, $10,062,500 of deferred underwriting fees, $3,456,652 fair value of the Class A common stock issued to the underwriters and $525,467 of other offering costs).
Net Loss Per Common Stock
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The 29,648,250 potential common stocks for outstanding warrants to purchase our shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the period from March 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met and its inclusion would be anti-dilutive. As a result, diluted net loss per common stock is the same as basic net loss per common stock for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We are currently evaluating the impact of the ASU on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement.