Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
Overview
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes for the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors”.
Our financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Results of Operations
The following results of operations, cash flows and changes in our financial position are for years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019.
The Company had no revenue for the years ended September 30, 2020 and 2019.
Operating expenses during the years ended September 30, 2020 were $1,041,610 and $1,100,880 for 2019. The decrease in expenses in year ended September 30, 2020 was due mostly to a reduction in consulting, professional and marketing costs offset by an increase in accrued rent expense of $377,170.
Other expense during the year ended September 30, 2020 was $1,703,954 compared to other expense of $616,496 for the same period in 2019. Other expense in 2020 primarily consisted of interest expense of $30,526 change in fair value of derivative liability of $1,380,545, financing costs of $120,530, amortization of debt discount of $132,793 and loss on debt settlement of $27,927. The change in fair value of derivative liability was the significant difference between 2020 and 2019.
The Company incurred a net loss of $2,745,564 in the year ending September 30, 2020, compared to a net loss of $1,717,376 for the same period in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2020, the Company had current assets of zero. The company has $1,762,299 in current liabilities, resulting in negative working capital of $1,762,299. As of September 30, 2020, the Company had an accumulative deficit of $21,206,197 of which $16,363,600 was a deemed dividend based on a down round of warrant conversion prices.
Cash used in operating activities was $140,549 for the year ended September 30, 2020 compared to $683,639 for the year ended September 30, 2019. The increase in the loss to $2,745,564 in 2020 from $1,717,376 in 2019 was offset by increased change in fair value of derivative liability of $1,380,545 plus increased accounts payable of $615,045 in 2020 was primary in reducing cash used by $543,090 from 2019 to 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities as of September 30, 2020 was $126,510 which was the repayment of advances from related parties of $35,500 plus cash from the sale of common stock of $40,000, proceeds from issuance of convertible notes of $89,000 and notes payable of $33,125 compared to cash provided of $668,554 in 2019 which was mainly due to proceeds from the sale of common stock for cash of $323,643 plus proceeds from convertible debt of $229,000, note payable of $100,000 and advances from related party of $15,911.
The Company’s financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to a going concern that contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company, as shown in the accompanying balance sheets, has an accumulated deficit of $21,206,197 and negative working capital (excess of current liabilities over current assets) of $1,762,299. The Company has not established any source of revenue to cover its operating costs. These factors raise substantial doubt about the company’s ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements. The Company will engage in very limited activities that must be satisfied in cash until a source of funding is secured. The Company will offer noncash consideration and seek equity lines as a means of financing its operations. If the Company is unable to obtain revenue producing contracts or financing or if the revenue or financing it does obtain is insufficient to cover any operating losses it may incur, it may substantially curtail or terminate its operations or seek other business opportunities through strategic alliances, acquisitions or other arrangements that may dilute the interests of existing stockholders. There can be no assurance however that the Company will be able to raise additional capital when needed, or at terms deemed acceptable, if at all. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company” as defined by Item 10 of Regulation S-K, the Company is not required to provide this information.
Accounting Policies
The Company’s financial statements are prepared using the accrual method of accounting in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
The Company has elected a fiscal year ending on September 30.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Foreign currency translation
The Company’s functional currency and reporting currency is in U.S. dollars. The financial statements of the Company are translated to U.S. dollars in accordance with ASC-830-Foreign Currency Matters”. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date. Gains and losses arising on translation or settlement of foreign currency denominated transactions or balances are included in the determination of income. The Company has not, to the date of these financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the reporting period. The Company’s significant estimates include the fair value of common stock issued for services, fair value of derivative liability, deemed dividend down round, the valuation of right to use asset and lease liability and valuation allowance for deferred tax assets.. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
The Company accounts for income taxes under the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board) Accounting Standards Codification 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. It prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attributes for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. As a result, the Company has applied a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold for all tax uncertainties. The guidance only allows the recognition of those tax benefits that have a greater than 50% likelihood of being sustained upon examination by the various taxing authorities.
The Company classifies penalties and interest related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense in the Statements of Operations.
Basic and diluted net loss per share
Basic loss per share is calculated as net loss to common stockholders divided by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted loss per share for the period equals basic loss per share as the effect of any stock based compensation awards or stock warrants would be antidilutive. As of September 30, 2020 the potential shares at conversion outstanding was 69,518,520 consisting of conversion of debt to common stock from derivative calculation of approximately 67,916,234 and conversion warrants to common stock of 1,602,286 compared to a total of 25,155,126 for the year ended September 30, 2019.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation to employees and consultants in accordance with FASB ASC 718. Stock-based compensation to employees is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite employee service period. The Company accounts for stock-based compensation to other than employees in accordance with FASB ASC 505-50. Equity instruments issued to other than employees are valued at the earlier of a commitment date or upon completion of the services, based on the fair value of the equity instruments and is recognized as expense over the service period. The Company estimates the fair value of stock-based payments using the Black Scholes option-pricing model for common stock options and warrants and the closing price of the Company’s common stock for common share issuances.
Gain (Loss) on Modification/Extinguishment of Debt
In accordance with ASC 470, a modification or an exchange of debt instruments that adds or eliminates a conversion option that was substantive at the date of the modification or exchange is considered a substantive change and is measured and accounted for as extinguishment of the original instrument along with the recognition of a gain or loss. Additionally, under ASC 470, a substantive modification of a debt instrument is deemed to have been accomplished with debt instruments that are substantially different if the present value of the cash flows under the terms of the new debt instrument is at least 10 percent different from the present value of the remaining cash flows under the terms of the original instrument. A substantive modification is accounted for as an extinguishment of the original instrument along with the recognition of a gain or loss.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2016-02 Leases which requires an entity to recognize assets and liabilities arising from a lease for both financing and operating leases with terms greater than 12 months. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-10 Leases, Codification Improvements and ASU 2018-11 Leases, Targeted Improvements, to provide additional guidance for the adoption of ASU 2016-02. ASU 2018-10 clarifies certain provisions and corrects unintended applications of the guidance such as the application of implicit rate, lessee reassessment of lease classification, and certain transition adjustments that should be recognized to earnings rather than to stockholders’ (deficit) equity. ASU 2018-11 provides an alternative transition method and practical expedient for separating contract components for the adoption of ASU 2016-02. ASU 2016-02, ASU 2018-10, ASU 2018-11, (collectively, “Topic 842”) are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, with early adoption permitted. In December 2019, the Company adopted Topic 842 and made the following elections:
·
The Company did not elect the hindsight practical expedient, for all leases.
·
The Company elected the package of practical expedients to not reassess prior conclusions related to contracts containing leases, lease classification and initial direct costs for all leases.
·
In March 2018, the FASB approved an optional transition method that allows companies to use the effective date as the date of initial application on transition. The Company elected this transition method, and as a result, will not adjust its comparative period financial information or make the newly required lease disclosures for periods before the effective date.
·
The Company elected to not separate lease and non-lease components, for all leases.
On October 1, 2019, the Company recorded a Right of Use Asset of $4,104,985, a corresponding Lease Liability of $4,330,735 in accordance with Topic 842.
The FASB recently issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470- 20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, to reduce complexity in applying GAAP to certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. The guidance in ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock by removing the existing guidance in ASC 470-20, Debt: Debt with Conversion and Other Options, that requires entities to account for beneficial conversion features and cash conversion features in equity, separately from the host convertible debt or preferred stock. The guidance in ASC 470-20 applies to convertible instruments for which the embedded conversion features are not required to be bifurcated from the host contract and accounted for as derivatives. These amendments are expected to result in more freestanding financial instruments qualifying for equity classification (and, therefore, not accounted for as derivatives), as well as fewer embedded features requiring separate accounting from the host contract. The amendments in ASU 2020-06 further revise the guidance in ASC 260, Earnings Per Share, to require entities to calculate diluted earnings per share (EPS) for convertible instruments by using the if-converted method. In addition, entities must presume share settlement for purposes of calculating diluted EPS when an instrument may be settled in cash or shares. The amendments in ASU 2020-06 are effective for public entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 with early adoption permitted (for “emerging growth company” beginning after December 15, 2023). The Company will be evaluating the impact this standard will have on the Company’s financial statements.
Derivative Instruments
Derivative financial instruments are recorded in the accompanying balance sheets at fair value in accordance with ASC 815. When the Company enters into a financial instrument such as a debt or equity agreement (the “host contract”), the Company assesses whether the economic characteristics of any embedded features are clearly and closely related to the primary economic characteristics of the remainder of the host contract. When it is determined that (i) an embedded feature possesses economic characteristics that are not clearly and closely related to the primary economic characteristics of the host contract, and (ii) a separate, stand-alone instrument with the same terms would meet the definition of a financial derivative instrument, then the embedded feature is bifurcated from the host contract and accounted for as a derivative instrument. The estimated fair value of the derivative feature is recorded in the accompanying balance sheets separately from the carrying value of the host contract. Subsequent changes in the estimated fair value of derivatives are recorded as a gain or loss in the Company’s statements of operations.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, accounts payable and accrued expenses and shareholder loans. The carrying amount of these financial instruments approximates fair value due either to length of maturity or interest rates that approximate prevailing market rates unless otherwise disclosed in these financial statements.
Financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value in our condensed consolidated balance sheets are categorized based upon a fair value hierarchy established by GAAP, which prioritizes the inputs used to measure fair value into the following levels:
Level 1- Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities at the measurement date.
Level 2- quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable and can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3- Inputs reflecting management’s best estimates and assumptions of what market participants would use in pricing assets or liabilities at the measurement date. The inputs are unobservable in the market and significant to the valuation of the instruments.
A financial instrument’s categorization within the valuation hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Deemed Dividend
The Company issues instruments which contain a provision for the change in conversion price should a new instrument issued hold a conversion price lower than the conversion price of the instrument issued earlier. The provision lowers the conversion price to the new instrument triggering the down round feature and creates a deemed dividend. The deemed dividend is added to the net income or loss for the period and used in calculating the earnings per share for the period.