ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the “Business” section, as well as the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should read this discussion and analysis together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report for the Company and Predecessor Company Group. In this “Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” references to the “Predecessor Company Group,” or the “Predecessor,” refers to the Predecessor Companies and the Predecessor Management Companies and their respective subsidiaries on a combined basis. Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “Broadmark Realty,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Broadmark Realty Capital Inc., a Maryland corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Broadmark Realty is an internally managed commercial real estate finance company that has elected to be taxed as a real estate investment trust for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Based in Seattle, Washington, we specialize in underwriting, funding, servicing and managing a portfolio of short-term, first deed of trust loans to fund the construction and development of, or investment in, residential or commercial properties. We generally operate in states that we believe to have favorable demographic trends and that provide more efficient and quicker access to collateral in the event of borrower default. Beginning in early 2021, we have increased the number of states in which we operate in order to expand our potential lending markets. As of December 31, 2021, our portfolio of 215 active loans had approximately $1.5 billion of total commitments and $924.7 million of principal outstanding across 164 borrowers in 19 states and the District of Columbia. We refer to loans that have outstanding commitments or principal balances that have not been repaid or retired, including by foreclosure, as “active loans.” Total commitments refer to the aggregate sum of outstanding principal balances, construction holdbacks and committed amounts for future draws and interest reserves on our loans. Historically, our loan portfolio was 100% equity funded, and we had no outstanding debt. On November 12, 2021, we closed the private placement of $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.0% senior unsecured notes due 2026. We plan to opportunistically issue debt and raise capital in the public and private markets from time to time based on market conditions to fund the growth of our portfolio and produce attractive returns for our stockholders. On February 19, 2021, we closed on a $135.0 million revolving credit facility, which has enabled us to use a larger percentage of our cash balances for lending activities.
Properties securing our loans are generally classified as residential properties, commercial properties or undeveloped land, and are typically not income producing. Each loan is secured by a first deed of trust lien on real estate. Our lending policy limits the committed amount of each loan to a maximum loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio of up to 65% of the “as-complete” appraised value of the underlying collateral as determined by an independent appraiser at the time of the loan origination. Our lending policy also limits the initial outstanding principal balance of each loan to a maximum LTV of up to 65% of the “as-is” appraised value of the underlying collateral as determined by an independent appraiser at the time of the loan origination. At the time of origination, the difference between the initial outstanding principal and the total commitment is the amount held back for future release, subject to property inspections, progress reports and other conditions in accordance with the loan documents. Unless otherwise indicated, LTV is measured by the total commitment amount of the loan at origination divided by the “as-complete” appraisal. LTVs do not reflect interim activity such as construction draws or interest payments capitalized to loans, or partial repayments of the loan. As of December 31, 2021, the weighted average LTV was 59.1% across our active loan portfolio based on the total commitment of the loan and “as-complete” appraisals. For our loans in contractual default status as of December 31, 2021, the weighted average LTV was approximately 85.4%, when measured by the sum of the principal outstanding, the estimated costs to complete and the accounts receivable for which collectability is reasonably assured, net of the provision for credit losses, divided by the most recent “as-complete” appraisal. In addition, our loans are typically personally guaranteed on a recourse basis by the principals of the borrower and/or others at our discretion to provide further credit support for the loan. The personal guarantee may be collaterally secured by a pledge of the guarantor’s interest in the borrower or other real estate or assets owned by the guarantor. As of December 31, 2021, a total of 31 loans were in contractual default, totaling $191.4 million in total commitment or 12.9% of the portfolio based on total commitment.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
As of December 31, 2021, the weighted average total commitment of our active loans was $6.9 million with a weighted average interest rate of 10.7%. The weighted average term of our active loans was 13 months at origination, which we often elect to extend for several months based on our evaluation of the expected timeline for completion of construction. We usually receive loan origination fees, or “points,” which as of December 31, 2021 had a weighted average fee of 3.5% of total commitment at origination, along with loan amendment and extension fees, each of which varies in amount based upon the term of the loan, the credit quality of the borrower and the loan otherwise satisfying our underwriting criteria. In addition, we charge late fees on past due receivables and receive reimbursements from borrowers for costs associated with services provided by us, such as closing costs, collection costs on defaulted loans and construction draw inspection fees.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced an adverse impact on our loan portfolio, primarily in the form of a significant increase in defaulted loans and a slow-down in construction progress. For example, delays in local government permitting and inspections arising from measures to limit the spread of COVID-19 delayed some projects, adversely affecting the ability of borrowers to complete the projects in accordance with the terms of the loans. We have experienced an increase in delinquencies and requests for extensions or forbearance. In addition, market conditions, and in some cases moratoriums on the foreclosure process, have increased the timeline to resolve non-performing loans. Delays in repayment of our outstanding loans or sales of foreclosed properties reduce the capital available for future loan originations.
In 2021, the U.S. and global economy began reopening and wider distribution of effective vaccines for COVID-19 encouraged greater economic activity. Nonetheless, the recovery could remain uneven, particularly given uncertainty with respect to the distribution and acceptance of the vaccines and their effectiveness in preventing the spread of COVID-19, including its new variant strains. There remains significant uncertainty regarding the timing and duration of the economic recovery, which precludes any prediction as to the ultimate adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on economic and market conditions. There remain shortages in raw materials, manufactured products and labor across industries that are resulting in longer construction timelines and rising prices, which are dampening a full economic recovery within the construction industry. The prolonged duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to negatively impact our business, financial performance and operating results.
As a result of limited residential housing supply, net migration trends and a low interest rate environment, we have seen an increase in new parties entering the real estate lending market as economic conditions have stabilized from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Such new entrants, as well as existing lenders, have been aggressively pursuing yields. This has resulted in increased competition and pricing pressure on our business, which has driven, and we expect will continue to drive, increased variability in the amount of our loan originations from quarter-to-quarter and the yields we are able to achieve on new loans. Historically, we primarily competed on the basis of borrower relationships, loan structure, terms and service rather than on price; however, competitive conditions have led us in some cases to originate loans with terms that deviate from our historical practice, such as a reduction in or absence of minimum interest provisions in our mortgage notes, which in turn reduce the interest income we earn on those loans. Starting in the second quarter of 2021, we adopted a dynamic pricing model, in which we determine credit risk for prospective loans utilizing categories such as experience of the borrower, amount of new capital being contributed by the borrower or guarantors to the project and strength of the underlying collateral. Under the dynamic pricing model, originated loans that we underwrite as lower credit risk receive lower annual rates or loan origination fees than loans that we deem as higher credit risk. To the extent that competitive conditions lead us to originate a greater percentage of loans containing annual fees or loan origination fees at the lower end of our historic ranges, our interest and fee income and financial performance could be adversely affected. We expect these trends related to the competitive environment to continue.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Key Indicators of Financial Condition and Operating Performance
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of financial and operating metrics, which include both GAAP and non-GAAP metrics, including the following:
Interest income earned on our loans. A primary source of our revenue is interest income earned on our loan portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, our loans bear a weighted average interest rate of 10.7%, paid monthly, primarily from interest reserves and, to a much lesser extent, cash payments. Certain of our mortgage notes provide for minimum interest provisions, to which the contractual rate applies, which is typically between 50% and 70% of the face amount of the note until the outstanding principal under the note exceeds a minimum threshold. A reduction in or absence of minimum interest provisions in our mortgage notes and an increase in the amount of our loans in non-accrual status as a result of being in contractual default reduce our effective interest-bearing principal and the interest income we earn on our loans. The effective interest-bearing principal represents the principal balance outstanding plus the excess of minimum interest provisions over the actual principal outstanding. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the effective interest-bearing principal was $1.0 billion and $998.6 million, respectively. With consideration of loans in non-accrual status, the effective interest-bearing principal net of non-accrual principal as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $831.4 and $786.4 million, respectively. We expect the trend of lower effective interest-bearing principal than historic levels to continue in subsequent quarters as a result of the absence of minimum interest provisions in new originations and loans in non-accrual status.
Fees and other revenue recognized from originating and servicing our loans. Fee income is comprised of loan origination fees, loan renewal fees and inspection fees. The majority of fee income is comprised of loan origination fees, or “points,” which as of December 31, 2021, had a weighted average fee of 3.5% of the total commitment at origination. In addition to origination fees, we earn loan extension fees when maturing loans are renewed or extended and amendment fees when loan terms are modified, such as increases in interest reserves and construction holdbacks in line with our underwriting criteria or upon modification of a loan for the transition from horizontal development to vertical construction. Loans are generally only renewed or extended if the loan is not in default and satisfies our underwriting criteria, including our maximum LTV ratio of up to 65% of the appraised value as determined by an independent appraiser at the time of loan origination, or based on an updated appraisal, if required. Loan origination and renewal fees are deferred and recognized in income over the contractual maturity of the underlying loan.
Loan originations. Our operating performance is heavily dependent upon our ability to originate new loans to invest new capital and re-invest returning capital from the repayment of loans. The dollar amounts of loan originations reflect the total commitment at origination and loan repayments reflect the total commitment at payoff. Given the short-term nature of our loans, loan principal is generally repaid on a faster basis than to other types of lenders, making redeployment of capital through our originations process an important factor in our success.
The following tables contains the total amount of our loan originations and repayments for the periods indicated:
(1)Based on original total loan commitment amounts and excluding amendments.
Credit quality of our loan portfolio. All of our loans are construction loans secured by residential or commercial real estate and, in assessing estimated credit losses, we evaluate various metrics, including, but not limited to, construction type, collateral type, LTV, market conditions of property location and borrower experience and financial strength.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
The following tables allocate the carrying value of our loan portfolio based on our internal credit quality indicators used in assessing estimated credit losses and vintage of origination at the dates indicated:
(1)Represents the year of amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting in connection with the amendment.
(2)Includes $0.7 million in loan specific allowances for loans deemed collateral dependent based on the fair value of the underlying collateral. In addition, $0.9 million of the CECL allowance is excluded from this table because it relates to unfunded commitments and has been recorded as a liability under accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet.
(1)Represents the year of amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting in connection with the amendment.
(2)Includes $0.7 million in loan specific allowances for loans deemed collateral dependent based on the fair value of the underlying collateral. In addition, $0.9 million of the CECL allowance is excluded from this table because it relates to unfunded commitments and has been recorded as a liability under accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
(1)Represents the year of amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting in connection with the amendment.
(2)Represents LTV as of origination or latest amendment. LTVs above 65% generally represent loans in contractual default status where we have agreed to extend funds to the borrower above 65% in order to ensure successful completion of the construction and return of capital.
(3)Includes $0.7 million in loan specific allowances for loans deemed collateral dependent based on the fair value of the underlying collateral. In addition, $0.9 million of the CECL allowance is excluded from this table because it relates to unfunded commitments and has been recorded as a liability under accounts payable and accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet.
(1)Represents the year of amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting in connection with the amendment.
(2)Includes $1.5 million in loan specific allowances for loans deemed collateral dependent based on the fair value of the underlying collateral.
(1)Represents the year of amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting in connection with the amendment.
(2)Includes $1.5 million in loan specific allowances for loans deemed collateral dependent based on the fair value of the underlying collateral.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
(1)Represents the year of amendment where the loan incurred a full re-underwriting in connection with the amendment.
(2)Represents LTV as of origination or latest amendment. LTVs above 65% generally represent loans in contractual default status where we have agreed to extend funds to the borrower above 65% in order to ensure successful completion of the construction and return of capital.
(3)Includes $1.5 million in loan specific allowances for loans deemed collateral dependent based on the fair value of the underlying collateral.
Dividends Declared. The following table summarizes the declared cash dividends per common share activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Earnings per Common Share. The following table summarizes the earnings (GAAP) and distributable earnings (non-GAAP) per common share activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Distributable Earnings
We have elected to present “distributable earnings” and “distributable earnings prior to realized loss on investments”, supplemental non-GAAP financial measures used by management to evaluate our operating performance. We define distributable earnings as net income attributable to common stockholders adjusted for: (i) impairment recorded on our investments; (ii) unrealized gains or losses on our investments (including provision for credit losses) and warrant liabilities; (iii) new public company transition expenses; (iv) non-capitalized transaction-related and other one-time expenses; (v) non-cash stock-based compensation; (vi) depreciation and amortization including amortization of our intangible assets; and (vii) deferred taxes, which are subject to variability and generally not indicative of future economic performance or representative of current operations.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, provision for credit losses, net was $6.2 and $6.7 million, respectively, which has been excluded from distributable earnings consistent with other unrealized gains (losses) pursuant to our policy for reporting distributable earnings. We expect to recognize such potential credit losses in distributable earnings if and when such amounts are deemed nonrecoverable upon a realization event. This is generally upon charge-off of principal at the time of loan repayment or upon sale of real property owned by us and the amount of proceeds is less than the principal outstanding at the time of foreclosure.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Management believes that the adjustments to compute “distributable earnings” specified above allow investors and analysts to readily identify and track the operating performance of our assets, assist in comparing the operating results between periods, and enable investors to evaluate our current performance using the same measure that management uses to operate the business. Distributable earnings excludes certain recurring items, such as unrealized gains and losses (including provision for credit losses) and non-capitalized transaction-related expenses, because they are not considered by management to be part of our primary operations for the reasons described herein. However, management has elected to also present distributable earnings prior to realized loss on investments because it believes the Company’s investors use such measure to evaluate and compare the performance of the Company and its peers. As such, distributable earnings and distributable earnings prior to realized loss on investments are not intended to reflect all of our activity and should be considered as only one of the factors used by management in assessing our performance, along with GAAP net income which is inclusive of all of our activities.
As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our annual REIT taxable income and to pay tax at regular corporate rates to the extent that we annually distribute less than 100% of such taxable income. Given these requirements and our belief that dividends are generally one of the principal reasons that stockholders invest in our common stock, we generally intend to attempt to pay dividends to our stockholders in an amount equal to our net taxable income, if and to the extent authorized by our board of directors. Distributable earnings and distributable earnings prior to realized loss on investments are one of many factors considered by our board of directors in declaring dividends and, while not direct measures of taxable income, over time, the measures can be considered useful indicators of our dividends.
Distributable earnings and distributable earnings prior to realized loss on investments do not represent, and should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, net income or as a substitute for, or superior to, cash flows from operating activities, each as determined in accordance with GAAP, and our calculation of these measures may not be comparable to similarly entitled measures reported by other companies.
The table below is a reconciliation of distributable earnings to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure:
(1)Expenses directly related to professional fees in connection with our new public company reporting procedures, the design and implementation of internal controls under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the implementation of the CECL standard.
(2)Includes other one-time expenses primarily related to the liquidation of the Private REIT and recruiting fees associated with the President executive search.
(3)Represents credit losses recorded in the provision for credit losses and recognized in distributable earnings upon charge-off of principal at the time of loan repayment or upon sale of real property where proceeds received are less than the principal outstanding.
Segment Reporting
We operate the business as one reportable segment, which originates, underwrites and services construction loans.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Principal Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
As a commercial real estate finance company, our results are affected by factors such as changes in economic climate, demand for housing, population trends, construction costs and the availability of alternative real estate financing from other lenders. These factors may have an impact on our ability to originate new loans or the performance of our existing loan portfolio.
From November 15, 2019, our consolidated financial statements reflect BRELF II, one of the Predecessor Companies, as the accounting acquirer and Successor entity, acquiring the other three Predecessor Companies, the four Predecessor Management Companies, and Trinity in the Successor period. The Business Combination transaction reflects a change in accounting basis for the Predecessor Company Group (other than BRELF II). As Trinity was a special purpose acquisition company, its acquisition is reflected as the issuance of shares for cash. For periods prior to November 15, 2019, in lieu of presenting separate financial statements of each of the Predecessor Companies and Predecessor Management Companies, consolidated financial statements have been presented, as these entities were under common management. Broadmark Realty is the successor issuer to Trinity.
As a result of the Business Combination, beginning from November 15, 2019, our consolidated financial statements are presented on a new basis of accounting pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations to reflect BRELF II acquiring the other entities within the Predecessor Company Group and Trinity. For more information refer to “Note 3 - Business Combination” to the financial statements included in this Report.
Results from Operations
The period-to-period comparison of results is not necessarily indicative of results for future periods. The tables below set forth the results of our operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenue (amounts in thousands, except percentage data):
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Comparison of Results of Operations
Unless otherwise stated, for purposes of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, the comparison of the results of operations is for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $120.5 and $122.4 million, respectively, a decrease of $1.9 million. The decrease primarily relates to a decrease in interest income of $3.9 million, partially offset by an increase in fee income of $2.1 million, which are discussed in more detail below.
Expenses
Total expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $30.0 and $30.9 million, respectively. The decrease primarily relates to decreases in general and administrative expenses and compensation and employee benefits of $3.6 and $0.6 million, respectively, partially offset by an increase in interest expense of $3.3 million, which are discussed in more detail below.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $3.9 million, or 4.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a lower average effective interest-bearing principal outstanding during the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period as a result of a larger percentage of the loan portfolio on non-accrual status over the course of 2021 compared to 2020 and an increase in the number of loans originated during the 2021 period with lower fixed rate interest and no minimum interest provisions; partially offset by the effects of an increase of 5% in the average size of our loan portfolio in the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Fee Income
Fee income increased by $2.1 million, or 7.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in loan origination volume.
Compensation and Employee Benefits
Compensation and employee benefits expense decreased by $0.6 million, or 3.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to decreases of $1.3 million in incentive compensation as certain stated company performance metrics were not achieved and $1.1 million in employee stock-based compensation expense primarily due to a longer vesting period for most of the RSUs in the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $1.9 million due to an increase in average employee headcount and higher wages during the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense decreased by $3.6 million, or 23.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decreases of $4.7 million in professional fees as a result of the higher professional fees incurred during the 2020 period for first-year public company financial reporting and implementation of internal controls under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The decrease was partially offset by an increase of $1.3 million in depreciation and amortization expense during the 2021 period, primarily as a result of a reversal of intangible asset amortization of $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted from a purchase accounting measurement period adjustment in the 2020 period and depreciation of tenant improvements related to our corporate office expansion.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases of $1.3 million as a result of amortization of deferred financing costs, associated with entering into a revolving credit facility in the first quarter of 2021, $1.2 million of undrawn fees on our revolving line of credit and $0.7 million in interest expense on our senior unsecured notes issued during the fourth quarter of 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense, which consists entirely of unrealized changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities increased $7.3 million due to an expense of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income of $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The expense in the 2021 period relates to the Private Placement Warrant liability and is equal to the fair value of the liability as of December 31, 2021. A correction of an immaterial error was made in the second quarter of 2021 to initially record fair value of the Private Placement Warrant liability (refer to "Correction of Immaterial Error" in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional details on the accounting classification of the Private Placement Warrants) and, accordingly, there was no corresponding expense recorded in the 2020 period. For the 2020 period, the other income of $5.5 million resulted from the decline in the fair value of the Optional Subscription liability that expired unexercised in the fourth quarter of 2020 and, accordingly, there is no corresponding income or expense related to the Optional Subscription liability in the 2021 period.
Provision for (Reversal of) Credit Losses, Net
The provision for credit losses decreased $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily due to a decrease in the provision for credit losses in the 2021 period resulting from the decrease in loans in contractual default compared to the 2020 period. This decrease was partially offset by increases in the provision for credit losses resulting from the growth in the size of the loan portfolio in the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period and an increase in estimated losses on loans classified as collateral dependent where foreclosure was deemed probable in the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 (Successor) Compared to the Period from November 15, 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and Period from January 1, 2019 through November 14, 2019 (Predecessor)
A discussion regarding the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the period from November 15 2019 through December 31, 2019 (Successor) and the period from January 1, 2019 through November 14 2019 (Predecessor) can be found under Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary liquidity needs include ongoing commitments to fund our lending activities and future funding obligations for our existing loan portfolio, paying dividends and funding other general business needs. Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligation are set forth in Note 12 - Commitment and Contingencies of our consolidated financial statements included in this Report. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $132.9 and $223.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, our total liquidity includes not only cash and cash equivalents, but our entire undrawn revolving credit facility of $135.0 million.
We seek to meet our long-term liquidity requirements, such as real estate lending needs, including future construction draw commitments, primarily through our existing cash resources and return of capital from investments, including loan repayments. Additionally, we intend to use borrowings under our revolving credit facility from time to time as a cash management tool in between collecting loan repayments. We expect to opportunistically issue debt and raise capital in the public and private markets from time to time based on market conditions. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.5 billion of total loan commitments outstanding, of which we have funded $924.7 million.
On February 19, 2021, we entered into a credit agreement with a syndicate of lenders and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent for the lenders, providing for a $135.0 million revolving credit facility. As a source of backup liquidity for future draws, the availability of the revolving credit facility has enabled us to use a larger percentage of our cash balances for lending activities. In October 2021, we made our first use of our revolving credit facility, with a draw of $50.0 million to support the funding of borrower draws and new loan originations while we awaited several large loan repayments. We then repaid the outstanding balance on our revolving credit facility in full by October 31, 2021 following the receipt of such loan repayments, minimizing the cost of such borrowing while earning fee income on the new borrower draws and loan originations. These events demonstrate the value of our revolving credit facility as a cash management tool.
Our obligations under the revolving credit facility are secured by substantially all of our assets. The revolving credit facility contains covenants customary for financings of this type, including limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness, liens, asset dispositions, acquisitions, mergers and consolidations, certain dividends, distributions and other payments, advances and investments, payments to affiliates, optional prepayments and other modifications of certain other indebtedness, and amendments, terminations and waivers of certain material agreements, as well as a minimum tangible net worth, a total debt to equity ratio and a minimum debt service coverage ratio requirement. Among other things, the credit agreement provides that we may not pay cash dividends that would result in non-compliance with the financial covenants under the credit agreement or during an event of default under the credit agreement, except in the case of defaults other than payment defaults, for dividends in the amounts necessary to maintain our REIT status. The revolving credit facility contains events of default customary for financings of this type, including failure to pay principal, interest and other amounts, materially incorrect representations or warranties, failure to observe covenants and other terms of the revolving credit facility, cross-defaults to other indebtedness, bankruptcy, insolvency, material judgments, certain ERISA violations, changes in control and failure to maintain REIT status, in some cases subject to customary grace periods.
On November 12, 2021, we completed a private offering of $100.0 million of senior unsecured notes. Interest on this debt accrues at the fixed rate of 5.00% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears. The notes may be prepaid prior to their maturity date, subject to the payment of applicable premiums. The note purchase agreement contains financial covenants that require compliance with leverage and coverage ratios and maintenance of minimum tangible net worth, as well as other affirmative and negative covenants that may limit, among other things, our ability to incur liens and enter into mergers or transfer all or substantially all of our assets. The note purchase agreement governing the senior unsecured notes also includes customary representations and warranties and customary events of default.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
On March 2, 2021, we entered into a distribution agreement with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, Barclays Capital Inc., B. Riley Securities, Inc., JMP Securities LLC and Raymond James & Associates, Inc. as sales agents, to sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $200,000,000, from time to time, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program (the “ATM Program”). We have no obligation to sell any shares under the ATM Program, and sold no shares under the ATM Program during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We believe our existing sources of liquidity are sufficient to fund our existing commitments. However, we are continuing to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on us, our borrowers and the economy as a whole. To the extent funds available for new loans are limited, we will manage our capital deployment based on the receipt of payoffs and may from time to time use borrowings under our credit facility. As a key component of our growth strategy going forward, we plan to raise capital, which may include additional debt financing, from time to time subject to market conditions. We intend to maintain a conservative balance sheet and debt to equity ratio. Under our credit agreement for our revolving credit facility, we must maintain a total debt to equity ratio that does not exceed 30%.
As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our annual REIT taxable income to our stockholders, including taxable income where Broadmark Realty does not receive corresponding cash. We intend to distribute all or substantially all of our REIT taxable income in order to comply with the REIT distribution requirements of the Code and to avoid U.S. federal income tax and the non-deductible excise tax.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table sets forth changes in cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and periods ended December 31, 2019 and November 14, 2019 :
Comparison of Results of Cash Flows for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were comparable at $64.1 and $63.8 million, respectively. Net cash provided by operating activities is driven by our net income adjusted for non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Interest received for the 2021 period did not increase by the percentage increase in our average outstanding loan portfolio for the 2021 period compared to the 2020 period due to the lower effective interest bearing principal outstanding and lower interest rates on some new loans due to market factors along with our new dynamic pricing model. The reconciliations between net income and cash provided by operating activities in the consolidated statement of cash flows include adjustments to net income for non-cash items that, while fluctuating between the 2021 and 2020 periods, have no effect on cash that was provided by operating activities.
Net cash used in investing activities was $136.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and net cash provided by investing activities was $32.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities of $168.5 million was primarily due to higher principal outstanding under our mortgage notes receivable between the 2021 and 2020 periods and the $43.5 million paid to repurchase of participations in mortgage notes receivable from the Private REIT in the 2021 period.
Net cash used in financing activities was $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $111.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used in financing activities of $92.5 million was primarily due to a $97.1 million increase in net proceeds from issuance of senior unsecured notes partially offset by an increase resulting from the $5.1 million payment of costs to obtain our revolving credit facility in the 2021 period.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The most significant accounting estimates involve a high degree of judgment or complexity. Management believes the estimates and judgments most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and to the understanding of our reported financial results include those made in connection with loan impairment and valuation of investments in real estate.
We measure and record potential expected credit losses related to our loan portfolio in accordance with the Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) Standard. The CECL Standard requires an entity to consider historical loss experience, current conditions, and a reasonable and supportable forecast of the economic environment. The Company utilizes a probability of default/loss given default (“PD/LGD”) method for estimating current expected credit losses. Please see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 4 Mortgage Notes Receivable” of our consolidated financial statements included in this Report for further discussion regarding CECL.
In accordance with the PD/LGD method, an annual historical loss rate is applied to the amortized cost of an asset or pool of assets over the remaining expected life. The PD/LGD method requires consideration of the timing of expected future funding of existing commitments and repayments over each asset’s remaining life. An annual loss factor, adjusted for macroeconomic estimates, is applied over each subsequent period and aggregated to arrive at the CECL allowance.
In determining the CECL allowance, we considered various factors including (i) historical loss experience in our portfolio, (ii) historical loss experience in the commercial real estate lending market, (iii) timing of expected pay offs including prepayments and extensions where reasonably expected, and (iv) our current and future view of the macroeconomic environment. We utilize a reasonable and supportable forecast period equal to the contractual term of the loan plus short-term extensions of one to three months that are reasonably expected for construction loans.
Management estimates the allowance for credit losses using relevant information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The allowance for credit losses is maintained at a level sufficient to provide for expected credit losses over the life of the loan based on evaluating historical credit loss experience and making adjustments to historical loss information for differences in the specific risk characteristics in the current loan portfolio. Refer to “Note 4 - Mortgage Notes Receivable” for further information regarding the CECL allowance. The CECL allowance related to the principal outstanding is presented within mortgage notes receivable, net and for unfunded commitments is within accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
We have made an accounting policy election to exclude accrued interest receivable, included in interest and fees receivable, net on our consolidated balance sheets, from the amortized cost basis of the related mortgage notes receivable in determining the CECL allowance, as any uncollected accrued interest receivable is written off in a timely manner. No interest income is recognized on mortgage notes receivable that are in contractual default unless the interest is paid in cash or collectability of all amounts due is reasonably assured. In addition, in certain instances, where the interest reserve on a current loan has been fully depleted and the interest payment is not expected to be collected from the borrower, we may place a current loan on non-accrual status and recognize interest income on a cash-basis where principal collection is not in doubt.
To maximize recovery against a defaulted loan, we may assume legal title or physical possession of the underlying collateral through foreclosure or the execution of a deed in lieu of foreclosure. Foreclosed properties are recorded at fair market value at the time of acquisition, which generally approximates the carrying value of the loan secured by such property. The fair value of real property is based upon the most recent independent third-party appraisal of value, discounted between 0% to 10% based upon our experience with actual liquidation values. For certain real properties, where a recent appraisal is either unavailable or not most representative of fair value, the fair value is based on a broker opinion of value including a capitalized income analysis and replacement cost analysis considering historical operating results, market rents, vacancy rates, capitalization rates, land cost comparisons, market trends and economic conditions. The assessment of fair value of real property is subject to uncertainty and, in certain cases, sensitive to the selection of comparable properties.
For a complete listing and description of our significant accounting policies and description of our adoption of new accounting pronouncements and the impact thereof on our business, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
Broadmark Realty Capital Inc.