ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors and included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF 2021 FINANCIAL RESULTS
We are a rapidly growing independent insurance distribution firm delivering solutions that give our Clients the peace of mind to pursue their purpose, passion and dreams.
The following is a summary of our 2021 financial results:
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $567.3 million, an increase of $326.4 million, or 135%, as compared to the same period of 2020. This increase was related to amounts attributable to Partners acquired during 2020 and 2021 prior to their having reached the twelve-month owned mark (such amounts, the “Partnership Contribution”) and organic growth. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $272.3 million of the increase to revenues and organic growth accounted for $54.0 million.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $598.9 million, an increase of $336.1 million, or 128%, as compared to the same period of 2020. The increase in operating expenses was primarily attributable to the Partnership Contribution, which comprised $219.1 million of operating expenses excluding fair value adjustments, an increase in the fair value of contingent consideration of $24.7 million, increased compensation for sales and support, including investments in new product development, and continued investments in Growth Services to support our growth.
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $26.9 million, an increase of $19.0 million, or 242%, as compared to the same period of 2020. Interest expense, net increased as a result of higher average borrowings under the JPM Credit Agreement.
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $58.1 million, an increase of $28.2 million as compared to net loss of $29.9 million in the same period of 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $112.9 million, an increase of $69.0 million as compared to the same period of 2020. Adjusted EBITDA Margin was 20% for 2021 and 18% for 2020.
Organic Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $295.0 million as compared to $159.7 million for the same period of 2020. Organic Revenue Growth was $54.0 million, or 22%, for 2021 and $21.8 million, or 16%, for 2020. Refer to the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section below for reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
PARTNERSHIPS
During 2021, we completed 16 Partnerships for an aggregate purchase price of $1.1 billion. We also completed a follow-on public offering for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $269.4 million and borrowed an additional $450.0 million under the New Term Loans (as defined elsewhere) on assist with funding such acquisitions. Partnerships completed during 2021 added $121.4 million of premiums, commissions and fees receivable, $439.4 million of intangible assets and $579.4 million of goodwill to the consolidated balance sheet. During 2020, we completed 16 Partnerships for an aggregate purchase price of $1.0 billion. We borrowed $400.0 million under the New Term Loan B and completed two follow-on public offerings for aggregate primary net proceeds of $449.7 million to assist with funding acquisitions during 2020.
Refer to Note 4 to BRP’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the Partnerships that we have completed during 2021.
NOVEL CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19)
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including changes in consumer behavior, pandemic fears, and market downturns, as well as restrictions on business and individual activities, has created significant volatility in the global economy and led to severe restrictions on the level of economic activity around the world.
Although COVID-19 vaccines are now broadly distributed and administered, there remains significant uncertainty concerning the magnitude of the impact and the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. As new strains of COVID-19 develop, we may continue to experience disruptions to our business, including due to a reduction in our Clients` insurable exposure units and a delay in cash payments to us from our Clients or Insurance Company Partners. Further, the impacts of inflation on our and our Clients` businesses and the broader economy, which may be exacerbated by the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, may also impact our financial condition and results of operations.
In addition, the uncertainties associated with the protective and preventive measures being put in place or recommended by both governmental entities and other businesses, among other uncertainties, may result in delays or modifications to our plans and initiatives.
Our Clients and Colleagues are our first priority and we have taken steps to ensure their safety by implementing alternative working arrangement, with a significant part of our Colleagues working in remote or hybrid environments. As we began a phased reopening of our U.S. offices in 2021, we provided guidelines on return to the office depending on the level of virus containment and local health and safety regulations in each geography. This has created and may continue to create additional risks and operational challenges and may require us to make additional investments of time and resources across our business, including to design, implement and enforce new workplace health and safety protocols, as well as investments in our IT systems to support a working environment that encompasses a mix of remote and in-person arrangements.
During the pandemic, we have also funded the BRP True North Colleague Fund to assist with relief for COVID-19 and other qualifying disasters for our Colleagues experiencing extraordinary hardship and are currently matching Colleague donations dollar-for dollar.
We intend to continue to execute on our strategic plans and operational initiatives during the pandemic. However, given the uncertainty regarding the spread and severity of COVID-19, the duration and scope of government measures, the nature of societal responses and the adverse effects on the national and global economy, the related financial impact on our business cannot be accurately predicted at this time. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors-The continued adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and an indeterminate recovery period could result in declines in business and increases in claims that could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 AND 2020
For a discussion of our 2019 financial results and a comparison of financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 11, 2021.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Item 1A. Risk Factors.
The following is a discussion of our consolidated results of operations for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
__________
n/m not meaningful
Seasonality
The insurance brokerage market is seasonal and our results of operations are somewhat affected by seasonal trends. Our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margins are typically highest in the first quarter and lowest in the fourth quarter. This variation is primarily due to fluctuations in our revenues, while overhead remains consistent throughout the year. Our revenues are generally highest in the first quarter due to the impact of contingent payments received in the first quarter from Insurance Company Partners that we cannot readily estimate before receipt without the risk of significant reversal and a higher degree of first quarter policy commencements and renewals in Medicare and certain Middle Market lines of business such as employee benefits and commercial. In addition, a higher proportion of our first quarter revenue is derived from our highest margin businesses. As discussed further above, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may continue to skew these general trends due to reduced amounts of new business and reductions in business from existing Clients related to the pandemic.
Partnerships can significantly impact Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margins in a given year and may increase the amount of seasonality within the business, especially results attributable to Partnerships that have not been fully integrated into our business or owned by us for a full year.
Commissions and Fees
We earn commissions and fees by facilitating the arrangement between Insurance Company Partners and individuals or businesses for the carrier to provide insurance to the insured party. Our commissions and fees are usually a percentage of the premium paid by the insured and generally depends on the type of insurance, the particular Insurance Company Partner and the nature of the services provided. Under certain arrangements with Clients, we earn pre-negotiated service fees in lieu of commissions. Additionally, we may also receive from Insurance Company Partners a profit-sharing commission, or straight override, which represent forms of variable consideration associated with the placement of coverage and are based primarily on underwriting results, but may also contain considerations for volume, growth or retention.
Our future commissions and fees can be affected by changes in premium rate levels, fluctuations in Client risk retention and increases or decreases in the value of risks that have been insured, as well by trends in the insurance industry toward alternative insurance markets.
Commissions and fees increased by $326.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. This increase was related to the Partnership Contribution and organic growth. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $272.3 million of the increase to revenues and organic growth accounted for $54.0 million.
Major Sources of Commissions and Fees
The following table sets forth our commissions and fees by major source by amount for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
__________
n/m not meaningful
Direct bill revenue represents commission revenue earned by providing insurance placement services to Clients, primarily for private risk management, commercial risk management, employee benefits and Medicare insurance types. Direct bill revenue increased by $164.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of the Partnership Contribution of $148.0 million and organic growth of $16.7 million.
Agency bill revenue primarily represents commission revenue earned by providing insurance placement services to Clients wherein we act as an agent on behalf of the Client. Agency bill revenue increased by $111.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of the Partnership Contribution of $82.5 million and organic growth of $28.7 million.
Profit-sharing revenue represents bonus-type revenue that is earned by us as a sales incentive provided by certain Insurance Company Partners. Profit-sharing revenue increased by $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of Partnership Contribution of $20.0 million and organic growth of $1.0 million. Profit-sharing revenue was affected by higher loss ratios in our Middle Market and MainStreet Operating Groups, which is particularly acute in the Florida homeowners marketplace.
Consulting and service fee revenue represents fees received in lieu of a commission and specialty insurance consulting revenue. Consulting and service fee revenue increased $25.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of the Partnership Contribution of $24.3 million and organic growth of $1.2 million.
Policy fee and installment fee revenue represents revenue earned for acting in the capacity of an MGA and providing payment processing and services and other administrative functions on behalf of Insurance Company Partners. Policy fee and installment fee revenue increased $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 due to organic growth. These fees are generated by our Specialty Operating Group.
Other income consists of Medicare marketing income that is based on agreed-upon cost reimbursement for fulfilling specific targeted marketing campaigns in addition to other fee income and premium financing income generated across all Operating Groups. Other income decreased $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. Organic growth contributed $1.6 million to other income.
Commissions, Employee Compensation and Benefits
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits is our largest expense. It consists of (a) base compensation comprising salary, bonuses and benefits paid and payable to Colleagues, commissions paid to Colleagues and outside commissions paid to others; and (b) equity-based compensation associated with the grants of restricted interest awards to senior management, Risk Advisors and executives. We expect to continue to experience a general rise in commissions, employee compensation and benefits expense commensurate with expected growth in our sales and headcount and as a result of increasing employee compensation related to ongoing public company costs. We operate in competitive markets for human capital and need to maintain competitive compensation levels as we expand geographically and create new products and services.
Our compensation arrangements with our employees contain significant bonus or commission components driven by the results of our operations. Therefore, as we grow commissions and fees, we expect compensation costs to rise.
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses increased by $225.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $159.7 million of the increase to commissions, employee compensation and benefits. Share-based compensation expense increased $11.4 million as a result of equity grants awarded to all newly hired Colleagues, including those who joined us through Partnerships, and grants to reward Colleagues, including members of senior management. The remaining increase in commissions, employee compensation and benefits expense can be attributed to higher commissions expense relating to our organic growth and higher compensation and benefits relating to hiring to support our growth.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses include travel, accounting, legal and other professional fees, placement fees, rent, office expenses and other costs associated with our operations. Our other operating expenses have increased in absolute terms as a result of ongoing public company costs, including those associated with compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulations governing public companies, increased costs of directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, and increased professional services expenses, particularly associated with the adoption of new accounting standards and integration of acquired businesses. Our occupancy-related costs and professional services expenses, in particular, generally increase or decrease in relative proportion to the number of our employees and the overall size and scale of our business operations. In addition, we have invested in the expansion of our Tampa offices to accommodate our growth plans, which has resulted in an increase to rent expense beginning in April 2020. Certain corporate expenses are allocated to the Operating Groups.
Other operating expenses increased by $54.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020, which was primarily attributable to increases in rent expense of $10.4 million related to expansion of our offices through Partnerships, dues and subscriptions of $6.3 million related to investing in technology to support our growth, travel and entertainment of $5.3 million, professional fees of $4.7 million related to Partnership transactions and public company costs, software and internet expenses of $4.4 million, consulting of $3.7 million, Colleague education and welfare of $2.8 million, and advertising and marketing of $2.1 million.
Amortization Expense
Amortization expense increased by $29.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. This increase was driven by the capitalization of intangible assets related to Partners acquired during 2020 and 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration was $45.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $20.5 million for the same period of 2020. The change in fair value of contingent consideration results from fluctuations in the value of the relevant measurement basis, normally revenue or EBITDA, of our Partners.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net increased by $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 resulting from higher average borrowings under the JPM Credit Agreement during 2021 compared to 2020.
FINANCIAL CONDITION - COMPARISON OF CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL CONDITION AT DECEMBER 31, 2021 TO DECEMBER 31, 2020.
Our total assets and total liabilities increased $1.3 billion and $0.9 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. The most significant changes in assets and liabilities are described below.
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash increased $85.7 million as a result of operating, investing and financing activities illustrated in the condensed consolidated statement of cash flows and discussed further under the Sources and Uses of Cash section below.
Restricted cash increased $55.9 million as a result of restricted trust accounts related to our 2021 Partnerships.
Premiums, commissions and fees receivable, net increased $185.3 million as a result of revenue growth and the changes in revenue seasonality of our business given the underlying revenue streams of Partnerships.
We adopted Topic 842 during 2021, which resulted in right-of-use assets $81.6 million and operating lease liabilities of $83.9 million at December 31, 2021.
Intangible assets, net increased $390.1 million primarily as a result of our 2021 Partnerships, which contributed $439.4 million to gross intangible assets during 2021, offset in part by $48.7 million of amortization during the year.
Goodwill increased $577.2 million as a result of our 2021 Partnerships, offset in part by measurement period adjustments for certain Partnerships formed in the fourth quarter 2020.
Premiums payable to insurance companies increased $174.5 million as a result of our 2021 Partnerships and organic revenue growth.
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities increased $40.7 million as a result of higher accrued compensation and benefits from new Partner costs and 2021 bonus accruals relating to an increase in the number of Colleagues; current portion of operating lease liabilities relating to the adoption of Topic 842 during 2021; and higher contract liabilities relating to our revenue growth and new Partners.
Related party notes payable of $61.5 million at December 31, 2021 relates to our having accelerated recognition of MSI’s maximum contingent earnout and entering into notes payable agreements with each of MSI’s shareholders in the third quarter of 2021.
Revolving line of credit increased $35.0 million as a result of borrowing on our Revolving Facility (as defined in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources”) for funding Partnerships and general working capital purposes in 2021.
Long-term debt increased $437.8 million as a result of having upsized our term loan to $850.0 million during the fourth quarter of 2021.
Contingent earnout liabilities increased $93.8 million resulting from issuances of $127.3 million in fair value related to our 2021 Partnerships and a $45.2 million increase from fair value adjustments. These increases were offset in part by $74.0 million of settlements, of which $61.5 million was a noncash exchange for related party notes payable.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Organic Revenue, Organic Revenue Growth, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share (“EPS”), are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered substitutes for GAAP measures, including commissions and fees (for Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth), net income (loss) (for Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin) net income (loss) attributable to BRP Group, Inc. (for Adjusted Net Income) or diluted earnings (loss) per share ("EPS") (for Adjusted Diluted EPS), which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP measures. These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools, and when assessing our operating performance, you should not consider these non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for commissions and fees, net income (loss), net income (loss) attributable to BRP Group, Inc. or other consolidated income statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies in our industry may define or calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, and accordingly these measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA eliminates the effects of financing, depreciation, amortization, fair value adjustments, and other noncash items and non-recurring costs. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, change in fair value of contingent consideration and certain items of income and expense, including share-based compensation expense, transaction-related expenses related to Partnerships including severance, and certain non-recurring costs, including those related to raising capital. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by commissions and fees. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is a key metric used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is an appropriate measure of operating performance because it eliminates the impact of expenses that do not relate to business performance, and that the presentation of this measure enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Margin is helpful in measuring profitability of operations on a consolidated level.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have important limitations as analytical tools. For example, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
•do not reflect any cash capital expenditure requirements for the assets being depreciated and amortized that may have to be replaced in the future;
•do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations;
•do not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•do not reflect share-based compensation expense and other non-cash charges; and
•exclude certain tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us.
We calculate Organic Revenue Growth based on commissions and fees for the relevant period by excluding the first twelve months of commissions and fees generated from new Partners. Organic Revenue Growth is the change in Organic Revenue period-to-period, with prior period results adjusted for Organic Revenues that were excluded in the prior period because the relevant Partners had not yet reached the twelve-month owned mark, but which have reached the twelve-month owned mark in the current period. For example, revenues from a Partner acquired on June 1, 2020 are excluded from Organic Revenue for 2020. However, after June 1, 2021, results from June 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 for such Partners are compared to results from June 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 for purposes of calculating Organic Revenue Growth in 2021. Organic Revenue Growth is a key metric used by management and our board of directors to assess our financial performance. We believe that Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth are appropriate measures of operating performance as they allow investors to measure, analyze and compare growth in a meaningful and consistent manner.
Adjusted Net Income is presented for the purpose of calculating Adjusted Diluted EPS. We define Adjusted Net Income as net income (loss) attributable to BRP Group, Inc. adjusted for depreciation, amortization, change in fair value of contingent consideration and certain items of income and expense, including share-based compensation expense, transaction-related expenses related to Partnerships including severance, and certain non-recurring costs that, in the opinion of management, significantly affect the period-over-period assessment of operating results, and the related tax effect of those adjustments.
Adjusted Diluted EPS measures our per share earnings excluding certain expenses as discussed above and assuming all shares of Class B common stock were exchanged for Class A common stock. Adjusted Diluted EPS is calculated as Adjusted Net Income divided by adjusted dilutive weighted-average shares outstanding. We believe Adjusted Diluted EPS is useful to investors because it enables them to better evaluate per share operating performance across reporting periods.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to net loss, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin:
Organic Revenue and Organic Revenue Growth
The following table reconciles Organic Revenue to commissions and fees, which we consider to be the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Organic Revenue:
__________
(1) Includes the first twelve months of such commissions and fees generated from newly acquired Partners.
(2) Organic Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 used to calculate Organic Revenue Growth for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $241.0 million, which is adjusted to reflect revenues from Partnerships that reached the twelve-month owned mark during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Diluted EPS
The following table reconciles Adjusted Net Income to net loss attributable to BRP Group, Inc. and reconciles Adjusted Diluted EPS to diluted net loss per share attributable to BRP Group, Inc. Class A common stock:
___________
(1) Calculation was adjusted in the fourth quarter of 2021 to include depreciation. Prior year amounts have been conformed to current year presentation.
(2) Represents corporate income taxes at assumed effective tax rate of 9.9% applied to adjusted pre-tax income.
(3) Assumes the full exchange of Class B shares for Class A common stock pursuant to the Amended LLC Agreement.
OPERATING GROUP RESULTS
Commissions and Fees
In the Middle Market, MainStreet and Specialty Operating Groups, the Company generates commissions and fees from insurance placement under both agency bill and direct bill arrangements. In addition, BRP generates profit sharing income in each of those segments based on either the underlying book of business or performance, such as loss ratios. In the Middle Market Operating Group only, the Company generates fees from service fee and consulting arrangements. Service fee arrangements are in place with certain customers in lieu of commission arrangements.
In the Medicare Operating Group, BRP generates commissions and fees in the form of direct bill insurance placement and marketing income. Marketing income is earned through co-branded marketing campaigns with the Company’s Insurance Company Partners.
The following table sets forth our commissions and fees by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our commissions and fees:
Commissions and fees for our Middle Market Operating Group increased $260.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of the Partnership Contribution of $243.5 million and organic growth of $16.9 million. Middle Market experienced organic growth in base commissions and fees of $15.4 million and contingents of $0.6 million during the period.
Commissions and fees for our Specialty Operating Group increased $55.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of organic growth of $32.3 million which is attributable to growth in our renter’s insurance product and Connected Risk Solutions, in addition to the Partnership Contribution of $23.3 million.
Policies in force for the MSI Partnership grew by 168,015, or 32%, to 692,385 at December 31, 2021 from 524,370 at December 31, 2020.
Commissions and fees for our MainStreet Operating Group increased $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. The MainStreet Operating Group had organic growth in base commissions and fees of $4.9 million, which was offset in part by a decrease in organic contingent revenue of $1.0 million resulting from higher loss ratios due to challenges in the Florida insurance marketplace.
Commissions and fees for our Medicare Operating Group increased $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 as a result of the Partnership Contribution of $6.4 million and organic growth of $1.6 million. Continued COVID-19 protocols, including social distancing, reduced our Medicare agents' ability to meet person-to-person in our normal venues, which impacted our ability to sell new business during the 2021 Annual Enrollment Period.
Revenue reported for Corporate and Other relates to the elimination of intercompany revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Middle Market Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees revenue from activity with the Specialty Operating Group of $1.5 million; the Specialty Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees revenue from activity with itself of $0.2 million; the MainStreet Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees revenue from activity with the Middle Market and Specialty Operating Groups of $0.5 million; and the Medicare Operating Group recorded intercompany commissions and fees revenue from activity with itself of $0.6 million. These amounts were eliminated through Corporate and Other.
Commissions, Employee Compensation and Benefits
The following table sets forth our commissions, employee compensation and benefits by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our commissions, employee compensation and benefits:
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses increased across all Operating Groups for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020. The Partnership Contribution accounted for $147.5 million, $8.8 million, and $3.4 million of the increase to commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses in the Middle Market, Specialty and Medicare Operating Groups, respectively. Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses also increased across all Operating Groups as a result of continued investments in Growth Services to support our growth, which costs are primarily allocated among the Operating Groups, and continued investment in sales and service talent.
Commissions, employee compensation and benefits expenses for Corporate and Other increased as a result of increased headcount to support our growth and additional share-based compensation expense.
Other Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth our other operating expenses by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our operating expenses:
Other operating expenses for our Middle Market Operating Group increased $33.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 driven by higher costs for rent expense of $8.5 million, travel and entertainment of $3.9 million, software and internet of $3.6 million, dues and subscriptions of $3.0 million, professional fees of $2.4 million and consulting of $1.8 million and colleague education and welfare of $1.7 million. Other operating expenses for our Specialty Operating Group increased $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 driven by higher costs for professional fees of $2.3 million, dues and subscriptions of $1.2 million, consulting fees of $0.8 million, rent expense of $0.6 million, bank charges of $0.5 million and advertising and marketing of $0.4 million. Other operating expenses for our Medicare Operating Group increased $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 driven by higher costs for advertising and marketing of $0.6 million, rent expense of $0.4 million and dues and subscriptions of $0.1 million. The increases in our operating costs are related to our growth, both organically and through Partnerships, during 2021.
Other operating expenses in Corporate and Other increased $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 due to higher costs for dues and subscriptions of $2.1 million, consulting fees of $1.1 million, rent expense of $1.0 million, travel and entertainment of $0.9 million and licenses and taxes of $0.9 million.
Amortization Expense
The following table sets forth our amortization by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our amortization:
Amortization expense increased across our Middle Market, Specialty and Medicare Operating Groups for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 driven by amortization related to Partners acquired over the past twelve months. Amortization for the MainStreet Operating Group was relatively flat.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
The following table sets forth our change in fair value of contingent consideration by Operating Group by amount and as a percentage of our change in fair value of contingent consideration:
__________
n/m not meaningful
The change in fair value of contingent consideration results from fluctuations in the value of the relevant measurement basis, normally revenue or EBITDA of our Partners.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary liquidity needs for the foreseeable future will include cash to (i) provide capital to facilitate the organic growth of our business and to fund future Partnerships, (ii) pay operating expenses, including cash compensation to our employees and expenses related to being a public company, (iii) make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, (iv) pay interest and principal due on borrowings under the JPM Credit Agreement, (v) pay contingent earnout liabilities and related short-term notes payable due April 2022, and (vi) pay income taxes. We have historically financed our operations and funded our debt service through the sale of our insurance products and services. In addition, we financed significant cash needs to fund growth through the acquisition of Partners through debt and equity financing.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $138.3 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations and available borrowings under the JPM Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our working capital and meet our commitments for the foreseeable future. However, we expect that we will require additional funding to continue to execute on our Partnership strategy. Such funding could include the incurrence of additional debt and the issuance of equity. Additional funds may not be available on a timely basis, on favorable terms, or at all, and such funds, if raised, may not be sufficient to enable us to continue to implement our long-term Partnership strategy. If we are not able to raise funds when needed, on favorable terms or in sufficient amount, we could be forced to delay or reduce the number of Partnerships that we complete.
See Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Risks Relating to our Business - We may not be able to successfully identify and acquire Partners or integrate Partners into our company, and we may become subject to certain liabilities assumed or incurred in connection with our Partnerships that could harm our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
Public Equity Offering
On September 17, 2021, we completed a public offering of 9,200,000 shares of our Class A common stock, including 1,200,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option. The shares were sold at an offering price of $30.50 per share for net proceeds of approximately $269.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $11.2 million. We used such proceeds to purchase 9,200,000 LLC Units. We also paid offering expenses of $1.1 million.
JPM Credit Agreement
On October 14, 2020, we entered into the JPM Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., to provide senior secured credit facilities in an aggregate principal amount of $800.0 million. The amount consists of (i) a term loan facility in the principal amount of $400.0 million maturing in 2027 (the “Existing Term Loan B”) and (ii) a revolving credit facility with commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $400.0 million maturing in 2025 (the “Revolving Facility”).
On June 2, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 2 to the JPM Credit Agreement to provide for a new senior secured first lien term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $500.0 million maturing in 2027 (the “New Term Loan B”), a portion of the proceeds from which were used to repay in full the obligations under the Existing Term Loan B. On August 6, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 3 to the JPM Credit Agreement providing for an increase in the aggregate principal amount of the Revolving Facility from $400.0 million to $475.0 million.
On December 16, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 4 to the JPM Credit Agreement to provide for a new senior secured first lien incremental term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $350.0 million (the “New Term Loans”), which represents an increase in the aggregate principal amount of its existing New Term Loan B from $500.0 million to $850.0 million. A portion of the proceeds of the New Term Loans were used to repay outstanding amounts under the Revolving Facility as of the closing date.
The New Term Loans bear interest at LIBOR plus 350 bps with a LIBOR floor of 50 bps. The applicable interest rate on the New Term Loans at December 31, 2021 was 4.00%. Borrowings under the Revolving Facility accrue interest at LIBOR plus 200 bps to LIBOR plus 300 bps based on total net leverage ratio. BRP will pay a letter of credit fee equal to the margin then in effect with respect to LIBOR loans under the Revolving Facility multiplied by the daily amount available to be drawn under any letter of credit, a fronting fee and any customary documentary and processing charges for any letter of credit issued under the JPM Credit Agreement. The outstanding borrowings on the Revolving Facility had an applicable interest rate of 2.10% at December 31, 2021.
The outstanding principal balance of the New Term Loans was $846.6 million at December 31, 2021 and is required to be repaid in equal quarterly installments equal to approximately 0.2506% of the original principal amount of the New Term Loans beginning with the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021, the balance of which is due at maturity. Outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Facility of $35.0 million at December 31, 2021 are not subject to amortization.
The Revolving Facility and the New Term Loans are collateralized by a first priority lien on substantially all the assets of BRP, including a pledge of all equity securities of certain of its subsidiaries. The JPM Credit Agreement contains covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to make certain restricted payments, incur additional debt, engage in certain asset sales, mergers, acquisitions or similar transactions, create liens on assets, engage in certain transactions with affiliates, change our business, make certain investments or restrict BRP’s ability to make dividends or other distributions to BRP Group. In addition, the JPM Credit Agreement contains financial covenants requiring us to maintain our Total First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the JPM Credit Agreement) at or below 6.00 to 1.00.
Source and Uses of Cash
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
The primary sources and uses of cash for operating activities are net income adjusted for non-cash items and changes in assets and liabilities, or operating working capital. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 driven by an increase in net income adjusted for noncash items and an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities. This increase in cash was partially offset by a decrease in cash relating to a higher balance in premiums, commissions and fees receivable driven by revenue growth and the changes in revenue seasonality of our business given the underlying revenue streams of Partnerships.
Investing Activities
The primary sources and uses of cash for investing activities relate to cash consideration paid for business combinations and asset acquisitions, as well as capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities increased $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 driven by an increase in cash consideration paid to fund investments in joint ventures of $0.7 million.
Financing Activities
The primary sources and uses of cash for financing activities relate to the issuance of our Class A common stock, borrowings from and repayment to our credit agreements, payment of debt issuance costs, payment of contingent earnout consideration, and other equity transactions. Net cash provided by financing activities increased $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 primarily as a result of an equity raise that we completed during 2021, which generated $268.3 million in net proceeds, an increase in net borrowings on our credit facilities of $128.2 million, and a decrease in redemptions of LLC Units and Class B common stock resulting in $78.3 million less financing cash outflows, offset partially by equity raises completed during 2020, which generated $449.7 million in net proceeds.
Contractual Obligations
The following table represents our contractual obligations, aggregated by type, at December 31, 2021:
__________
(1) The Company leases facilities and office equipment under non-cancelable operating leases. Operating lease expense was $13.1 million and $7.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) Represents scheduled debt obligation and interest payments.
(3) Includes $258.6 million of current and non-current estimated contingent earnout liabilities at December 31, 2021.
Effects of Inflation
Certain of our lease agreements feature annual rent escalations either fixed or based on a consumer price index or other index, which, historically, have not had a material impact on our results of operations, including our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Given the recent rise in inflation, we anticipate the inflation rate increase for the upcoming year to be higher than those of past years. Despite this anticipated increase, we do not anticipate the inflation rate increase for 2022 to have a material impact on our results of operations. We have monitored and will continue to monitor the components of cost of revenue and operating expenses for the potential impact of inflation.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not invest in any off-balance sheet vehicles that provide liquidity, capital resources, market or credit risk support, or engage in any activities that expose us to any liability that is not reflected in our consolidated financial statements except for those described under this Liquidity and Capital Resources section.
Dividend Policy
Assuming BRP makes distributions to its members in any given year, the determination to pay dividends, if any, to our Class A common stockholders out of the portion, if any, of such distributions remaining after our payment of taxes, Tax Receivable Agreement payments and expenses (any such portion, an “excess distribution”) will be made at the sole discretion of our board of directors. Our board of directors may change our dividend policy at any time. See Item 5. “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities - Dividend Policy.”
Tax Receivable Agreement
On October 28, 2019, BRP Group entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with BRP’s LLC Members that provides for the payment by BRP Group to BRP’s LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that BRP Group actually realizes as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in BRP assets resulting from (a) previous acquisitions by BRP Group of BRP’s LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members, (b) the acquisition of LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (c) redemptions or exchanges by BRP’s LLC Members of LLC Units and the corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock for shares of Class A common stock or cash or (d) payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest resulting from payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Holders of BRP’s LLC Units (other than BRP Group) may, subject to certain conditions and transfer restrictions described above, redeem or exchange their LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock of BRP Group on a one-for-one basis. BRP intends to make an election under Section 754 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the regulations thereunder (the “Code”) effective for each taxable year in which a redemption or exchange of LLC Units for shares of Class A common stock occurs, which is expected to result in increases to the tax basis of the assets of BRP at the time of a redemption or exchange of LLC Units. The redemptions or exchanges are expected to result in increases in the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of BRP. These increases in tax basis may reduce the amount of tax that BRP Group would otherwise be required to pay in the future. We have entered into a Tax Receivable Agreement with the BRP’s LLC Members that provides for the payment by us to the BRP’s LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we actually realize as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in BRP Group’s assets resulting from (a) the purchase of LLC Units from any of the BRP’s LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (b) redemptions or exchanges by the BRP’s LLC Members of LLC Units for shares of our Class A common stock or (c) payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed arising as a result of payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. This payment obligation is an obligation of BRP Group and not of BRP. For purposes of the Tax Receivable Agreement, the cash tax savings in income tax will be computed by comparing the actual income tax liability of BRP Group (calculated with certain assumptions) to the amount of such taxes that BRP Group would have been required to pay had there been no increase to the tax basis of the assets of BRP as a result of the redemptions or exchanges and had BRP Group not entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement. Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the Tax Receivable Agreement is by its nature imprecise, insofar as the calculation of amounts payable depends on a variety of factors. While the actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of redemptions or exchanges, the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the redemption or exchange, the extent to which such redemptions or exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of our income, the tax rates then applicable and the portion of our payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement constituting imputed interest. We anticipate that we will account for the effects of these increases in tax basis and associated payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement arising from future redemptions or exchanges as follows:
•we will record an increase in deferred tax assets for the estimated income tax effects of the increases in tax basis based on enacted federal and state tax rates at the date of the redemption or exchange;
•to the extent we estimate that we will not realize the full benefit represented by the deferred tax asset, based on an analysis that will consider, among other things, our expectation of future earnings, we will reduce the deferred tax asset with a valuation allowance; and
•we will record 85% of the estimated realizable tax benefit (which is the recorded deferred tax asset less any recorded valuation allowance) as an increase to the liability due under the Tax Receivable Agreement and the remaining 15% of the estimated realizable tax benefit as an increase to additional paid-in capital.
All of the effects of changes in any of our estimates after the date of the redemption or exchange will be included in net income. Similarly, the effect of subsequent changes in the enacted tax rates will be included in net income.
Deferred Tax Assets
To determine the realizability of the Company’s deferred tax assets, the Company analyzed if it was in a cumulative pre-tax income or loss position over a three year period (2019, 2020 and 2021). Based on the analysis, the Company is in a pre-tax book loss position, and therefore has determined that its deferred tax assets are not more likely than not to be realized. As the Company emerges from its cumulative loss position, it will reassess the realizability of its deferred tax assets.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Please refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact us.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of commissions and fees and expenses during the reporting period. Our estimates, judgments and assumptions are continually evaluated based on historical experience and factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results involve judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities not readily apparent from other sources and actual results could differ from those estimates. The areas that we believe are critical accounting estimates, as discussed below, affect the more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions used to prepare our consolidated financial statements. Different assumptions in the application of these policies could result in material changes in our consolidated financial position or consolidated results of operations.
Commissions and Fees Recognition
We earn commission revenue by acting as an agent or broker on behalf of our Clients and Insurance Company Partners to provide insurance placement services to Clients. Commission revenue is usually a percentage of the premium paid by Clients and generally depend upon the type of insurance, the particular insurance company and the nature of the services provided. Commission revenue is earned at a point in time upon the effective date of bound insurance coverage, as no performance obligation exists after coverage is bound. The Company makes its best estimate of direct bill commissions at the policy effective date, particularly in employee benefits within the Middle Market Operating Group, which is subject to change based on enrollment and other factors over the policy period. Commissions revenue is recorded net of an allowance for estimated policy cancellations, which is determined based on an evaluation of historical and current cancellation data. Given a hypothetical 1% increase in our policy cancellation rate, our annual allowance for estimated policy cancellations would have increased by $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We earn consulting and service fee revenues by negotiating fees in lieu of a commission by providing specialty insurance consulting. Consulting and service fee revenue from certain agreements are recognized over time depending on when the services within the contract are satisfied and when the Company has transferred control of the related services to the customer.
We earn policy fee revenue for acting in the capacity of a managing general agent on behalf of the Insurance Company Partner and fulfilling certain services and administrative functions during the term of the insurance policy. Policy fee revenue is deferred and recognized over the life of the policy. We earn installment fee revenue related to policy premiums paid on an installment basis for payment processing services performed on behalf of the Insurance Company Partner. The Company recognizes installment fee revenue in the period the services are performed.
Profit-sharing commissions represent a form of variable consideration, which includes additional commissions over base commissions received from Insurance Company Partners. Profit-sharing commissions associated with relatively predictable measures are estimated with a constraint applied and recognized at a point in time. The profit-sharing commissions are recorded as the underlying policies that contribute to the achievement of the metric are placed with any adjustments recognized when payments are received or as additional information that affects the estimate becomes available. A constraint of variable consideration is necessary when commissions and fees are subject to significant reversal. Profit-sharing commissions associated with loss performance are uncertain, and therefore, are subject to significant reversal through catastrophic loss season and as loss data remains subject to material change. The constraint is relieved when management estimates commissions and fees that are not subject to significant reversal, which often coincides with the earlier of written notification from the Insurance Company Partner that the target has been achieved or cash collection. Year-end amounts incorporate estimates based on confirmation from Insurance Company Partners after calculation of potential loss ratios that are impacted by catastrophic losses. The consolidated financial statements include estimates that are not subject to significant reversal and incorporates information received from Insurance Company Partners, and where still subject to significant changes in estimates due to loss ratios and external factors that are outside of the Company’s control, a full constraint is applied.
We are entitled to commissions each year for multi-year Medicare contracts. We have applied a constraint to renewal commission that limits commissions and fees recognized on new policies to the policy year in effect, and revenue recognized on renewal policies to the receipt of periodic cash, when a risk of significant reversal exists based on (1) insufficient history; and (2) the influence of external factors outside of our control including policyholder discretion over plans and Insurance Company Partner relationships, political influence, and a contractual provision, which limits our right to receive renewal commissions to ongoing compliance and regulatory approval of the relevant Insurance Company Partner.
Costs to obtain contracts includes compensation in the form of producer commissions paid on new business. These incremental costs are capitalized as deferred commission expense and amortized over five years, which represents management’s estimate of the average period over which a Client maintains its initial coverage relationship with the original Insurance Company Partner. Given a hypothetical one-year increase in the amortization period for deferred commission expense, our annual expense related to deferred commissions would have decreased by $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Business Combination, Purchase Price Allocation and Valuation of Intangible Assets and Contingent Consideration
We continue to acquire significant intangible assets through multiple business combinations. The determination of estimated useful lives of intangible assets, the allocation of purchase price to intangible assets and the determination of the fair value of contingent earnout liabilities require significant judgment and affects the amount of future amortization, potential impairment charges and net fair value gain or loss.
Business combination purchase prices are typically based upon a multiple of average adjusted EBITDA or commission and fees earned over a one to three-year period within a minimum and maximum price range. We perform a purchase price allocation in connection with our business combinations, in connection with which we record the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including contingent consideration relating to potential earnout provisions. The excess of the purchase price of the business combination over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Intangible assets generally consist of purchased customer accounts, distributor relationships, carrier relationships, software and trade names. Purchased customer accounts include the records and files obtained from acquired businesses that contain information about insurance policies and the related insured parties that are essential to policy renewals. Distributor relationships consist of relationships with distributors that were not previously established. Carrier relationships consist of relationships with Insurance Company Partners that were not previously established. Trade names consist of acquired business names with potential customer base recognition. The Company assesses the fair value of purchased customer accounts, distributor relationships, carrier relationships and trade names by comparison of a reasonable multiple applied to either the corresponding commissions and fees or EBITDA in addition to considering the estimated future cash flows expected to be received over the estimated future renewal periods of the insurance policies comprising the intangible assets through the use of recognized income approach valuation methods. The valuation of these intangible assets involves significant assumptions concerning matters such as revenue and expense growth rates, customer attrition rates and discount rates. Any changes in these assumptions could affect the carrying value of the intangible assets. Purchased customer accounts, distributor relationships, carrier relationships and trade names are amortized on a basis consistent with the underlying cash flows over the related estimated lives of between one and twenty years. Software is recorded based on the estimated fair value of the acquired technology and is amortized on the straight-line basis over an estimated useful life of two to five years.
The fair value of contingent earnout liabilities and contingently returnable consideration is based upon estimated payments expected to be or paid to, or clawed back from, the sellers of the acquired businesses as measured by expected future cash flow projections under various scenarios. We use a probability weighted value analysis as a valuation technique to convert future estimated cash flows under various scenarios to a single present value amount. The significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurements are sales projections over the earnout period, and the probability outcome percentages assigned to each scenario. Significant increases or decreases to either of these inputs would result in a significantly higher or lower asset or liability with a higher asset capped by the contractual maximum of the contingently returnable consideration and a higher liability capped by the contractual maximum of the contingent earnout consideration. We assess the fair value of these liabilities and assets at each balance sheet date based on the expected performance of the associated business and any changes in fair value are recorded through change in fair value of contingent consideration in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
The fair value of contingent earnout liabilities is based on the present value of the expected future payments to be made to Partners in accordance with the provisions outlined in the respective purchase agreements. In determining fair value, we estimate the Partner’s future performance using financial projections developed by management for the Partner and market participant assumptions that were derived for revenue growth, profitability based on earnings before income taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) or the number of rental units tracked. Revenue and EBITDA growth rates generally ranged from 5% to 22% at December 31, 2021. We estimate future payments using the earnout formula and performance targets specified in each purchase agreement and these financial projections. These payments are discounted to present value using a risk-adjusted rate that takes into consideration market-based rates of return that reflect the ability of the Partner to achieve the targets. These discount rates generally ranged from 5.00% to 15.50% at December 31, 2021. Changes in financial projections, market participant assumptions for revenue growth and profitability, or the risk-adjusted discount rate, would result in a change in the fair value of contingent consideration.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets Including Goodwill
In applying the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations, the excess of the purchase price of an acquisition over the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities acquired is assigned to goodwill. Intangible assets are initially valued at fair value using generally accepted valuation methods appropriate for the type of intangible asset. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives and evaluated for impairment whenever an event occurs that indicates the asset may be impaired.
Goodwill is not amortized but rather is evaluated for impairment at least annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. Indicators of impairment include a reduction of expected future cash flows of our reporting units, a significant negative trend in the economy or insurance industry, and a sustained significant decrease in our market capitalization.
We test for goodwill impairment at the reporting unit level, which is an Operating Group or one level below an Operating Group. We have four reporting units, which are also our Operating Groups. We have the option of performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether a quantitative impairment test is necessary. If, after assessing qualitative factors, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then we proceed to the quantitative assessment.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires the fair value of each reporting unit to be compared to its book or carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is determined to be less than the fair value of the reporting unit, goodwill is deemed not to be impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is greater than the fair value, an impairment charge is recorded for the amount that the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, limited to amount of goodwill of the reporting unit.
During 2021, we performed an impairment evaluation for each of our reporting units beginning with a qualitative assessment. The qualitative factors we considered included general economic conditions, limitations on accessing capital, industry and market considerations, cost factors such as commissions expense that could have a negative effect on future cash flows, overall financial performance including declining cash flows and a decline in actual or anticipated commissions and fees, earnings or key statistics, and other entity-specific events such as changes in management and loss of key personnel or customers. We determined that based on the overall results and outlook of our reporting units, company and industry, including consideration of the effect of our new Partnerships, there was no indication of goodwill impairment at December 31, 2021. As such, no further testing was required.
We review our definite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever an event occurs that indicates the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. There were no indications that the carrying values of our definite-lived intangible assets or other long-lived assets were impaired at December 31, 2021. Any impairment charges that we may record in the future could materially impact our results of operations.
Tax Receivable Agreement Liability
On October 28, 2019, BRP Group entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with BRP’s LLC Members that provides for the payment by BRP Group to BRP’s LLC Members of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that BRP Group actually realizes as a result of (i) any increase in tax basis in BRP assets resulting from (a) previous acquisitions by BRP Group of BRP’s LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members, (b) the acquisition of LLC Units from BRP’s LLC Members using the net proceeds from any future offering, (c) redemptions or exchanges by BRP’s LLC Members of LLC Units and the corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock for shares of Class A common stock or cash or (d) payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, and (ii) tax benefits related to imputed interest resulting from payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
The actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, will vary depending on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the timing of any future redemptions, exchanges or purchases of the LLC Units held by BRP’s LLC Members, the price of our Class A common stock at the time of the purchase, redemption or exchange, the extent to which redemptions or exchanges are taxable, the amount and timing of the taxable income that we generate in the future, the tax rates then applicable and the portion of our payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement constituting imputed interest.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation includes expense recognized for management incentive units, advisor incentives, restricted stock awards to Colleagues, Class A common stock awards to our board of directors and performance-based restricted stock units awards to executives. We measure share-based compensation expense at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We use the ratable method to recognize compensation expense for equity awards with service conditions and performance conditions.
The grant-date fair value of unrestricted and restricted stock awards is equal to the market value of our Class A common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of the PSUs was estimated on the grant date using a Monte Carlo analysis to model the value of the PSUs using the following assumptions. Expected volatility between 18% and 172% is based on the 1-year historical volatility of a peer group and other companies that are publicly traded within the Russell 3000 Index. The risk-free interest rate of 0.27% is based on the U.S. Treasury rate in effect at the time of the grant. Expected term of 2.7 years is based on the actual term of the awards.
Income Taxes
We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. We compute the provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using the currently enacted tax rates in each jurisdiction that applies to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled.
We are required to establish a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and record a charge to income if it is determined, based on available evidence at the time the determination is made, that it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred taxes in 2021 have been reduced by a full valuation allowance due to a determination that it is more likely than not that all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized based on the weight of all available evidence.
Our evaluation of the realizability of the deferred tax assets focuses on identifying significant, objective evidence that we will more likely than not be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future. We consider both positive and negative evidence when evaluating the need for a valuation allowance, which is highly judgmental and requires subjective weighting of such evidence.