ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations of Brain Scientific Inc. together with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Forward Looking Statements
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section entitled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “could,” “scheduled,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “seek,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Overview
The Company is a MedTech company with two cutting edge product lines: Neurology and Motion Products. Since October 1, 2021, the Company has had two subsidiaries, each of which is focused on one of our complimentary Product lines. The Neurology Products of Memory MD are designed for neurology-focused medical devices. The Motion Products of Piezo are piezoelectric motors which are fast, precise, tiny and powerful. The piezo motors are designed for and expected to have valuable and beneficial uses as motors within medical devices and devices outside of the MedTech industry. We have developed twelve motor platforms and an ultra-precise micro dosing pump, each of which is presently available commercially. We are also currently developing additional motion products that leverage our patented intellectual property.
We were initially organized on November 18, 2013 as a Nevada limited liability company under the name Global Energy Express LLC by the filing of articles of organization with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada. On December 18, 2015, we converted from a Nevada limited liability company under the name Global Energy Express LLC to a Nevada corporation under the name All Soft Gels Inc. by the filing of articles of conversion and articles of incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of Nevada. On September 18, 2018, we changed our name from All Soft Gels Inc. to Brain Scientific Inc. and changed our ticker symbol on the OTC Pink market to “BRSF”.
   
On September 21, 2018, we entered into a merger agreement (the “Merger Agreement”) with MemoryMD, Inc. and AFGG Acquisition Corp. to acquire MemoryMD, Inc. (the “Acquisition”). The transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement were consummated on September 21, 2018 and, pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, all outstanding shares of MemoryMD were exchanged for shares of our common stock. Accordingly, we acquired 100% of Memory MD, Inc. in exchange for the issuance of shares of our common stock and MemoryMD, Inc. became our wholly-owned subsidiary. In conjunction with the Acquisition, we ceased all direct operations and assigned all of our assets and liabilities from prior to the Acquisition, and assumed and commenced the business of MemoryMD as the sole business of the Company.
On June 11, 2021, we entered into another merger agreement (the “Piezo Merger Agreement”) with Piezo Motion Corp. and BRSF Acquisition Corp. to acquire Piezo. (the “Piezo Acquisition”). The transactions contemplated by the Piezo Merger Agreement were consummated on October 1, 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the Piezo Merger Agreement, all outstanding shares of Piezo were exchanged for shares of our common stock. Accordingly, we acquired 100% of Piezo in exchange for the issuance of shares of our common stock and Piezo became our wholly-owned subsidiary.
The financial statements are represented based upon the Piezo financials up until the Piezo Acquisition. The combined company financials are provided inclusive of the BSI operations for the fourth quarter of 2021. The accounting is based upon reverse merger accounting due to the majority of outstanding shares after the Piezo Acquisition were with the Piezo shareholders.
The majority of revenue in 2021 is from 4th quarter sales from our subsidiary which operates as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia (except for $38,309 from Piezo sales and $6,194 of sales from MemoryMD in the U.S.). Sales of $93,664 in 2020 were based upon sale of piezoelectric motors, including non-recurring engineering consulting and software licensing revenue. While we intend to continue the sale of third-party medical devices, we do not intend for it to be our primary source of revenue in the long-term. The Russian invasion of Ukraine on February 24, 2022 may have impact on our ability to continue the Russian operations. We also can give no assurance that any revenue we generate from so acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices will continue, will continue to be material or will be sufficient to enable us to continue our operations. We have no supply or distribution agreements in place with respect to such business. In the event that we see an opportunity to sell such products, we procure them and then re-sell them.
We have limited resources. To date, our primary activities have been limited to, and our limited resources have been dedicated to, commercializing our piezoelectric motors, NeuroCap and NeuroEEG. performing business and financial planning, raising capital, recruiting personnel, and conducting development activities, although we have acted as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia (which has generated revenue for us in 2021. Both our Neurology Products and Motion Products are production ready for manufacture and sale. For all our Products we have commenced some non-recurring, initial sales.
Financial Overview
Revenue
Revenues for 2021 were generated both from sale of evaluation kits for piezoelectric motors of $38,309 for the year. Revenue includes 4th quarter sales of $6,194 of NeuroCaps and of $221,244 from the Russian subsidiary for distributing third-party medical devices in Russia. Sales for piezoelectric motors reduced from 2020 as Piezo focused on the final commercialization of the Blue Series of motors. In 2020, revenue had included non-recurring revenue from engineering services and licensing of software for approximately $66k of revenue.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for administration, product management, for personnel in functions not directly associated with sales and marketing or research and development activities. Other significant costs include rent, travel, legal fees relating to corporate matters, intellectual property costs, professional fees for consultants assisting with regulatory, product development and financial matters, and product costs. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will be steady in the near to support our continued commercialization of our Products and maintaining the infrastructure for a public company.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development activities in developing our Products. Research and development expenses include compensation and benefits for research and development employees, overhead expenses, cost of laboratory supplies, costs related to regulatory operations, fees paid to consultants, and other outside expenses. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to be maintained at the current level until we begin generating revenue from our existing Neurology and Motion Products. We anticipate it will then begin to increase as we exploit additional patents in our Motion Products and develop our Neurology Products, including conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of costs and interest costs related to the convertible notes we issued in 2021 and 2020. The convertible notes bear interest at fixed rate of 10% per annum.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the results of operations of the Company for the years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Revenue for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $265,747 compared to $93,664 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. In the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, we generated the majority of our revenue through acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia, and we did not have significant sales of our Products. The increase in revenues in the current year resulted from inclusion of sales of third-party medical devices in Russia.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold were $182,519 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $43,792 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increased cost of sales was primarily due to the inclusion in sales of third-party medical devices in Russia during 4th quarter.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $329,425 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $210,706 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in product validation activities and adding additional personnel to complete the commercialization of the Blues Series piezoelectric motors.
Professional fees
Professional fees were $818,698 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $268,223 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, professional fees were associated with preparation for the Piezo Acquisition, including approximately $373,000 in legal expenses, approximately $323,000 in accounting expenses, and approximately $67,000 of advisory expenses. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees were primarily related to approximately $232,000 in legal expenses and approximately $35,000 in accounting expenses. The increase in professional fees in the current year was due primarily to the Piezo Acquisition.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses were $1,041,575, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $197,372 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to hiring of personnel to begin the process of sales and marketing products as the Company readied for full commercialization.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $6,549,981 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,143,089 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses included payroll expenses of approximately $1,985,000, expense associated with stock-option based compensation of approximately $3,224,000, approximately $161,000 of insurance expense, $244,000 of consulting for product engineering and system implementation and $216,000 of travel expenses. In the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses were primarily related to approximately $1,429,000 in payroll related expenses, approximately $321,000 in consulting fees and approximately $9,000 in insurance expense. The increase in spending in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the stock-based compensation, increased D&O insurance costs and an increase in payroll related expenses.
Interest expense
Interest expense, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $467,849, related to the Company’s convertible and promissory notes. A further amortization of debt discount of $89,787 was expensed for the year ended December 31, 2021. Interest expense, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 was $29,474, related to the Company’s convertible promissory notes. The increase was due to the issuance of approximately $6.9 million of convertible debt during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other income and expense
Other expense for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $444,209. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expense was derived primarily from interest expense of $467,849 and debt discount amortization of $89,787 partially offset by gain on forgiveness of paycheck protection plan of $112,338 and other income of $1,110.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
While we have generated revenue in 2021, we anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future. Furthermore, most of the revenue was generated through acting as a distributor of third-party medical devices in Russia, and we did not have significant sales of our Products. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we expand our sales and marketing efforts for our Products, seek further regulatory approvals, ramp manufacture of Motion Products and contract to manufacture Neurology Products.
We have incurred losses since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $22,278,923 as of December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative expenses associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating and net losses for the foreseeable future.
Historically, our primary source of cash has been proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 we issued $9,718,915 of convertible promissory notes. Net cash proceeds from those notes totaled $7,219,982.
We need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise such capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop and commercialize our products and future products and our ability to pursue our business strategy. See “-Liquidity and Capital Requirements” below.
We have also from time to time issued shares of our common stock to individuals and entities as payment for services rendered to us in lieu of cash.
We have no current source of revenue to sustain our present activities other than as acting as a distributor of medical devices in Russia which is not our primary business goal. We require successful launches of both our Neurology and our Motion products to begin to generate revenue to start supporting operations. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity (preferred stock or common stock) and debt financings as well as collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third-party partners, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our Product development, or future commercialization efforts.
Our independent registered public accounting firm included an explanatory paragraph in its report on our financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, noting the existence of substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. This uncertainty arose from management's review of our results of operations and financial condition and its conclusion that, based on our operating plans, we did not have sufficient existing working capital to sustain operations for a period of twelve months from the date of the issuance of these financial statements.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, without raising additional funds or generating revenues, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses only to approximately May 2022.
The development of our Products is subject to numerous uncertainties, and we have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be substantially different than we currently anticipate and could use our cash resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of developing medical devices and piezoelectric motors is costly with uncertain timing. Our ability to successfully transition to profitability will be dependent upon achieving a level of Product sales adequate to support our cost structure. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $5,794,792 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $931,664 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This fluctuation is primarily due to increases in net loss of $6,297,657, fair value of stock options vested of $2,943,499 and common stock issued for services of $280,174 partially offset by a decrease in net working capital of $783,717.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $58,647 and $30,371 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and consisted of the purchase of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6,573,849 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of the sale of the Company’s convertible promissory notes for aggregate gross proceeds of $7,219,982 proceeds from convertible notes partially offset by repayment of promissory notes in the amount of $646,133. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash proceeds included $650,000 proceeds from the sale of convertible notes, $100,000 proceeds from issuance of Series C Preferred Stock and $111,477 of proceeds from the paycheck protection loan program.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid temporary cash investments with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had no cash equivalents.
The Company’s cash is held with financial institutions, and the account balances may, at times, exceed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insurance limit. Accounts are insured by the FDIC up to $250,000 per financial institution. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts with these financial institutions. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $277,989 and $0, respectively, in excess over the FDIC insurance limit.
Inventory
Inventory consists of finished goods that are valued at lower of cost or market using the weighted average method.
Property and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost. Depreciation is provided on the straight-line method over the assets estimated service lives. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to expense in the period in which they are incurred, and betterments are capitalized. The cost of assets sold or abandoned and the related accumulated depreciation are eliminated from the accounts and any gains or losses are reflected in the accompanying statements of operations of the respective period. The estimated useful lives range from 3 to 7 years.
Convertible Notes Payable
The Company has issued convertible notes, which contain variable conversion features, whereby the outstanding principal and accrued interest automatically convert into common shares at a fixed price which may be a discount to the common stock at the time of conversion. Some of the conversion features of these notes are contingent upon future events, whereby, the holder agreed not to convert until the contingent future event has occurred.
Revenue Recognition
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC Topic 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers. This guidance requires an entity to recognize revenue by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied. Once the steps are met, revenue is recognized, generally upon receiving a letter of acceptance from the customer. There has been no material effect on the Company’s financial statements as a result of adopting Topic 606.
The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of piezoelectric motors, NeuroCaps, as well as revenue from the sale of goods purchased through manufacturers of medical devices. The majority revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 ais from the sale of medical devices purchased from Neurotech..
Research and Development
The Company expenses all research and development costs as they are incurred. Research and development includes expenditures in connection with in-house research and development salaries and staff costs, application and filing for regulatory approval of proposed products, regulatory and scientific consulting fees, as well as contract research, data collection, and monitoring, related to the research and development of the cloud infrastructure, data imaging, and proprietary products and technology. Research and development costs recognized in the statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $329,452 and $210,706, respectively.
Sales and Marketing
Advertising and marketing costs are expensed as incurred. Advertising and marketing costs recognized in the statement of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,041,575 and $197,372, respectively.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company measures and recognizes compensation expense for all stock-based payments at fair value over the requisite service period. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the weighted average fair value of options and warrants. Equity-based compensation expense is recorded in administrative expenses based on the classification of the employee or vendor. The determination of fair value of stock-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as by assumptions regarding a number of subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, the expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors.