Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION SHOULD BE READ TOGETHER WITH THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND RELATED NOTES INCLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K.
The following discussion reflects our plan of operation. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements which are attached to this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding our expected financial position, business and financing plans. These statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly under the headings "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
Unless the context otherwise suggests, "we," "our," "us," and similar terms, as well as references to "BRVO" and "Bravo Multinational Incorporated," all refer to the "Company".
As mentioned above, over the years, and prior to our entry into the business of the leasing of gaming equipment described below, we had been engaged in the business of owning and leasing mining claims, see "Item 1. Business - Former Business."
For a complete discussion of our former leasing of mining claims, please see our previous Form 10-Ks, 10-Qs, and 8-Ks filed with the SEC.
Coronavirus Impact (COVID-19)
Due to the recent outbreak of the coronavirus reported in many countries worldwide, local and federal governments have issued travel advisories, canceled large scale public events and closed schools. In addition, companies have begun to cancel conferences and travel plans and require employees to work from home. Global financial markets have also experienced extreme volatility and disruptions to capital and credit markets.
Adverse events such as health-related concerns about working in our offices, the inability to travel, potential impact on our business partners and customers, and other matters affecting the general work and business environment could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy.
Management is currently aware of the global and domestic issues arising from the Covid-19 pandemic and the possible direct and indirect effects on the Company's operations which could have a material adverse effect on the Company's current financial position, future results of operations, or liquidity, because its current operations are limited. However, investors should also be aware of factors, which includes the possibility of Covid-19 effects on operational status, could have a negative impact on the Company's prospects and the consistency of progress in the areas of revenue generation, liquidity, and generation of capital resources. These may include: (i) variations in revenue, (ii) possible inability to attract investors for its equity securities or otherwise raise adequate funds from any source should the company seek to do so, (iii) increased governmental regulation or significant changes in that regulation, (iv) increased competition, (v) unfavorable outcomes to litigation involving the Company or to which the Company may become a party in the future, and (vi) a very competitive and rapidly changing operating environment. The adverse events may also adversely impact our ability to raise capital or to continue as a going concern. We continue to monitor the recent outbreak of the coronavirus on our operations. The global economic slowdown and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects. In addition, to the extent the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic adversely affects the Company's business and results of operations. It may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks and uncertainties which the Company faces.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, Bravo Multinational had an accumulated deficit of $90,412,662. We, as managment, have substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. While we are attempting to generate revenues, our cash position may not be significant enough to support our daily operations. We intends to raise additional funds by way of an offering of our securities, and that the actions presently being taken to further implement our business plan and generate revenues will improve the Company's operating results. While we believe in the viability of our strategy to generate revenues and in our ability to raise additional funds, we may not be successful. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our capability to further implement our business plan and generate revenues. This issue is addressed in footnote 4 to the financial statements.
Year Ended December 31, 2021, compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues for the Company's year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $-0- and for year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $-0. No machines sales occurred throughout the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $-0- and for year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $-0. No gaming machines were purchased or sold during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Gross margins for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 0%, respectively.
General and Administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $9,436 compared to $16,045 for year ending December 31, 2020. The decrease was attributed to lower fees paid to the Company's stock transfer agent in 2021.
Professional Fees for the year ending December 31, 2021 totaled $43,203 compared to $70,939 for year ending December 31, 2020, the decrease was attributed to lower legal and accounting fees incurred as a fully reporting Company with the SEC.
Board of Director fees for the year ending December 31, 2021 totaled $475,000 compared to $48,435,417 for year ending December 31, 2020, the decrease was attributed to accounting treatment for the retirement of certain shares of preferred stock in 2020 as more fully set forth below.
Consulting fees for the year ending December 31, 2021 totaled $-0- compared to $12,000,000 for the year ending December 31, 2020, the decrease was attributed to no consultation fees in 2021.
Net Loss
Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $420,126 and $60,473,829 , respectively. The decrease in loss was attributed due to no issuances of equity based compensation of either common or preferred shares.
The enormous impact on the financial numbers set forth above is due to the accounting treatment related to Mr. Ferguson's and Mr. Kaiser's return and retirement of preferred stock in 2020
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
As of December 31, 2021, our assets, consisting primarily of Cash and Prepaid Expenses, totaled $133. The Company's total liabilities at December 31, 2021 were $1,062,417, which consisted primarily of accounts payable, accrued expenses, customer deposits, amounts due to related parties, and accrued board of director fees. As of this date the Company had an accumulated deficit of $90,412,662 and working capital of deficit of $81,239,506. This increase in our deficit over the same period in 2020, is due to increase in operational cost.
The Company's significant operating losses raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern (see footnote 4 to the financial statements). The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. As indicated herein, we need capital for the implementation of our business plan, and we will need additional capital for continuing our operations. We do not have sufficient revenues to pay our operating expenses at this time. Unless the Company is able to raise working capital, it is likely that the Company will either have to cease operations or substantially change its methods of operations or change its business plan. For the next 12 months the Company has an oral commitment from its CEO to advance funds as necessary to meet our operating requirement.
Cash from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $47,942 for year ended December 31, 2021, and was $76,498 for year ended December 31, 2020.
Accounting Principals
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with the United States generally accepted accounting principles. Preparing financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that impact the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by management's application of accounting policies. Critical accounting policies include revenue recognition and impairment of long-lived assets.
Stock-Based Compensation
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718)to expand the scope of ASC 718,Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718)("ASU 2018-07"), to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2018. The Company is still evaluating this ASU and anticipates it will not have significant impact on our condensed consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. To achieve this core principle, we apply the following five steps: (1) Identify the contract with a client; (2)Identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) Determine the transaction price; (4) Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and (5) Recognize revenues when or as the company satisfies a performance obligation.
We adopted this ASU on January 1, 2018. Although the new revenue standard is expected to have an immaterial impact, if any, on our ongoing net income, we did implement changes to our processes related to revenue recognition and the control activities within them.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.