Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences are described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included earlier in this report. Please see “-Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-:Looking Statements.”
This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between those years. For discussion of our year ended December 31, 2019, as well as the year ended 2020 compared to year ended 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 - “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
We are a western United States independent upstream energy company focused on the development and production of onshore, low geologic risk, long-lived conventional oil reserves primarily located in California. As further discussed below, in the fourth quarter of 2021, we diversified our operations with the acquisition of a business with well servicing and abandonment capabilities. As of October 1, 2021, we have operated in two business segments: (i) development and production (“D&P”) (ii) well servicing and abandonment. The development and production segment is engaged in the development and production of onshore, low geologic risk, long-lived conventional oil reserves primarily located in California, as well as Utah. On October 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of one of the largest upstream well servicing and abandonment businesses in California, which became a reportable segment (well servicing and abandonment) under U.S. GAAP.
Our upstream development and production assets, in the aggregate, are characterized by high oil content, with 100% oil content for our California assets, and are in rural areas with low population. In California, we focus on conventional, shallow oil reservoirs, the drilling and completion of which are relatively low-cost in contrast to unconventional resource plays. For example, the cost to drill and complete the different types of our wells in California is approximately $400,000 per well. The vertical wells in Utah operations cost approximately $1.5 million per well. In contrast, wells in typical unconventional resource plays cost $5 million to $10 million to drill and complete. The California oil market has Brent-linked pricing which in recent history realizes premium pricing to WTI. In the past five years Brent pricing has averaged almost $5 above WTI. All of our California assets are located in the oil-rich reservoirs in the San Joaquin basin, which has more than 150 years of production history and substantial oil remaining in place. As a result of the substantial data produced over the basin’s long history, its reservoir characteristics are well understood, which enables predictable, repeatable, low geological risk and low-cost development opportunities. We also have upstream assets in the low-operating cost, oil-rich reservoirs in the Uinta basin of Utah. In January 2022, we divested our natural gas properties in the Piceance basin of Colorado.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we acquired one of the largest upstream well servicing and abandonment businesses in California, which operates as C&J Well Services. This acquisition creates a strategic growth opportunity for Berry. It is a synergistic fit with the services required by our oil and gas operations and supports our commitment to be a responsible operator and reduce our emissions, including through the proactive plugging and abandonment of wells. Additionally, C&J Well Services is critical to advancing our strategy to work with the State of California to reduce fugitive emissions - including methane and carbon dioxide - from idle wells. We believe that C&J Well Services is uniquely positioned to capture both state and federal funds to help remediate orphan idle wells (an idle well that has been abandoned by the operator and as a result becomes a burden of the State is referred to as an orphan well), and there are approximately 35,000 idle wells estimated to be in California according to third-party sources.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Since our Initial Public Offering in 2018, we have demonstrated our commitment to returning a substantial amount of capital to shareholders, delivering $134 million to our shareholders through dividends and share repurchases through 2021. In 2022, we initiated a new shareholder return model, which is designed to significantly increase cash returns to our shareholders from our discretionary free cash flow, which we define as cash flow from operations less regular fixed dividends and the capital needed to hold production flat. Like our business model, this new shareholder returns model is simple and further demonstrates our commitment to return capital to our shareholders.
We believe that the successful execution of our strategy across our low-declining, oil-weighted production base coupled with extensive inventory of identified drilling locations with attractive full-cycle economics will support our objectives to generate Levered Free Cash Flow to fund our operations, optimize capital efficiency, and return meaningful capital to stockholders, while maintaining a low leverage profile and focusing on attractive organic and strategic growth through commodity price cycles.
As part of our commitment to creating long-term value for our stockholders, we are dedicated to conducting our operations in an ethical, safe and responsible manner, to protecting the environment, and to taking care of our people and the communities in which we live and operate.
How We Plan and Evaluate Operations
We use “Levered Free Cash Flow” in planning our capital allocation to sustain production levels and fund internal growth opportunities, as well as determine our strategic hedging needs (we also hedge to meet the hedging requirements of the 2021 RBL Facility). Levered Free Cash Flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as Adjusted EBITDA less capital expenditures, interest expense and dividends. Adjusted EBITDA is also a non-GAAP financial measure that is discussed and defined below.
We use the following metrics to manage and assess the performance of our operations: (a) Adjusted EBITDA; (b) shareholder returns; (c) operating expenses; (d) environmental, health & safety (“EH&S”) results; (e) general and administrative expenses; (f) production; and (g) well servicing and abandonment operations performance. With respect to our development and production business, we also measure oil and gas production levels. For our well services and abandonment business, we measure their performance through activity levels, pricing and relative performance for each service provided.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is the primary financial and operating measurement that our management uses to analyze and monitor the operating performance of our business. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion, and amortization (“DD&A”); derivative gains or losses net of cash received or paid for scheduled derivative settlements; impairments; stock compensation expense; and unusual and infrequent items.
Shareholder Returns
In early 2022, we implemented a new shareholder return model, for which we intend to allocate a significant portion of discretionary free cash flow to cash variable dividends to be paid quarterly. The model is based on our discretionary free cash flow, which is defined as cash flow from operations less regular fixed dividends and the capital needed to hold production flat. We expect remaining cash flows will be allocated to fund opportunistic debt repurchases, opportunistic growth, including from our extensive inventory of drilling opportunities, advancing our short- and long-term sustainability initiatives, share repurchases, and/or capital retention. Our focus on shareholder returns is also demonstrated through our performance-based restricted stock awards, which are based on the Company's average cash returned on invested capital.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Operating Expenses
Overall, operating expense is used by management as a measure of the efficiency with which operations are performing. With respect to our production business, we define operating expenses as lease operating expenses, electricity generation expenses, transportation expenses, and marketing expenses, offset by the third-party revenues generated by electricity, transportation and marketing activities, as well as the effect of derivative settlements (received or paid) for gas purchases. Lease operating expenses include fuel, labor, field office, vehicle, supervision, maintenance, tools and supplies, and workover expenses. Taxes other than income taxes and costs of services are excluded from operating expenses. Marketing revenues represent sales of natural gas purchased from and sold to third parties. The electricity, transportation and marketing activity related revenues are viewed and treated internally as a reduction to operating costs when tracking and analyzing the economics of development projects and the efficiency of our hydrocarbon recovery. Additionally, we strive to minimize the variability of our fuel gas costs for our California steam operations with gas hedges, and more recently agreements to transport fuel gas from the Rockies which have historically been cheaper than the California markets.
Environmental, Health & Safety
Like other companies in the oil and gas industry, both our production and well services operations are subject to complex and stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to drilling, completion, well stimulation, well servicing, operation, maintenance or abandonment of wells or facilities, managing energy, water use, land use, managing greenhouse gases or other emissions, governing the discharge of materials into the environment or otherwise relating to environmental protection, including air quality, and the transportation, marketing, and sale of our products.
With respect to our production operations, current and future laws and regulations, as well as legislative and regulatory changes and other government activities, can materially impact our development, production, well servicing and abandonment plans, including by restricting the production rate of oil, natural gas and NGLs below the rate that would otherwise be possible. Additionally, the regulatory burden on the industry increases the cost of doing business and consequently effects capital expenditures and earnings.
As part of our commitment to creating long-term stockholder value, we strive to conduct our operations in an ethical, safe and responsible manner, to protect the environment and to take care of our people and the communities in which we live and operate. We also seek proactive and transparent engagement with regulatory agencies, the communities in which we operate and our other stakeholders in order to realize the full potential of our resources in a timely fashion that safeguards people and the environment and complies with existing laws and regulations.
We have a progressive approach to growing and evolving our businesses in today's dynamic oil and gas industry. Our strategy includes proactively engaging the many forces driving our industry and impacting our operations, whether positive or negative, to maximize the utility of our assets, create value for shareholders, and support environmental goals that align with safer, more efficient and lower emission operations. We believe that oil and gas will remain an important part of the energy landscape going forward and our goal is to conduct our business safely and responsibly, while supporting economic stability and social equity through engagement with our stakeholders. We monitor our EH&S performance through various measures, holding our employees and contractors to high standards. Meeting corporate EH&S metrics, including with respect to health and safety and spill prevention, is a part of our short-term incentive program for all employees.
General and Administrative Expenses
We monitor our cash general and administrative expenses as a measure of the efficiency of our overhead activities and approximately 9% of such costs are capitalized, which is significantly less than industry norms. Such expenses are a key component of the appropriate level of support our corporate and professional team provides to the development of our assets and our day-to-day operations.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Production
Oil and gas production is a key driver of our operating performance, an important factor to the success of our business, and used in forecasting future development economics. We measure and closely monitor production on a continuous basis, adjusting our property development efforts in accordance with the results. We track production by commodity type and compare it to prior periods and expected results.
Well Servicing and Abandonment Operations Performance
We consistently monitor our well servicing and abandonment operations performance with revenue by service and customer, as well as Adjusted EBITDA for this business.
Business Environment and Market Conditions
Our operating and financial results, and those of the oil and gas industry as a whole, are heavily influenced by commodity prices. Oil and gas prices and differentials have, and may continue to, fluctuate significantly as a result of numerous market-related variables, including global geopolitical and economic conditions. While oil prices have improved in 2021 and into 2022, they still remain volatile.
Our well services and abandonment business is dependent on expenditures of oil and gas companies, which can in part reflect the volatility of commodity prices. Because existing oil and natural gas wells require ongoing spending to maintain production, expenditures by oil and gas companies for the maintenance of existing wells historically have been relatively stable and predictable. Additionally, our customers' requirements to plug and abandon wells is largely driven by regulatory requirements that is less dependent on commodity prices.
The recent recovery in the oil and gas industry has improved with increasing oil prices as demand increases with more states and countries re-opening and national and global economies continuing to recover from the global COVID-19 pandemic. The demand for oil, while improving as the ability of the global industry to grow supply diminishes, could again decline if there is a widespread resurgence of the COVID-19 outbreak. The extent to which our operating and financial results of future periods will be adversely impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the actions of foreign oil and gas producers will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. Further, to what extent these events do ultimately impact our future business, liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations is highly uncertain and dependent on numerous factors that are not within our control and cannot be predicted, including the duration and extent of the pandemic and speculation as to future actions by OPEC+. We were proactive in taking steps to address the challenges and mitigate repercussions from both the COVID-19 pandemic and industry downturns on our operations, our financial condition and our people.
As we focused on managing our business and operations in response to this health and economic crisis, the safety and well-being of our employees and the communities in which we operate remained our top priority. We are committed to being a good corporate citizen and demonstrated this commitment by focusing on the well-being of our employees and communities, including maintaining our strong safety and environmental standards and investing in community impact initiatives.
Because the visibility of the long-term supply and demand for oil has improved, we reinstated the quarterly dividend in the first quarter of 2021, which had been temporarily suspended in 2020, increased the dividend beginning the third quarter of 2021, and repurchased treasury shares during the year. Since our Initial Public Offering in 2018, we have demonstrated our commitment to returning a substantial amount of capital to shareholders, delivering $134 million to our shareholders through dividends and share repurchases through 2021. In 2022, we initiated a new shareholder return model, which is designed to significantly increase cash returns to our shareholders from our discretionary free cash flow, which we define as cash flow from operations less regular fixed dividends and the capital needed to hold production flat. Like our business model, this new shareholder returns model is simple and further demonstrates our commitment to return capital to our shareholders.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Commodity Pricing and Differentials
Our revenue, costs, profitability, shareholder returns and future growth are highly dependent on the prices we receive for our oil and natural gas production, as well as the prices we pay for our natural gas purchases, which are affected by a variety of factors, including those discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Average oil prices were higher for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Brent crude oil contract prices ranged from $51.09 per bbl to $86.40 per bbl and averaged $70.95 per bbl during the year. Though the California market generally receives Brent-influenced pricing, California oil prices are determined ultimately by local supply and demand dynamics.
In California, the price we have typically paid for fuel gas purchases is generally based on the Kern, Delivered Index, which was as high as $120.13 per mmbtu in February due to the effects of Winter Storm Uri, and as low as $2.37 per mmbtu during 2021, while we paid an average of $5.64 per mmbtu for the year.
The following table presents the average Brent, WTI, Kern Delivered, and Henry Hub prices for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
As mentioned above, California oil prices are Brent-influenced as California refiners import approximately 65% to 70% of the state’s demand from OPEC+ countries and other waterborne sources. Without the higher costs and potential environmental impact associated with importing crude via rail or supertanker, we believe our in-state production and low-cost crude transportation options, coupled with Brent-influenced pricing, in appropriate oil price environments, should continue to allow us to realize positive cash margins in California over the cycle.
Utah oil prices have historically traded at a discount to WTI as the local refineries are designed for Utah's unique oil characteristics and the remoteness of the assets makes access to other markets logistically challenging. However, we have high operational control of our existing acreage, which provides significant upside for additional vertical and or horizontal development and recompletions.
Natural gas prices and differentials are strongly affected by local market fundamentals, availability of transportation capacity from producing areas and seasonal impacts. We purchase substantially more natural gas for our California steamfloods and cogeneration facilities than we produce and sell in the Rockies. Natural gas prices were strong in 2021 and we expect will continue to exhibit strength in 2022 based on current and projected supply and demand balances. In recent history, the California gas markets have generally had higher gas prices than the Rockies and the rest of the United States. Higher gas prices have a negative impact on our operating results. However, we mitigate a portion of this exposure by selling excess electricity from our cogeneration operations to third parties at prices linked to the price of natural gas. We also strive to minimize the variability of our fuel gas costs for our steam operations by hedging a significant portion of such gas purchases. In addition, we recently entered into new pipeline capacity agreements for the shipment of natural gas from the Rockies to our assets in California that help limit our exposure to fuel gas purchase price fluctuations. Additionally, the negative impact of higher gas prices on our California operating expenses is partially offset by higher gas sales for the gas we produce and sell in the Rockies.
Prices and differentials for NGLs are related to the supply and demand for the products making up these liquids. Some of them more typically correlate to the price of oil while others are affected by natural gas prices as well as the
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
demand for certain chemical products which are used as feedstock. In addition, infrastructure constraints magnify pricing volatility.
Our earnings are also affected by the performance of our cogeneration facilities. These cogeneration facilities generate both electricity and steam for our properties and electricity for off-lease sales. While a portion of the electric output of our cogeneration facilities is utilized within our production facilities to reduce operating expenses, we also sell electricity produced by two of our cogeneration facilities under long-term contracts with terms ending in July 2022 through December 2026. The most significant input and cost of the cogeneration facilities is natural gas. We generally receive significantly more revenue from these cogeneration facilities in the summer months, most notably in June through September, due to negotiated capacity payments we receive. In October 2021 we sold Placerita, which included a cogeneration facility requiring significant fuel gas purchases, and generated significant amount of electricity throughout the year, especially in the summer months.
Seasonal weather conditions can impact our drilling, production and well servicing activities. These seasonal conditions can occasionally pose challenges in our operations for meeting well-drilling and completion objectives and increase competition for equipment, supplies and personnel, which could lead to shortages and increase costs or delay operations. For example, our operations may have been and in the future may be impacted by ice and snow in the winter, especially in Utah, and by electrical storms and high temperatures in the spring and summer, as well as by wild fires and rain.
Additionally, like other companies in the oil and gas industry, our operations are subject to stringent federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to drilling, completion, well stimulation, operation, maintenance or abandonment of wells or facilities, managing energy, water, land, greenhouse gases or other emissions, protection of health, safety and the environment, or transportation, marketing, and sale of our products. Federal, state and local agencies may assert overlapping authority to regulate in these areas. See “Items 1 and 2. Business and Properties-Regulation of Health, Safety and Environmental Matters” for a description of laws and regulations that affect our business. For more information related to regulatory risks, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Operations and Industry”.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Certain Operating and Financial Information
The following tables set forth information regarding average daily production, total production, and average prices for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
__________
(1) Production represents volumes sold during the period. We also consume a portion of the natural gas we produce on lease to extract oil and gas.
(2) Natural gas volumes have been converted to boe based on energy content of six mcf of gas to one bbl of oil. Barrels of oil equivalence does not necessarily result in price equivalence. The price of natural gas on a barrel of oil equivalent basis is currently substantially lower than the corresponding price for oil and has been similarly lower for a number of years. For example, in the year ended December 31, 2021, the average prices of Brent oil and Henry Hub natural gas were $70.95 per bbl and $3.89 per mmbtu respectively.
(3) Kern, Delivered Index is the relevant index used for gas purchases in California.
(4) Henry Hub is the relevant index used for gas sales in the Rockies.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following table sets forth average daily production by operating area for the periods indicated:
__________
(1) Production represents volumes sold during the period.
(2) Includes production for Placerita properties though the end of October 2021 when they were divested. These properties had average daily production in 2021 of over 800 boe/d prior to the sale.
(3) Our properties in Colorado were in the Piceance basin, all of which were all divested in January 2022.
Average daily production increased each quarter throughout 2021 and the last quarter of 2021 was 5% higher than the last quarter of 2020. This is indicative of the positive response from our assets with strategic capital deployment. The year-over-year production results were impacted by a significant capital reduction in 2020 in response to the significant decline in oil price and the measured ramp up in activity in early 2021. Oil production decreased 4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, however the fourth quarter 2021 exit rate was 6% higher than the prior year. As a result of the 2021 development campaign in Utah, the year-over-year production in Utah was essentially flat compared to the decline of 14% in 2020.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Summary by Area
The following table shows a summary by area of our selected historical financial and operating information for our development and production operations.
__________
(1) Operating income (loss) includes oil, natural gas and NGL sales, marketing revenues, other revenues, and scheduled oil derivative settlements, offset by operating expenses (as defined elsewhere), general and administrative expenses, DD&A, impairment of oil and gas properties, and taxes, other than income taxes.
(2) Excludes corporate capital expenditures.
(3) Includes production for Placerita properties, in the Ventura basin, though the end of October 2021 when they were divested. These properties had average daily production in 2021 of over 800 boe/d prior to the sale.
(4) Our properties in Colorado were in the Piceance basin, all of which were all divested in January 2022.
Results of Operations
Revenues and Other
We hedge a significant portion of our oil sales in order to protect our anticipated cash flows from oil price decreases, as well as to meet the hedging requirements of the 2021 RBL Facility. In 2021, our unhedged realized oil
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
price was $66.57 per bbl and the hedged price was $50.12 per bbl. By comparison, in 2020, our unhedged realized oil price was $39.56 per bbl and our hedged price was $56.07 per bbl.
Oil, natural gas and NGL sales increased by $247 million, or 65%, to approximately $625 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by $242 million and $20 million of higher prices for oil and natural gas, respectively, partially offset by a $15 million decrease in volumes.
Services revenue in 2021 consisted entirely of revenue from the Well Servicing and Abandonment business we acquired on October 1, 2021.
Electricity sales which represent sales to utilities increased by $10 million, or 38%, to approximately $36 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was largely a result of 59% higher unit sales prices that were driven by higher natural gas prices, partially offset by slightly lower volumes sold.
Gain or loss on oil and gas sales derivatives consists of settlement gains and losses and mark-to-market gains and losses. In the year ended December 31, 2021, settlement losses were $143 million and in 2020 settlements gains were $152 million. The change was due to higher prices relative to the derivative fixed prices in 2021 compared to 2020. The mark-to-market non-cash losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $14 million and $34 million, respectively, were due to higher future prices relative to the derivative fixed prices at each year end.
Marketing and other revenues were higher for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher average gas prices.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
__________
(1) We report electricity, transportation and marketing sales separately in our financial statements as revenues in accordance with GAAP. However, these revenues are viewed and used internally in calculating operating expenses which is used to track and analyze the economics of development projects and the efficiency of our hydrocarbon recovery. We purchase third-party gas to generate electricity through our cogeneration facilities to be used in our field operations activities and view the added benefit of any excess electricity sold externally as a cost reduction/benefit to generating steam for our thermal recovery operations. Marketing revenues and expenses mainly relate to natural gas purchased from third parties that moves through our gathering and processing systems and then is sold to third parties. Transportation sales relate to water and other liquids that we transport on our systems on behalf of third parties and have not been significant to date. Operating expenses also include the effect of derivative settlements (received or paid) for gas purchases.
(2) Total unhedged operating expenses equals total operating expenses, excluding the derivative settlements paid (received) for gas purchases.
(3) Total non-energy operating expenses equals total operating expenses, excluding fuel, electricity sales and gas purchase derivative settlements (gains) losses.
(4) Total energy operating expenses equals fuel and gas purchase derivative settlements (gains) losses less electricity sales.
(5) Includes non-recurring costs and non-cash stock compensation expense, in aggregate, of approximately $1.61 per boe and $1.94 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
(6) Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss) are financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP. For definitions and a reconciliation to the Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities and Net Income (Loss), please see “Item 7 - Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
Expenses
Operating expenses, including hedge effects, decreased 3% or $0.62 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $18.51 for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to lower non-energy operating expenses and energy operating expenses. Operating expenses are defined above in “How We Plan And Evaluate Operations.”
As a result of our efficiency initiatives implemented beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we achieved a positive and substantial impact on operating expenses throughout 2021 without compromising our safety standards. Through these initiatives, non-energy operating expense decreased approximately $11 million, $0.51 per boe, when compared to the prior year. Primary year-over-year cost reductions in lease operating expenses were driven by lower facility costs of $0.63 per boe and outside services of $0.21, partially offset by higher recompletions and well maintenance of $0.21 and other expenses. Energy operating expenses decreased $0.11 per boe in 2021 due to higher electricity revenue of $1.09 per boe partially offset by higher hedged fuel costs of $0.97 per boe. Fuel costs impact both lease operating expenses and electricity generation expenses. Average natural gas purchase price increased $3.10 per mmbtu, 2.2 times higher than that of 2020, which resulted in higher fuel expense, net of the benefit from lower consumption. Settled hedges in 2021 had an average fixed price of $2.80 and notional quantities of 46,000 mmbtu per day, resulting in hedge effects that offset a large portion unhedged fuel cost. Higher natural gas prices in 2021 resulted in increased electricity unit revenue compared to 2020.
Cost of services in 2021 consisted entirely of costs from the Well Servicing and Abandonment business we acquired on October 1, 2021.
Electricity generation expenses increased 45% to $2.31 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1.59 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily driven by higher fuel cost. Increased fuel costs included in electricity generation expenses exclude the effects of natural gas derivative settlements discussed elsewhere.
Gain or loss on natural gas purchase derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were a gain of $39 million and a loss of $1 million, respectively. The settlement gain for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $51 million, or $5.09 per boe, compared to a settlement loss of $9 million, or $0.89 per boe for same period in 2020, driven by higher gas prices in 2021 compared to 2020. The mark-to-market valuation gain or loss for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was a loss of $13 million and a gain of $8 million, respectively, consistent with the changes in futures prices at the end of each period. While, we allocate fuel costs to electricity generation and lease operating expenses, we do not allocate hedge effects specifically to these line items.
Transportation expenses decreased 5% to $0.69 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.66 for the year ended December 31, 2020, mainly due to lower volumes shipped from our Rockies assets.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Marketing expenses increased 192% to $0.38 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.13 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher gas prices. Marketing expenses in these periods, which exclude the effects of hedging, represented the cost of natural gas purchased and sold to third parties.
General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $5 million or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease includes lower non-cash stock compensation costs and non-recurring costs. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, non-cash stock compensation costs were approximately $13 million and $14 million, respectively, and non-recurring costs were approximately $3 million and $6 million, respectively. Non-recurring costs in 2021 consisted of legal and other professional services costs related to acquisition activity. In 2020, these costs primarily consisted of employee reorganization and termination costs and to a lesser degree costs associated with the volatile and depressed price environment.
Adjusted general and administrative expenses, which excluded non-cash stock compensation costs and non-recurring costs, were flat year-over-year, at $57 million despite the additional $3 million CJWS general and administrative expenses in the fourth quarter of 2021. Excluding the impact of CJWS, the $3 million year-over-year decrease in adjusted general and administrative expenses was primarily due to lower employee costs. Please see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of adjusted general and administrative expense to general and administrative expenses, the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
DD&A increased by $5 million, or 4%, to approximately $144 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the higher depreciation and depletion rates for 2021. On a per boe basis, year-over-year DD&A increased $1.10 to $14.44 from $13.34.
Impairment of Oil and Gas Properties
During 2021, we did not have any impairment charges. In the first quarter of 2020, we performed impairment tests with respect to our proved and unproved oil and gas properties as a result of significant declines in oil prices. As a result, we recorded a non-cash pre-tax asset impairment charge of $289 million on proved properties in Utah and certain California locations.
Taxes, Other Than Income Taxes
Taxes, other than income taxes, increased $1.24 to $4.65 per boe for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.41 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was largely due to higher greenhouse gas mark-to-market prices during 2021. GHG prices began 2021 at $18 per metric ton and increased to $32 at year-end, and averaged $24 during 2021. During 2021, we experienced an increase in property taxes, as well as higher severance taxes due to increased revenue driven by higher product prices.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Other Operating Expense (Income)
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 other operating expenses were $3 million and $6 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other operating expenses mainly consisted of expensing approximately $3 million of unamortized debt issuance costs related to the 2017 RBL Facility, approximately $3 million of supplemental property tax assessments, royalty audit charges and tank rental costs, and $2 million of various other costs such as excess abandonment costs and legal fees, partially offset by approximately $2 million of gain on the sale of properties and over $2 million of income from employee retention credits. For the year ended December, 31 2020, other operating expenses included $3 million of excess abandonment costs, $2 million of oil tank storage fees, and $1 million of drilling rig standby charges, partially offset by $1 million of tax and other refunds.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was comparable for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had income tax expense of approximately $1 million and a tax benefit of $7 million in 2020. The rates in 2021 and 2020 were impacted as we recorded valuation allowances on a large portion of our tax credits, net operating loss carryforwards and on other deferred tax assets as a result of estimated future realizability. The tax expense in 2021 included minimum taxes paid in California. Refer to Note 8 of the consolidated financial statements for more information about our income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Currently, we expect to fund our 2022 capital expenditures with cash flows from our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had liquidity of $215 million, consisting of $22 million cash on hand and $193 million available for borrowings under our 2021 RBL Facility. The 2021 RBL Facility has a borrowing base of $200 million with no further borrowing restrictions beyond the covenants summarized elsewhere. We also have $400 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.0% senior unsecured notes due February 2026 (the “2026 Notes”) outstanding, as further discussed below.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we announced a new shareholder return model, which went into effect January 1, 2022, designed to increase cash returns to our shareholders, further demonstrating our commitment to be a leading returner of capital to its shareholders. The model is based on our discretionary free cash flow, which is defined as cash flow from operations less regular fixed dividends and the capital needed to hold production flat. Under this new model, the company intends to allocate discretionary free cash flow on a quarterly basis as follows: (a) 60% predominantly in the form of cash variable dividends to be paid quarterly, as well as opportunistic debt repurchases; (b) 40% in the form of discretionary capital, to be used for opportunistic growth, including from our extensive inventory of drilling opportunities, advancing our short- and long-term sustainability initiatives, share repurchases, and/or capital retention.
We currently believe that our liquidity, capital resources and cash on hand will be sufficient to conduct our business and operations for at least the next 12 months. In the longer term, if oil prices were to significantly decline and remain weak, we may not be able to continue to generate the same level of Levered Free Cash Flow we are currently generating and our liquidity and capital resources may not be sufficient to conduct our business and operations until commodity prices recover. Please see Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” for a discussion of known material risks, many of which are beyond our control, that could adversely impact our business, liquidity, financial condition, and results of operations.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
2021 RBL Facility
On August 26, 2021, Berry Corp, as a guarantor, together with Berry LLC, as the borrower, entered into a credit agreement that provided for a revolving loan with up to $500 million of commitments, subject to a reserve borrowing base (“2021 RBL Facility”). Our initial borrowing base is $200 million. The 2021 RBL Facility provides a letter of credit subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit in an aggregate amount not to exceed $20 million. Issuances of letters of credit reduce the borrowing availability for revolving loans under the 2021 RBL Facility on a dollar for dollar basis. The 2021 RBL Facility matures on August 26, 2025, unless terminated earlier in accordance with the 2021 RBL Facility terms. Borrowing base redeterminations generally become effective each May and November, although the borrower and the lenders may each make one interim redetermination between scheduled redeterminations. In December 2021, we completed the first scheduled semi-annual borrowing base redetermination and entered into that certain First Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “First Amendment”), which resulted in a reaffirmed borrowing base at $200 million and changes to the hedging covenants in respect of the exclusion of short puts or similar derivatives in the calculation of minimum and maximum hedging requirements.
If the outstanding principal balance of the revolving loans and the aggregate face amount of all letters of credit under the 2021 RBL Facility exceeds the borrowing base at any time as a result of a redetermination of the borrowing base, we have the option within 30 days to take any of the following actions, either individually or in combination: make a lump sum payment curing the deficiency, deliver reserve engineering reports and mortgages covering additional oil and gas properties sufficient in certain lenders’ opinion to increase the borrowing base and cure the deficiency or begin making equal monthly principal payments that will cure the deficiency within the next six-month period. Upon certain adjustments to the borrowing base other than a result of a redetermination, we are required to make a lump sum payment in an amount equal to the amount by which the outstanding principal balance of the revolving loans and the aggregate face amount of all letters of credit under the 2021 RBL Facility exceeds the borrowing base. In addition, the 2021 RBL Facility provides that if there are any outstanding borrowings and the consolidated cash balance exceeds $20 million at the end of each calendar week, such excess amounts shall be used to prepay borrowings under the credit agreement. Otherwise, any unpaid principal will be due at maturity.
The outstanding borrowings under the revolving loan bear interest at a rate equal to either (i) a customary base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.0% to 3.0% per annum, and (ii) a customary benchmark rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 3.0% to 4.0% per annum, and in each case depending on levels of borrowing base utilization. In addition, we must pay the lenders a quarterly commitment fee of 0.5% on the average daily unused amount of the borrowing availability under the 2021 RBL Facility. We have the right to prepay any borrowings under the 2021 RBL Facility with prior notice at any time without a prepayment penalty.
The 2021 RBL Facility requires us to maintain on a consolidated basis as of each quarter-end (i) a leverage ratio of not more than 3.0 to 1.0 and (ii) a current ratio of not less than 1.0 to 1.0. As of December 31, 2021, our leverage ratio and current ratio were 2.0 to 1.0 and 2.2 to 1.0, respectively. In addition, the 2021 RBL Facility currently provides that to the extent we incur unsecured indebtedness, including any amounts raised in the future, the borrowing base will be reduced by an amount equal to 25% of the amount of such unsecured debt. We were in compliance with all financial covenants under the 2021 RBL Facility as of December 31, 2021.
The 2021 RBL Facility contains usual and customary events of default and remedies for credit facilities of a similar nature. The 2021 RBL Facility also places restrictions on the borrower and its restricted subsidiaries with respect to additional indebtedness, liens, dividends and other payments to shareholders, repurchases or redemptions of our common stock, redemptions of the borrower’s senior notes, investments, acquisitions, mergers, asset dispositions, transactions with affiliates, hedging transactions and other matters.
From and after August 26, 2022, the 2021 RBL Facility permits us to repurchase certain indebtedness if availability is equal to or greater than 20% of the borrowing base, whichever is in effect, and our pro forma leverage ratio is less than or equal to 2.0 to 1.0.
We can repurchase equity or make other distributions to our equity holders in an amount equal to (i) 100% of Free Cash Flow (as defined under the 2021 RBL Facility) for the fiscal quarter most recently ended prior to such
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
repurchase or distribution minus (ii) the amount of certain investments made, so long as, in addition to other conditions and limitations as described in the 2021 RBL Facility, availability is equal to or greater than 20% of the elected commitments or borrowing base, whichever is in effect, and our pro forma leverage ratio is less than or equal to 2.0 to 1.0.
Berry LLC is the borrower on the 2021 RBL Facility and Berry Corp. is the guarantor. Each future subsidiary of Berry Corp., with certain exceptions, is required to guarantee our obligations and obligations of the other guarantors under the 2021 RBL Facility and under certain hedging transactions and banking services arrangements (the “Guaranteed Obligations”). The lenders under the 2021 RBL Facility hold a mortgage on at least 90% of the present value of our proven oil and gas reserves. The obligations of Berry LLC and the guarantors are also secured by liens on substantially all of our personal property, subject to customary exceptions.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding, $7 million in letters of credit outstanding, and approximately $193 million of available borrowings capacity under the 2021 RBL Facility.
2017 RBL Facility
On July 31, 2017, we entered into a credit agreement that provided for a revolving loan with up to $1.5 billion of commitment, subject to a reserve borrowing base (“2017 RBL Facility”). In April 2021, we completed our scheduled semi-annual borrowing base redetermination under our 2017 RBL Facility, which resulted in a reaffirmed borrowing base at $200 million. On August 26, 2021, we cancelled the 2017 RBL Facility agreement. There were no borrowings outstanding at the time of cancellation.
Senior Unsecured Notes Offering
In February 2018, we completed a private issuance of $400 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.0% senior unsecured notes due February 2026 (the “2026 Notes”), which resulted in net proceeds to us of approximately $391 million after deducting expenses and the initial purchasers’ discount.
We may, at our option, redeem all or a portion of the 2026 Notes at any time on or after February 15, 2021. If we experience certain kinds of changes of control, holders of the 2026 Notes may have the right to require us to repurchase their notes at 101% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any.
The 2026 Notes are our senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other senior indebtedness and senior to any of our subordinated indebtedness. The notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by us and will also be guaranteed by certain of our future subsidiaries; whereas Berry LLC, C&J Management and CJWS are not guarantors. The 2026 Notes and related guarantees are effectively subordinated to all of our secured indebtedness (including all borrowings and other obligations under the RBL Facility) to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness, and structurally subordinated in right of payment to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities (including trade payables) of any future subsidiaries that do not guarantee the 2026 Notes.
The indenture governing the 2026 Notes contains restrictive covenants and customary events of default, including, among others, (a) non-payment; (b) non-compliance with covenants (in some cases, subject to grace periods); (c) payment default under, or acceleration events affecting, material indebtedness and (d) bankruptcy or insolvency events involving us or certain of our subsidiaries.
The 2026 Notes do not restrict us from making open market and other purchases of such notes.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Debt Repurchase Program
In February 2020, our Board of Directors adopted a program to spend up to $75 million for the opportunistic repurchase of our 2026 Notes. The manner, timing and amount of any purchases will be determined based on our evaluation of market conditions, compliance with outstanding agreements and other factors, may be commenced or suspended at any time without notice and does not obligate Berry Corp. to purchase the 2026 Notes during any period or at all. We have not yet repurchased any notes under this program.
Hedges
We have protected a significant portion of our anticipated cash flows through our commodity hedging program, including swaps, puts and calls. We hedge crude oil and gas production to protect against oil and gas price decreases and we also hedge gas purchases to protect against price increases.
In addition, we also hedge to meet the hedging requirements of the 2021 RBL Facility. The 2021 RBL Facility requires us to maintain commodity hedges (other than three-way collars) on minimum notional volumes of (i) at least 75% of our reasonably projected production of crude oil from our PDP reserves, for 24 full calendar months after the effective date of the 2021 RBL Facility and after each May 1 and November 1 of each calendar year (each, a “Minimum Hedging Requirement Date”) and (ii) at least 50% of our reasonably projected production of crude oil from our PDP reserves, for each full calendar month during the period from and including the 25th full calendar month following each such Minimum Hedging Requirement Date through and including the 36th full calendar month following each such Minimum Hedging Requirement Date; provided, that in the case of each of the above clauses (i) and (ii), the notional volumes hedged are deemed reduced by the notional volumes of any short puts or other similar derivatives having the effect of exposing us to commodity price risk below the “floor”.
In addition to minimum hedging requirements and other restrictions in respect of hedging described therein, the 2021 RBL Facility contains restrictions on our commodity hedging which prevent us from entering into hedging agreements (i) with a tenor exceeding 48 months or (ii) for notional volumes which (when aggregated with other hedges then in effect other than basis differential swaps on volumes already hedged) exceed, as of the date such hedging agreement is executed, 90% of our reasonably projected production of crude oil from our PDP reserves, for each month following the date such hedging agreement is entered into, provided that the volume limitations above do not apply to short puts or put options contracts that are not related to corresponding calls, collars, or swaps.
We have also entered into Utah gas transportation contracts to help reduce the price fluctuation exposure, however these do not qualify as hedges. Our generally low-decline production base, coupled with our stable operating cost environment, affords an ability to hedge a material amount of our future expected production. We expect our operations to generate sufficient cash flows at current commodity prices including our current hedging positions. For information regarding risks related to our hedging program, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Operations and Industry”.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
As of February 11, 2022, we had the following crude oil production and gas purchases hedges.
The following table summarizes the historical results of our hedging activities.
Cash Dividends
Our Board of Directors approved regular cash dividends on our common stock of $0.04 per share for each of the first and second quarters of 2021 and $0.06 per share for each of the third and fourth quarters of 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021 we paid approximately $11 million in cash dividends on our common stock. For the year
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
ended December 31, 2020 we paid approximately $19 million in cash dividends on our common stock, which included payment of the dividend declared for the fourth quarter of 2019 and a $0.12 per share cash dividend for the first quarter of 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019 we declared a cash dividend of $0.12 per share each quarter for a total of $0.48 per share and paid approximately $39 million in cash dividends on our common stock.
Stock Repurchase Program
In December 2018, our Board of Directors adopted a program for the opportunistic repurchase of up to $100 million of our common stock. Based on the Board’s evaluation of market conditions for our common stock at the time, they authorized repurchases of up to $50 million under the program. In 2018 and 2019, the Company repurchased a total of 5,057,682 shares under the stock repurchase program for approximately $50 million in aggregate. In February 2020, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of the remaining $50 million available under the repurchase program. We did not repurchase any common stock in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased 471,022 shares at an average price of $5.18 per share for approximately $2 million in the third quarter. All shares repurchased are reflected as treasury stock. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the Company has repurchased a total of 5,528,704 shares under the stock repurchase program for approximately $52 million in aggregate, leaving approximately $48 million authorized and available for future repurchases under the program. Repurchases may be made from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or by other means, as determined in the Company's sole discretion. The manner, timing and amount of any purchases will be determined based on our evaluation of market conditions, stock price, compliance with outstanding agreements and other factors, may be commenced or suspended at any time without notice and does not obligate Berry Corp. to purchase shares during any period or at all. Any shares acquired will be available for general corporate purposes.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Capital Program
Refer to Part II, Item 1 and 2. - “Our Capital Program” for details.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
C&J Well Services Acquisition (2021)
On October 1, 2021, we acquired one of the largest upstream well servicing and abandonment business in California, which operates as C&J Well Services, LLC. The purchase price was $53 million, including closing adjustments mainly related to working capital, which we funded with cash on hand of $51 million in 2021 and $2 million in 2022. The C&J Well Services transaction costs were approximately $3 million. The acquired business activities are owned and operated by C&J Well Services, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Berry Corp. formed for the purposes of acquiring these businesses and establishing an independent well services and abandonment company. The C&J Well Services Acquisition creates a strategic growth opportunity and further aligns Berry with the State of California's energy transition goals, including to help reduce fugitive emissions, especially methane and carbon dioxide, from orphan and idle wells.
Placerita Divestiture (2021)
In October 2021, we completed the sale of our Placerita Field property in the Ventura Basin in Los Angeles County, California for approximately $14 million. We have recorded a gain on the sale of approximately $2 million.
Piceance Divestiture (2022)
In January 2022, we completed the divestiture of all of our natural gas properties in Colorado, which were in the Piceance basin. The divestiture closed with no material impact to the financial statements.
Antelope Creek Acquisition (2022)
In February 2022, we completed the acquisition of oil and gas producing assets in the Antelope Creek area of Utah for approximately $18 million. These assets are adjacent to our existing Uinta assets and prior to our acquisition produced approximately 700 boe/d.
Statements of Cash Flows
The following is a comparative cash flow summary:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 by approximately $74 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, and the most significant decreases consisted of a $234 million change in derivatives settlements paid and received, an increase of $56 million in unhedged operating
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
expenses, which was mostly fuel gas costs on an unhedged basis, an increase of $28 million in cost of services related to CJWS, and a decrease of $51 million in working capital changes and other items. These cash decreases were mostly offset by increased sales, including CJWS sales, of $295 million.
Investing Activities
The following provides a comparative summary of cash flow from investing activities:
__________
(1) Based on actual cash payments rather than accrual.
Cash used in investing activities increased $75 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $44 million increase in cash used for capital spending as we reinstated our development program in 2021. In 2021, we also had approximately $45 million more in expenditures for acquisitions than we did in 2020. These increases were partially offset by approximately $14 million of proceeds from divestitures in 2021.
Financing Activities
Cash used by financing activities decreased $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the cash used was primarily for dividends paid of $11 million, debt issuance costs related to the 2017 RBL Facility of $3 million, and the purchase of treasury stock of $2 million. In 2020, the cash used was primarily for dividends paid of $19 million.
Commitments, and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we, or our subsidiary, are the subject of, or party to, pending or threatened legal proceedings, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters that seek, or may seek, among other things, compensation for alleged personal injury, breach of contract, property damage or other losses, punitive damages, fines and penalties, remediation costs, or injunctive or declaratory relief.
We accrue for currently outstanding lawsuits, claims and proceedings when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably estimated. We have not recorded any reserve balances at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. We also evaluate the amount of reasonably possible losses that we could incur as a result of these matters. We believe that reasonably possible losses that we could incur in excess of accruals on our balance sheet would not be material to our consolidated financial position or results of operations.
We, or our subsidiaries, or both, have indemnified various parties against specific liabilities those parties might incur in the future in connection with transactions that they have entered into with us. As of December 31, 2021, we are not aware of material indemnity claims pending or threatened against us.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
We have certain commitments under contracts, including purchase commitments for goods and services. Prior to our 2017 emergence, Berry entered into a Carry and Earning Agreement with Encana, effective June 7, 2006, in connection with our Piceance assets which, among other things, required us to either build a road or secure a license for alternative access, in lieu of paying a $6 million penalty. As of December 31, 2019, we fulfilled the obligation by delivering the access license pursuant to the agreement. On January 30, 2020, Caerus Piceance LLC, the successor of Encana's interests filed a claim in the City and County of Denver District Court challenging the sufficiency of such access, which we dispute. We settled the lawsuit and the case was dismissed with prejudice on February 1, 2022 , which also satisfied the road obligation.
Securities Litigation Matter
On November, 20, 2020, Luis Torres, individually and on behalf of a putative class, filed a securities class action lawsuit (the “Torres Lawsuit”) in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas against Berry Corp. and certain of its current and former directors and officers (collectively, the “Defendants”). The complaint asserts violations of Sections 11 and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933, and Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act, on behalf of a putative class of all persons who purchased or otherwise acquired (i) common stock pursuant and/or traceable to the Company’s 2018 IPO; or (ii) Berry Corp.'s securities between July 26, 2018 and November 3, 2020 (the “Class Period”). In particular, the complaint alleges that the Defendants made false and misleading statements during the Class Period and in the offering materials for the IPO, concerning the Company’s business, operational efficiency and stability, and compliance policies, that artificially inflated the Company’s stock price, resulting in injury to the purported class members when the value of Berry Corp.’s common stock declined following release of its financial results for the third quarter of 2020 on November 3, 2020.
On January 21, 2021, multiple plaintiffs filed motions in the Torres Lawsuit seeking to be appointed lead plaintiff and lead counsel. After briefing and a stipulation between the remaining movants, the Court appointed Luis Torres and Allia DeAngelis as co-lead plaintiffs on August 18, 2021. On November 1, 2021, the co-lead plaintiffs filed an amended complaint asserting claims on behalf of the same putative class under Sections 11 and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933 and Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act, alleging, among other things, that the Company and the individual Defendants made false and misleading statements between July 26, 2018 and November 3, 2020 regarding the Company’s permits and permitting processes. The amended complaint does not quantify the alleged losses but seeks to recover all damages sustained by the putative class as a result of these alleged securities violations, as well as attorneys’ fees and costs. The Defendants filed a Motion to Dismiss on January 24, 2022; plaintiffs’ opposition is due on March 21, 2022 and Defendants' reply is due on May 16, 2022.
We dispute these claims and intend to defend the matter vigorously. Given the uncertainty of litigation, the preliminary stage of the case, and the legal standards that must be met for, among other things, class certification and success on the merits, we cannot reasonably estimate the possible loss or range of loss that may result from this action.
Contractual Obligations
The following is a summary of our commitments and contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
__________
(1) Amounts include payments which will become due under long-term agreements to purchase goods and services used in the normal course of business to secure pipeline transportation of natural gas to market and between markets, as well as gathering and processing of natural gas.
(2) Amounts included a purchase commitment of $6 million to build a road, which was classified as current. In January 2022 the purchase commitment of $6 million was fully resolved without any payment. Additionally, we have a drilling commitment in California, for which we are required to drill 57 wells with an estimated cost and minimum commitment of $17.1 million by April 2023. 49 of those wells are estimated at $14.7 million and are required to be drilled by December 2022.
Balance Sheet Analysis
The changes in our balance sheet from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 are discussed below.
See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for discussions about the changes in cash and cash equivalents.
The $34 million increase in accounts receivable was driven mostly by $25 million in higher sales prices period-over-period and $18 million of accounts receivable related to CJWS which was acquired in the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by $9 million in lower hedge settlements outstanding at each period end.
The $26 million increase in net derivative assets and liabilities was due to the change from a net liability of $21 million in 2020 to a net liability of $47 million in 2021. Changes to mark-to-market derivative values at the end of each period result from differences in the forward curve prices relative to the contract fixed prices, changes in positions held and settlements received and paid throughout the periods.
The $26 million increase in other current assets was primarily due to $10 million of current assets from newly-acquired CJWS, $7 million of prepayments for development permits, $3 million of collateral for commitments, $6 million of prepaid deposits, $2 million of various other prepaid items, partially offset by a decrease in materials inventory of $2 million.
The $43 million increase in property, plant and equipment was largely the result of the $133 million in capital investments along with $35 million in asset retirement obligation and other additions, and $45 million of CJWS property, plant and equipment, offset by depreciation expense of $134 million as well as divestitures of $35 million.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The $1 million decrease in other non-current assets was primarily due to $3 million of unamortized debt issuance costs related to the cancellation of the 2017 RBL Facility, $3 million of amortization expense related to the 2021 RBL Facility and 2017 RBL Facility, offset by $4 million of cost incurred related to the issuance of the 2021 RBL Facility.
The $6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses included $26 million of increased accruals and spending for various capital and operating costs due to the increased level of these activities at the end of each year, a $10 million increase in royalties accrued due to increased sales, and a $5 million increase in dividends payable, partially offset by a decrease of approximately $28 million in the current portion of the greenhouse gas liability due to a significant, scheduled payment in 2021, a decrease of $5 million in the current portion of asset retirement obligation and a decrease of $2 million taxes other than income tax liability.
The increase in long-term deferred income taxes liability was due to the income tax expense during the year.
The $9 million increase in the long-term portion of the asset retirement obligation from $135 million at December 31, 2020 to $144 million at December 31, 2021 was due to revised cost estimates of $32 million, $11 million of accretion, $5 million reclassified from short to long-term, and $1 million of liabilities incurred. These increases were partially offset by $22 million of reduction due to property sales and $18 million of liabilities settled during the period.
The $17 million increase in other non-current liabilities was driven by additional non-current greenhouse gas liabilities compared to prior year. At year-end 2020, the non-current portion of greenhouse gas liabilities was reclassified to current as the payments were due and paid in 2021.
The $21 million decrease in stockholders' equity was due to the net loss of $16 million, $16 million of common stock dividends declared, $2 million of treasury stock, and $2 million of shares withheld for payment of taxes on equity awards. These decreases were partially offset by $14 million of stock-based equity awards, net of taxes.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA, Levered Free Cash Flow, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) is not a measure of net income (loss), Levered Free Cash Flow is not a measure of cash flow, and Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of either, in all cases, as determined by GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest expense; income taxes; depreciation, depletion, and amortization; derivative gains or losses net of cash received or paid for scheduled derivative settlements; impairments; stock compensation expense; and unusual and infrequent items. We define Levered Free Cash Flow as Adjusted EBITDA less capital expenditures, interest expense and fixed dividends.
Our management believes Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information in assessing our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and is widely used by the industry and the investment community. The measure also allows our management to more effectively evaluate our operating performance and compare the results between periods without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. Levered Free Cash Flow is used by management as a primary metric to plan capital allocation to sustain production levels and for internal growth opportunities, as well as hedging needs. It also serves as a measure for assessing our financial performance and our ability to generate excess cash from operations to service debt, pay fixed dividends and accelerate our asset retirement activity.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Adjusted Net Income (Loss) excludes the impact of unusual and infrequent items affecting earnings that vary widely and unpredictably, including non-cash items such as derivative gains and losses. This measure is used by management when comparing results period over period. We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net income (loss) adjusted for derivative gains or losses net of cash received or paid for scheduled derivative settlements, unusual and infrequent items, and the income tax expense or benefit of these adjustments using our effective tax rate.
While Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow are non-GAAP measures, the amounts included in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow were computed in accordance with GAAP. These measures are provided in addition to, and not as an alternative for, income and liquidity measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing our financial performance, such as our cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic cost of depreciable and depletable assets. Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Levered Free Cash Flow should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure that is used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies. We define Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses as general and administrative expenses adjusted for non-cash stock compensation expense and unusual and infrequent costs. Management believes Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses is useful because it allows us to more effectively compare our performance from period to period.
We exclude the items listed above from general and administrative expenses in arriving at Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses because these amounts can vary widely and unpredictably in nature, timing, amount and frequency and stock compensation expense is non-cash in nature. Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, general and administrative expenses as determined in accordance with GAAP. Our computations of Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following tables present reconciliations of the non-GAAP financial measures Adjusted EBITDA and Levered Free Cash Flow to the GAAP financial measures of net income (loss) and net cash provided or used by operating activities, as applicable, for each of the periods indicated.
__________
(1) Capital expenditures on an accrual basis includes capitalized overhead and interest and excludes acquisitions. Also excluded is asset retirement spending of $19 million and $18 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) Levered Free Cash Flow includes cash paid for scheduled derivative settlements of $88 million and cash received for scheduled derivative settlements of $142 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted Net Income (Loss) to the GAAP financial measure of net income (loss).
__________
(1) Excludes discrete income tax items from the total additions (subtractions), net line item and the tax effect the discrete income tax items have on the current rate.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted General and Administrative Expenses to the GAAP financial measure of general and administrative expenses for each of the periods indicated.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The process of preparing financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to select appropriate accounting policies and to make informed estimates and judgments regarding certain items and transactions. Changes in facts and circumstances or discovery of new information may result in revised estimates and judgments, and actual results may differ from these estimates upon settlement. We consider the following to be our most critical accounting policies and estimates that involve management’s judgment and that could result in a material impact on the financial statements due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Proved Properties
We account for oil and natural gas properties in accordance with the successful efforts method. Under this method, all acquisition costs of proved properties are capitalized and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the proved reserves. All development costs of proved properties are capitalized and amortized on a unit-of-production basis over the remaining life of the proved developed reserves. Costs of retired, sold or abandoned properties that constitute a part of an amortization base are charged or credited, net of proceeds, to accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization unless doing so significantly affects the unit-of-production amortization rate, in which case a gain or loss is recognized in the current period. Gains or losses from the disposal of other properties are recognized in the current period. For assets acquired, we base the capitalized cost on fair value at the acquisition date. We expense expenditures for maintenance and repairs necessary to maintain properties in operating condition, as well as annual lease rentals, as they are incurred. Estimated dismantlement and abandonment costs are capitalized at their estimated net present value and amortized over the remaining lives of the related assets. Interest is capitalized only during the periods in which these assets are brought to their intended use. We only capitalize the interest on borrowed funds related to our share of costs associated with qualifying capital expenditures.
We evaluate the impairment of our proved oil and natural gas properties generally on a field by field basis or at the lowest level for which cash flows are identifiable, whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We reduce the carrying values of proved properties to fair value when the expected undiscounted future cash flows are less than net book value. We measure the fair values of proved properties using valuation techniques consistent with the income approach, converting future cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs used to determine the fair values of proved properties include estimates of: (i) reserves; (ii) future operating and development costs; (iii) future commodity prices; and (iv) a risk-adjusted discount rate. These inputs require significant judgments and estimates by our management at the time of the valuation. The most significant financial statement effect from a change in our oil and gas reserves or impairment of its proved properties would be to the DD&A rate. For example, a 5% increase or decrease in the amount of oil and gas reserves would change the DD&A rate by approximately $0.64 per mmboe, which would increase or decrease pre-tax income by approximately $6 million annually at current production rates. In addition, the underlying commodity prices are embedded in our estimated cash flows and are the product of a process that begins with the relevant forward curve pricing, adjusted for estimated location and quality differentials, as well as other factors our management believes will impact realizable prices. The fair value was estimated using inputs characteristic of a Level 3 fair value measurement.
Unproved Properties
A portion of the carrying value of our oil and gas properties was attributable to unproved properties. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the net capitalized costs attributable to unproved properties was approximately $292 million and $311 million, respectively. The unproved amounts were not subject to depreciation, depletion and amortization until they were classified as proved properties and amortized on a unit-of-production basis. We evaluate the impairment of our unproved oil and gas properties whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. If the exploration and development work were to be unsuccessful, or management decided not to pursue development of these properties as a result of lower commodity
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
prices, higher development and operating costs, contractual conditions or other factors, the capitalized costs of such properties would be expensed. The timing of any write-downs of unproved properties, if warranted, depends upon management’s plans, the nature, timing and extent of future exploration and development activities and their results. We believe our current plans and exploration and development efforts will allow us to realize the carrying value of our unproved property balance at December 31, 2021.
Acquisition Purchase Price Allocations
We account for acquisitions of businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the allocation of the purchase price consideration based on the fair values of the assets and liabilities acquired. We estimate the fair values of the assets and liabilities acquired using accepted valuation methods, and, in many cases, such estimates are based on our judgments as to the future operating cash flows expected to be generated from the acquired assets throughout their estimated useful lives. Following the October 1, 2021 acquisition of CJWS, we accounted for the various assets and liabilities acquired and issued as consideration based on our estimates of their fair values. Our estimates and judgments of the fair value of acquired businesses could prove to be inexact, and the use of inaccurate fair value estimates could result in the improper allocation of the acquisition purchase price consideration to acquired assets and liabilities, which could result in asset impairments, the recording of previously unrecorded liabilities, and other financial statement adjustments. The difficulty in estimating the fair values of acquired assets and liabilities is increased during periods of economic uncertainty.
Asset Retirement Obligation
We recognize the fair value of asset retirement obligations (“AROs”) in the period in which a determination is made that a legal obligation exists to dismantle an asset and remediate the property at the end of its useful life and the cost of the obligation can be reasonably estimated.
The liability amounts are based on future retirement cost estimates and incorporate many assumptions such as time to abandonment, technological changes, future inflation rates and the risk-adjusted discount rate. When the liability is initially recorded, we capitalize the cost by increasing the related property, plant and equipment (“PP&E”) balances. If the estimated future cost of the AROs changes, we record an adjustment to both the ARO and PP&E. Over time, the liability is increased, and expense is recognized through accretion, and the capitalized cost is depreciated over the useful life of the asset.
Fair Value Measurements
We have categorized our assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value in a three-level fair value hierarchy, based on the inputs to the valuation techniques: Level 1-using quoted prices in active markets for the assets or liabilities; Level 2-using observable inputs other than quoted prices for the assets or liabilities; and Level 3-using unobservable inputs. Transfers between levels, if any, are recognized at the end of each reporting period. We primarily apply the market approach for recurring fair value measurement, maximize our use of observable inputs and minimize use of unobservable inputs. We generally use an income approach to measure fair value when observable inputs are unavailable. This approach utilizes management’s judgments regarding expectations of projected cash flows and discounts those cash flows using a risk-adjusted discount rate.
We determine the fair value of our oil and gas sales and natural gas purchase derivatives using valuation techniques which utilize market quotes and pricing analysis. Inputs include publicly available prices and forward price curves generated from a compilation of data gathered from third parties. We classify these measurements as Level 2.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting. The amount of income taxes recorded requires interpretations of complex rules and regulations of federal and state taxing authorities. We have recognized deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences, operating losses and tax
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
carryforwards. We evaluate the probability of realizing the future benefits of our deferred tax assets and provide a valuation allowance for the portion of any deferred tax assets where the likelihood of realizing an income tax benefit in the future does not meet the more likely than not criteria for recognition.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes by recognizing the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. See Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report for a discussion of new accounting matters
Stock-based Compensation
We have issued restricted stock units (“RSUs”) that vest over time and performance-based restricted stock units (“PSUs”) that include (i) awards with a market objective measured against both absolute total stockholder return (“Absolute TSR”) and a relative total stockholder return (“Relative TSR”) (the “TSR PSUs”) over the performance period and (ii) awards based on the Company's average cash returned on invested capital (“CROIC PSUs”) over the performance period. The fair value of the stock-based awards is determined at the date of grant and is not remeasured. The fair value of the RSUs and CROIC PSUs was determined using the grant date stock price. The fair value of the TSR PSUs was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation analysis to estimate the total shareholder return ranking of the Company, including a comparison against the peer group over the performance periods. Estimates used in the Monte Carlo valuation model are considered highly complex and subjective. Compensation expense, net of actual forfeitures, for the RSUs and PSUs is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods, which is over the awards’ respective vesting or performance periods which range from one to three years.
Significant Accounting and Disclosure Changes
See Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this report for a discussion of new accounting matters.
Inflation
Although inflation in the United States has been relatively low in recent years, it rose significantly in the second half of 2021. This is believed to be the result of the economic impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, including the global supply chain disruptions and the government stimulus packages, among other factors. Global, industry-wide supply chain disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in shortages in labor, materials and services. Such shortages have resulted in inflationary cost increases for labor, materials and services and could continue to cause costs to increase as well as scarcity of certain products and raw materials. We are experiencing some inflationary pressure for certain costs, including employees and vendors, although such cost increases did not materially impact our 2021 financial condition or results of operations, and we currently do not expect them to materially impact our 2022 financial results or operations. However, to the extent elevated inflation remains, we may experience further cost increases for our operations, including natural gas purchases and oilfield services and equipment as increasing oil, natural gas and NGL prices increase drilling activity in our areas of operations, as well as increased labor costs. An increase in oil, natural gas and NGL prices may cause the costs of materials and services to rise. We cannot predict any future trends in the rate of inflation and a significant increase in inflation, to the extent we are unable to recover higher costs through higher commodity prices and revenues, would negatively impact our business, financial condition and results of operation.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
CAUTIONARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The information included or incorporated by reference in this report includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties that could materially affect our expected results of operations, liquidity, cash flows and business prospects. Such statements specifically include our expectations as to our future financial position, liquidity, cash flows, results of operations and business strategy, potential acquisition opportunities, other plans and objectives for operations, capital for sustained production levels, expected production and operating costs, reserves, hedging activities, capital expenditures, return of capital, improvement of recovery factors and other guidance. Actual results may differ from anticipated results, sometimes materially, and reported results should not be considered an indication of future performance. You can typically identify forward-looking statements by words such as aim, anticipate, achievable, believe, budget, continue, could, effort, estimate, expect, forecast, goal, guidance, intend, likely, may, might, objective, outlook, plan, potential, predict, project, seek, should, target, will or would and other similar words that reflect the prospective nature of events or outcomes. For any such forward-looking statement that includes a statement of the assumptions or bases underlying such forward-looking statement, we caution that, while we believe such assumptions or bases to be reasonable and make them in good faith, assumed facts or bases almost always vary from actual results, sometimes materially. Material risks that may affect us are discussed above in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this prospectus, in any applicable prospectus supplement and in the documents incorporated by reference.
Factors (but not necessarily all the factors) that could cause results to differ include among others:
•the regulatory environment, including availability or timing of, and conditions imposed on, obtaining and/or maintaining permits and approvals, including those necessary for drilling and/or development projects;
•the impact of current, pending and/or future laws and regulations, and of legislative and regulatory changes and other government activities, including those related to permitting, drilling, completion, well stimulation, operation, maintenance or abandonment of wells or facilities, managing energy, water, land, greenhouse gases or other emissions, protection of health, safety and the environment, or transportation, marketing and sale of our products;
•inflation levels, particularly the recent rise to historically high levels;
•the length, scope and severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or the emergence of a new pandemic, including the effects of related public health concerns and the impact of actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic and its impact on commodity prices, supply and demand considerations, global supply chain disruptions and labor constraints;
•global economic trends, geopolitical risks and general economic and industry conditions, such as the economic impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, including the global supply chain disruptions and the government interventions into the financial markets and economy, among other factors;
•those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and from the actions of foreign producers, importantly including OPEC+ and change in OPEC+'s production levels;
•volatility of oil, natural gas and NGL prices;
•the California and global energy future, including the factors and trends that are expected to shape it, such as concerns about climate change and other air quality issues, the transition to a low-emission economy and the expected role of different energy sources;
•supply of and demand for oil, natural gas and NGLs, including due to the actions of foreign producers, importantly including OPEC+ and change in OPEC+'s production levels;;
•disruptions to, capacity constraints in, or other limitations on the pipeline systems that deliver our oil and natural gas and other processing and transportation considerations;
•inability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or to obtain adequate financing to fund capital expenditures, meet our working capital requirements or fund planned investments;
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
•price fluctuations and availability of natural gas and electricity and the cost of steam;
•our ability to use derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk;
•our ability to meet our planned drilling schedule, including due to our ability to obtain permits on a timely basis or at all, and to successfully drill wells that produce oil and natural gas in commercially viable quantities;
•concerns about climate change and other air quality issues;
•uncertainties associated with estimating proved reserves and related future cash flows;
•our ability to replace our reserves through exploration and development activities;
•drilling and production results, lower-than-expected production, reserves or resources from development projects or higher-than-expected decline rates;
•our ability to obtain timely and available drilling and completion equipment and crew availability and access to necessary resources for drilling, completing and operating wells;
•changes in tax laws;
•effects of competition;
•uncertainties and liabilities associated with acquired and divested assets;
•our ability to make acquisitions and successfully integrate any acquired businesses;
•market fluctuations in electricity prices and the cost of steam;
•asset impairments from commodity price declines;
•large or multiple customer defaults on contractual obligations, including defaults resulting from actual or potential insolvencies;
•geographical concentration of our operations;
•the creditworthiness and performance of our counterparties with respect to our hedges;
•impact of derivatives legislation affecting our ability to hedge;
•failure of risk management and ineffectiveness of internal controls;
•catastrophic events, including wildfires, earthquakes and pandemics;
•environmental risks and liabilities under federal, state, tribal and local laws and regulations (including remedial actions);
•potential liability resulting from pending or future litigation;
•our ability to recruit and/or retain key members of our senior management and key technical employees;
•information technology failures or cyberattacks; and.
•governmental actions and political conditions, as well as the actions by other third parties that are beyond our control.
Except as required by law, we undertake no responsibility to publicly release the result of any revision of our forward-looking statements after the date they are made.
All forward-looking statements, expressed or implied, included in this report are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. This cautionary statement should also be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we or persons acting on our behalf may issue.
Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data