Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations may contain some statements and information that are not historical facts but are forward-looking statements. For a discussion of these forward-looking statements, and of important factors that could cause results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this report, see Item 1 of Part I, “Business-Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and Item 1A of Part I, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Bsquare develops and deploys technologies for the makers and operators of connected devices. These fleets of business-oriented devices, often called the Internet of Things (IoT), offer a powerful means to connect organizations, people, information, and ideas. Hundreds of millions of connected devices have already been deployed and it is estimated that billions more will be. Despite their growing prevalence, these devices and the systems in which they operate remain a significant source of complexity, unplanned and often uncontrolled expense, and operational risk. Our customers are undergoing a massive change in their business practices and Bsquare provides technology that helps them capture the value of connected devices and reduces the cost and risk of doing so.
Since our founding in 1994, Bsquare has helped embedded device manufacturers (“Original Equipment Manufacturers” or “OEMs”) design and build cost-effective products. For most of our history, we operated at the intersection of hardware and software, helping our customers select, develop, and configure system software for a variety of purpose-built devices, from mobile computing to point-of-sale systems to healthcare equipment to hospitality, gaming, and more. Our expertise in hardware, device configuration, and operating systems became essential to our customers’ design cycles and purchasing decisions. As our customers deployed ever-larger fleets of devices, our understanding of the requirements for large-scale device operations increased.
More recently, our expertise and business prospects have shifted to cloud-connected devices that have been connected to create intelligent systems. This shift coincides with the overall growth of IoT technologies and with our customers’ recognition that connected intelligent devices create significant business opportunities. Device makers have increasingly specified their products not only to be connection-ready, but also to be enhanced by the breadth and depth of functionality that connection creates. We have taken to market a valuable and expanding portfolio of products and services that meet the needs of connected device makers. This portfolio captures our experience and our expertise can enable our customers to be more productive, flexible, and financially successful. And, in turn, our customers can then help make people and organizations more productive, improve quality of life, and reduce demands on the limited resources of our planet.
2021 Key Highlights
The COVID-19 pandemic, including its impact on the microchip supply chain, continued to affect our customer ordering patterns and caused ongoing disruptions and revenue variability in 2021, particularly in the Partner Solutions segment. After experiencing year-over-year revenue increases in the second and third quarters of 2021, fourth quarter 2021 revenue decreased $1 million or 11% from the fourth quarter of 2020. Full year 2021 revenue reflected a $7 million or 14% decrease from 2020. We believe our Partner Solutions revenue was also affected by other Microsoft distributors offering deep discounts on Windows IoT OS software as part of hardware / software bundles. We expect this market trend may continue in future quarters. We are working to retain and attract customers with superior service and technical support, pricing that rewards loyalty, and a clear upgrade path for efficient, effective, and secure IoT operations.
In 2021, our Edge to Cloud segment revenue reflected a strategic and intentional shift away from many smaller customers to a few key customers, all operating in the IoT space. While this shift was the primary driver of the year-over-year decrease in revenue, we believe the experience we gained serving our large IoT customers has positioned us to improve our IoT software and services in 2022 and beyond. We plan to leverage this expertise both to expand existing customer relationships and to attract new customers to our offerings.
Our work in 2019 and 2020 to right-size our operating expense structure was evident in 2021 as our selling, general and administrative expenses were $1.3 million less than selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020. We anticipate increasing our marketing spend during 2022 as we support the launch of new products and build brand awareness.
Throughout 2021, we invested in the development of new product offerings for our customers, two of which we announced in the fourth quarter of 2021: SquareOne, a secure device management solution and Device Hardening, a solution ensuring appropriate OS configuration. In 2021, our product development investment totaled over $1.7 million, of which $0.4 million was capitalized as internally developed software and the remainder is captured on the income statement as research and development expense.
Our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash increased by $27.1 million during 2021. This increase in cash was driven by the receipt of net proceeds of $31.9 million from the sale of our common stock. This increase was partially offset by the use of cash for R&D investment, operational shortfalls (primarily soft Partner Solutions revenue) and variations in working capital items.
Cash will be invested strategically to grow our business and enhance our value proposition to customers.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Revenue recognition
Our revenue recognition accounting methodology contains uncertainties because it requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, and to apply judgment. For example, for arrangements that have multiple performance obligations, we must exercise judgment and use estimates in order to (1) determine whether performance obligations are distinct and should be accounted for separately; (2) determine the standalone selling price of each performance obligation; (3) allocate the transaction price among the various performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis; and (4) determine whether revenue for each performance obligation should be recognized at a point in time or over time.
We have not made any changes to the significant estimates utilized to determine the total transaction price and stand-alone selling prices at contract inception. Our customer contracts that involve perpetual licenses are less sensitive to changes in estimates than contracts involving SaaS as those arrangements require us to estimate customer usage. Changes to our customer usage estimates could have a material impact on the total transaction price.
In addition, we exercise judgment in certain transactions when determining whether we should recognize revenue based on the gross amount billed to a customer (as a principal) or the net amount retained (as an agent). These judgments are based on our determination of whether or not we control the service before it is transferred to the customer.
Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the countries and other jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our current tax expense together with assessing temporary differences resulting from the differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities. Net operating losses and tax credits, to the extent not already utilized to offset taxable income or income taxes, also give rise to deferred tax assets. We must then assess the likelihood that any deferred tax assets will be realized from future taxable income, and, to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we must establish a valuation allowance. We are required to use judgment as to the appropriate weighting of all available evidence when assessing the need for the establishment or the release of valuation allowances. As part of this analysis, we examine all available evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis and weigh the positive and negative information when determining the need for full or partial valuation allowances. The evidence considered for each jurisdiction includes, among other items, (i) the historical levels of income or loss over a range of time periods that extends beyond the two years presented, (ii) the historical sources of income and losses, (iii) the expectations and risk associated with underlying estimates of future taxable income, (iv) the expectations and risk associated with new product offerings and uncertainties with the timing of future taxable income, and (v) prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. We estimate the valuation allowance related to our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis.
Our sales may be subject to other taxes, particularly withholding taxes, due to our sales to customers in countries other than the United States. The tax regulations governing withholding taxes are complex, causing us to have to make assumptions about the appropriate tax treatment. Further, we make sales in many jurisdictions across the United States, where tax regulations are varied and complex. We must therefore continue to analyze our state tax exposure and determine what the appropriate tax treatments are, and make estimates for sales, franchise, income and other state taxes.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our summarized results of operations for the periods indicated. Our historical operating results are not necessarily indicative of the results for any future period.
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of software, both embedded operating system software that we resell and our own proprietary software, and related professional services. Total revenue decreased in 2021 compared to 2020, due to decreased sales in our Partner Solutions segment, primarily in North America and Europe, as well as decreased revenue in our Edge to Cloud segment.
Additional revenue details are as follows:
Partner Solutions revenue
Partner solutions revenue decreased $5.7 million (or 14%) in 2021 compared to 2020. We believe customer demand for embedded operating systems was adversely impacted by the economic downturn and related uncertainty stemming from the global COVID-19 pandemic. We have some moderate customer concentration in industries particularly impacted by COVID-19, such as casino gaming, hospitality, and point-of-sale systems.
Edge to Cloud revenue
Edge to Cloud revenue decreased $1.0 million (or 21%) in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a decrease in professional services revenue driven primarily by purchasing delays from one of our large customers. In addition, our relationships with some smaller customers concluded and we have strategically shifted our focus to larger customers and product development opportunities.
Gross profit and gross margin
Cost of revenue for the Partner Solutions segment consists primarily of embedded operating system software product costs payable to third-party vendors, net of rebate credits earned through Microsoft's distributor incentive program. Cost of revenue for Edge to Cloud revenue consists primarily of salaries, benefits, rebillable expenses, and amortization of certain intangible assets related to acquisitions.
Gross profit and gross margin were as follows:
(1) For gross margin, amounts represent percentage point change.
Partner Solutions gross profit and gross margin
The year-over-year decline in Partner Solutions gross profit was driven by lower third-party software sales and gross margin rate deterioration due to a decrease in Microsoft rebates and a change in the mix of customer types and in products sold.
Partner Solutions gross profit is impacted by rebate credits earned through Microsoft’s distributor incentives program. In accordance with program rules, we allocate a portion of the incentive earnings to reduce cost of revenue with the remaining portion utilized to offset qualified marketing expenses during the period in which expenditures are approved. During the first half of 2020, we allocated 20% of rebates to reduce cost of sales and 80% to marketing expenses. In the second half of 2020, we began allocating the rebates 50/50 which continued throughout 2021. See Footnote 13 - Significant Concentrations for further information about these rebates.
Edge to Cloud gross profit and gross margin
The year-over-year decrease in Edge to Cloud gross profit was driven by a decrease in revenue partially offset by a decrease in cost of revenue resulting from the conclusion of one-time customer investments.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses were as follows:
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, commissions and bonuses for our sales, marketing and administrative personnel, facilities and depreciation costs, as well as professional services fees (such as consulting, legal, audit and tax). SG&A expenses decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to lower salaries and related benefits resulting from prior period restructuring efforts, partially offset by a reduction in the amount of Microsoft rebates recognized as a marketing contra expense.
Research and development
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits for software development and quality assurance personnel, and contractor and consultant costs. R&D expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to higher salaries and related benefits and other costs related to product development.
Other income (loss), net
Other income and loss typically consist primarily of interest income on our cash and investments, gains and losses we may recognize on our investments, gains and losses on foreign exchange transactions and other items. During the second quarter of 2021, we recorded on the statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, a $1.6 million gain on the extinguishment of debt related to the forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program loan. See Footnote 14 - Paycheck Protection Program Loan for additional information.
Income taxes
Income tax expense was not recorded in either 2021 or 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had $40.1 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash, compared to $13.0 million at December 31, 2020, reflecting a net increase of approximately $27.1 million. We generally invest our excess cash in high quality marketable investments. These investments generally include corporate notes and bonds, commercial paper and money market funds, although specific holdings can vary from period to period depending upon our cash requirements. There were no investments held at December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months.
Cash flows from operating activities
Operating activities used cash of approximately $4.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash use was primarily driven by a net loss, adjusted for non-cash items, of $2.7 million, a decrease in deferred revenue of $1.0 million, and changes in working capital of $0.7 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
Investing activities used cash of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash use related primarily to property and equipment additions in the form of internally developed software.
Cash flows from financing activities
Financing activities provided cash of $32.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. This cash is related primarily to the sale of our common stock, in addition to employee stock options exercised throughout 2021. See Footnote 11 - Shareholders’ Equity for more information about the sale of our common stock.
Material cash requirements and sources of liquidity
Cash requirements arising from contractual obligations relate to our office leases, see Footnote 9 - Leases for further information. Other significant cash requirements include software royalties, which become a liability at the point we sell third-party software to our customers, and salary and benefit expenditures related to our personnel. Our sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents currently on-hand, and cash generated from operations. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to meet our cash requirements for the foreseeable future.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.