ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) covers information pertaining to the Company up to March 31, 2021 and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes of the Company as of and for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Except as otherwise noted, the financial information contained in this MD&A and in the financial statements has been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. All amounts are expressed in U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain information contained in this MD&A and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section entitled “Risk Factors” as well as elsewhere herein.
Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “could,” “scheduled,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” “seek,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in herein will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
Company Overview
We are a healthcare technology company committed to the development of software and hardware solutions to help the management of chronic health issues. Our first product is a turnkey, wearable medical cardiac solution that provides physicians the ability to monitor patients remotely. We are also developing other remote patient monitoring solutions for physicians and public consumers. To achieve this, we are dedicated to continuing our research and development programs, honing our medical-device expertise, increasing our deep knowledge of biometrics, developing both software and hardware components and nurturing a cohesive medical network.
Critical Accounting Policies
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) and are expressed in United States Dollars. Significant accounting policies are summarized below:
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”) on April 1, 2018. In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services by applying the core principles - 1) identify the contract with a customer, 2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, 3) determine the transaction price, 4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract, and 5) recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied.
The Bioflux mobile cardiac telemetry device, a wearable device, is worn by patients for a monitoring period up to 30 days. The cardiac data that the device monitors and collects is curated and analyzed by the Company’s proprietary algorithms and then securely communicated to a remote monitoring facility for electronic reporting and conveyance to the patient’s prescribing physician or other certified cardiac medical professional. Revenues earned with respect to this device are comprised of device sales revenues and technology fee revenues (technology as a service). The device, together with its licensed software, is available for sale to the medical center or physician, who is responsible for the delivery of clinical diagnosis and therapy. The remote monitoring, data collection and reporting services performed by the technology culminate in a patient study that is generally billable when it is complete and is issued to the physician. In order to recognize revenue, management considers whether or not the following criteria are met: persuasive evidence of a commercial arrangement exists, and delivery has occurred or services have been rendered. For sales of devices, which are invoiced directly, additional revenue recognition criteria include that the price is fixed and determinable and collectability is reasonably assured; for device sales contracts with terms of more than one year, the Company recognizes any significant financing component as revenue over the contractual period using the effective interest method, and the associated interest income is reflected accordingly on the statement of operations and included in other income; for revenue that is earned based on customer usage of the proprietary software to render a patient’s cardiac study, the Company recognizes revenue when the study ends based on a fixed billing rate. Costs associated with providing the services are recorded as the service is provided regardless of whether or when revenue is recognized.
The Company may also earn service-related revenue from contracts with other counterparties with which it consults. This contract work is separate and distinct from services provided to clinical customers, but may be with a reseller or other counterparties that are working to establish their operations in foreign jurisdictions or ancillary products or market segments in which the Company has expertise and may eventually conduct business.
The Company recognized the following forms of revenue for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021:
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost and market value, cost being determined on a weighted average cost basis. Market value of our inventory, which is all purchased finished goods, is determined based on its estimated net realizable value, which is generally the selling price less normally predictable costs of disposal and transportation. The Company records write-downs of inventory that is obsolete or in excess of anticipated demand or market value based on consideration of product lifecycle stage, technology trends, product development plans and assumptions about future demand and market conditions. Actual demand may differ from forecasted demand, and such differences may have a material effect on recorded inventory values. Inventory write-downs are charged to cost of revenue and establish a new cost basis for the inventory.
Significant accounting estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires the use of estimates and assumptions to be made in applying the accounting policies that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The estimates and related assumptions are based on previous experiences and other factors considered reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making the assumptions about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions to accounting estimates are recognized in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
Significant accounts that require estimates as the basis for determining the stated amounts include share-based compensation, impairment analysis and fair value of warrants, structured notes, convertible debt and conversion liabilities.
● Fair value of stock options
The Company measures the cost of equity-settled transactions with employees by reference to the fair value of equity instruments at the date at which they are granted. Estimating fair value for share-based payments requires determining the most appropriate valuation model for a grant of such instruments, which is dependent on the terms and conditions of the grant. The estimate also requires determining the most appropriate inputs to the Black-Scholes option pricing model, including the expected life of the instrument, risk-free rate, volatility, and dividend yield.
● Fair value of warrants
In determining the fair value of the warrant issued for services and issue pursuant to financing transactions, the Company used the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions: volatility rate, risk-free rate, and the remaining expected life of the warrants that are classified under equity.
● Fair value of derivative liabilities
In determining the fair values of the derivative liabilities from the conversion and redemption features, the Company used valuation models with the following assumptions: dividend yields, volatility, risk-free rate and the remaining expected life. Changes in those assumptions and inputs could in turn impact the fair value of the derivative liabilities and can have a material impact on the reported loss and comprehensive loss for the applicable reporting period.
● Functional currency
Determining the appropriate functional currencies for entities in the Company requires analysis of various factors, including the currencies and country-specific factors that mainly influence labour, materials, and other operating expenses.
● Useful life of property and equipment
The Company employs significant estimates to determine the estimated useful lives of property and equipment, considering industry trends such as technological advancements, past experience, expected use and review of asset useful lives. The Company makes estimates when determining depreciation methods, depreciation rates and asset useful lives, which requires considering industry trends and company-specific factors. The Company reviews depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values annually or when circumstances change and adjusts its depreciation methods and assumptions prospectively.
● Provisions
Provisions are recognized when the Company has a present obligation, legal or constructive, as a result of a previous event, if it is probable that the Company will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the obligation. The amount recognized is the best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the present obligation at the end of the reporting period, taking into account the risks and uncertainties surrounding the obligations. Provisions are reviewed at the end of each reporting period and adjusted to reflect the current best estimate of the expected future cash flows.
● Contingencies
Contingencies can be either possible assets or possible liabilities arising from past events, which, by their nature, will be resolved only when one or more uncertain future events occur or fail to occur. The assessment of the existence and potential impact of contingencies inherently involves the exercise of significant judgment and the use of estimates regarding the outcome of future events.
● Inventory obsolescence
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and market value. Market value of our inventory, which is all purchased finished goods, is determined based on its estimated net realizable value, which is generally the selling price less normally predictable costs of disposal and transportation. The Company estimates net realizable value as the amount at which inventories are expected to be sold, taking into consideration fluctuations in retail prices less estimated costs necessary to make the sale. Inventories are written down to net realizable value when the cost of inventories is estimated to be unrecoverable due to obsolescence, damage, or declining selling prices.
● Income and other taxes
The calculation of current and deferred income taxes requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions and to exercise judgment regarding the carrying values of assets and liabilities which are subject to accounting estimates inherent in those balances, the interpretation of income tax legislation across various jurisdictions, expectations about future operating results, the timing of reversal of temporary differences and possible audits of income tax filings by the tax authorities. In addition, when the Company incurs losses for income tax purposes, it assesses the probability of taxable income being available in the future based on its budgeted forecasts. These forecasts are adjusted to take into account certain non-taxable income and expenses and specific rules on the use of unused credits and tax losses.
When the forecasts indicate that sufficient future taxable income will be available to deduct the temporary differences, a deferred tax asset is recognized for all deductible temporary differences. Changes or differences in underlying estimates or assumptions may result in changes to the current or deferred income tax balances on the consolidated statements of financial position, a charge or credit to income tax expense included as part of net income (loss) and may result in cash payments or receipts. Judgment includes consideration of the Company’s future cash requirements in its tax jurisdictions. All income, capital and commodity tax filings are subject to audits and reassessments. Changes in interpretations or judgments may result in a change in the Company’s income, capital, or commodity tax provisions in the future. The amount of such a change cannot be reasonably estimated.
● Incremental borrowing rate for lease
The determination of the Company’s lease obligation and right-of-use asset depends on certain assumptions, which include the selection of the discount rate. The discount rate is set by reference to the Company’s incremental borrowing rate. Significant assumptions are required to be made when determining which borrowing rates to apply in this determination. Changes in the assumptions used may have a significant effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
The Company has adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 260-10 which provides for calculation of “basic” and “diluted” earnings per share. Basic earnings per share includes no dilution and is computed by dividing net income or loss available to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per share reflect the potential dilution of securities that could share in the earnings of an entity. Diluted earnings per share exclude all potentially dilutive shares if their effect is anti-dilutive. There were no potentially dilutive shares outstanding as at March 31, 2022 and 2021.
Cash
Cash includes cash on hand and balances with banks.
Foreign Currency Translation
The functional currency of the Company’s Canadian-based subsidiary is the Canadian dollar and the US-based parent is the U.S. dollar. Transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are translated into the functional currency at the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transaction. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate prevailing at the balance sheet date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities are translated using the historical rate on the date of the transaction. All exchange gains or losses arising from translation of these foreign currency transactions are included in net income (loss) for the year. In translating the financial statements of the Company’s Canadian subsidiaries from their functional currency into the Company’s reporting currency of United States dollars, balance sheet accounts are translated using the closing exchange rate in effect at the balance sheet date and income and expense accounts are translated using an average exchange rate prevailing during the reporting period. Adjustments resulting from the translation, if any, are included in cumulative other comprehensive income (loss) in stockholders’ equity. The Company has not, to the date of these consolidated financial statements, entered into derivative instruments to offset the impact of foreign currency fluctuations.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consists of amounts due to the Company from medical facilities, which receive reimbursement from institutions and third-party government and commercial payors and their related patients, as a result of the Company’s normal business activities. Accounts receivable is reported on the balance sheets net of an estimated allowance for doubtful accounts. The Company establishes an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated uncollectible receivables based on historical experience, assessment of specific risk, review of outstanding invoices, and various assumptions and estimates that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, and recognizes the provision as a component of selling, general and administrative expenses. Uncollectible accounts are written off against the allowance after appropriate collection efforts have been exhausted and when it is deemed that a balance is uncollectible.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC 820 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands required disclosure about fair value measurements of assets and liabilities. ASC 820-10 defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC 820-10 also establishes a fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The standard describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
● Level 1 - Valuation based on quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
● Level 2 - Valuation based on quoted market prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets.
● Level 3 - Valuation based on unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity, therefore requiring management’s best estimate of what market participants would use as fair value.
In instances where the determination of the fair value measurement is based on inputs from different levels of the fair value hierarchy, the level in the fair value hierarchy within which the entire fair value measurement falls is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. The Company’s assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement in its entirety requires judgment, and considers factors specific to the asset or liability.
Fair value estimates discussed herein are based upon certain market assumptions and pertinent information available to management. The respective carrying value of certain on-balance-sheet financial instruments approximated their fair values due to the short-term nature of these instruments or interest rates that are comparable to market rates. These financial instruments include cash, accounts receivable, deposits and other receivables, convertible promissory notes, and accounts payable and accrued liabilities. The Company’s cash and derivative liabilities, which are carried at fair values, are classified as a Level 1 and Level 3, respectively. The Company’s bank accounts are maintained with financial institutions of reputable credit, therefore, bear minimal credit risk.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful lives of the assets. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred, and improvements and betterments are capitalized. Depreciation of property and equipment is provided using the straight-line method for substantially all assets with estimated lives as follow:
Office equipment years
Leasehold improvement years
Impairment for Long-Lived Assets
The Company applies the provisions of ASC Topic 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment, which addresses financial accounting and reporting for the impairment or disposal of long-lived assets. ASC 360 requires impairment losses to be recorded on long-lived assets, including right-of-use assets, used in operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ carrying amounts. In that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the long-lived assets. Loss on long-lived assets to be disposed of is determined in a similar manner, except that fair values are reduced for the cost of disposal. Based on its review at March 31, 2022 and 2021, the Company believes there was no impairment of its long-lived assets.
Leases
On April 1, 2019, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification Topic 842, “Leases” (“ASC 842”) to replace existing lease accounting guidance. This pronouncement is intended to provide enhanced transparency and comparability by requiring lessees to record right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities on the balance sheet for most leases. Expenses associated with leases will continue to be recognized in a manner like previous accounting guidance. The Company adopted ASC 842 utilizing the transition practical expedient added by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), which eliminates the requirement that entities apply the new lease standard to the comparative periods presented in the year of adoption.
The Company is the lessee in a lease contract when the Company obtains the right to use the asset. Operating leases are included in the line items right-of-use asset, lease obligation, current, and lease obligation, long-term in the consolidated balance sheet. Right-of-use (“ROU”) asset represents the Company’s right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease obligations represent the Company’s obligations to make lease payments arising from the lease, both of which are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at the commencement date. Leases with a lease term of 12 months or less at inception are not recorded on the consolidated balance sheet and are expensed on a straight-line basis over the lease term in our consolidated statement of income. The Company determines the lease term by agreement with lessor. As our lease does not provide an implicit interest rate, the Company uses the Company’s incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of future payments.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740. The Company provides for Federal and Provincial income taxes payable, as well as for those deferred because of the timing differences between reporting income and expenses for financial statement purposes versus tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recoverable or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates is recognized as income or expense in the period of the change. A valuation allowance is established, when necessary, to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
Research and Development
Research and development costs, which relate primarily to product and software development, are charged to operations as incurred. Under certain research and development arrangements with third parties, the Company may be required to make payments that are contingent on the achievement of specific developmental, regulatory and/or commercial milestones. Before a product receives regulatory approval, milestone payments made to third parties are expensed when the milestone is achieved. Milestone payments made to third parties after regulatory approval is received are capitalized and amortized over the estimated useful life of the approved product.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for share-based payments in accordance with the provision of ASC 718, which requires that all share-based payments issued to acquire goods or services, including grants of employee stock options, be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values, net of estimated forfeitures. ASC 718 requires forfeitures to be estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Compensation expense related to share-based awards is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period.
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services, as prescribed by ASC 718-10, at either the fair value of the services rendered or the instruments issued in exchange for such services, whichever is more readily determinable, using the guidelines in ASC 505-50. The Company issues compensatory shares for services including, but not limited to, executive, management, accounting, operations, corporate communication, financial and administrative consulting services.
Convertible Notes Payable and Derivative Instruments
The Company has adopted the provisions of ASU 2017-11 to account for the down round features of warrants issued with private placements effective as of April 1, 2017. In doing so, warrants with a down round feature previously treated as derivative liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and measured at fair value are henceforth treated as equity, with no adjustment for changes in fair value at each reporting period. Previously, the Company accounted for conversion options embedded in convertible notes in accordance with ASC 815. ASC 815 generally requires companies to bifurcate conversion options embedded in convertible notes from their host instruments and to account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments. ASC 815 provides for an exception to this rule when convertible notes, as host instruments, are deemed to be conventional, as defined by ASC 815-40. The Company accounts for convertible notes deemed conventional and conversion options embedded in non-conventional convertible notes which qualify as equity under ASC 815, in accordance with the provisions of ASC 470-20, which provides guidance on accounting for convertible securities with beneficial conversion features. Accordingly, the Company records, as a discount to convertible notes, the intrinsic value of such conversion options based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt.
Preferred Shares Extinguishments
The Company accounted for preferred stock redemptions and conversions in accordance to ASU-260-10-S99. For preferred stock redemptions and conversion, the difference between the fair value of consideration transferred to the holders of the preferred stock and the carrying amount of the preferred stock is accounted as deemed dividend distribution and subtracted from net income.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” This pronouncement, along with subsequent ASUs issued to clarify provisions of ASU 2016-13, changes the impairment model for most financial assets and will require the use of an “expected loss” model for instruments measured at amortized cost. Under this model, entities will be required to estimate the lifetime expected credit loss on such instruments and record an allowance to offset the amortized cost basis of the financial asset, resulting in a net presentation of the amount expected to be collected on the financial asset. In developing the estimate for lifetime expected credit loss, entities must incorporate historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. This pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. On November 19, 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-10, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), finalized various effective date delays for private companies, not-for-profit organizations, and certain smaller reporting companies applying the credit losses (CECL), the revised effective date is January 2023.
In July 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-07, Codification Updates to SEC Sections. This ASU amends various SEC paragraphs pursuant to the issuance of SEC Final Rule Releases No. 33-10532, Disclosure Update and Simplification, and Nos. 33-10231 and 33-10442, Investment Company Reporting Modernization. One of the changes in the ASU requires a presentation of changes in stockholders’ equity in the form of a reconciliation, either as a separate financial statement or in the notes to the financial statements, for the current and comparative year-to-date interim periods. The Company presented changes in stockholders’ equity as separate financial statements for the current and comparative year-to-date interim periods beginning on April 1, 2019. The additional elements of the ASU did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes, eliminates certain exceptions within ASC 740, Income Taxes, and clarifies certain aspects of the current guidance to promote consistency among reporting entities. ASU 2019-12 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. Most amendments within the standard are required to be applied on a prospective basis, while certain amendments must be applied on a retrospective or modified retrospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the impacts of the provisions of ASU 2019-12 on its financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2030-20 Codification Improvements to Financial Instruments, An Amendment of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification: a)in ASU No. 2016-01, b) in Subtopic 820-10, c) for depository and lending institutions clarification in disclosure requirements, d) in Subtopic 470-50, e) in Subtopic 820-10, f) Interaction of Topic 842 and Topic 326, g) Interaction of the guidance in Topic 326 and Subtopic 860-20.The amendments in this Update represent changes to clarify or improve the Codification. The amendments make the Codification easier to understand and easier to apply by eliminating inconsistencies and providing clarifications. For public business entities updates under the following paragraphs: a), b), d) and e) are effective upon issuance of this final update. The effective date for c) is for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company does not expect that the new guidance will significantly impact its consolidated financial statements.
In April 2021, The FASB issued ASU 2021-04 to codify the final consensus reached by the Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) on how an issuer should account for modifications made to equity-classified written call options (hereafter referred to as a warrant to purchase the issuer’s common stock). The guidance in the ASU requires the issuer to treat a modification of an equity-classified warrant that does not cause the warrant to become liability-classified as an exchange of the original warrant for a new warrant. This guidance applies whether the modification is structured as an amendment to the terms and conditions of the warrant or as termination of the original warrant and issuance of a new warrant. The Company does not expect that the new guidance will significantly impact its consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
The fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 marked the trailing 24-month period of full market release of the Bioflux MCT device for commercialization, originally launched in limited market release in April 2018, after receiving its second and final required FDA clearance. To commence commercialization, we ordered device inventory from our FDA-regulated manufacturer and hired a small, captive sales force, with deep experience in cardiac technology sales; we expanded on our limited market release, which identified potential anchor clients who could be early adopters of our technology. By increasing our sales force and geographic footprint, we have since launched sales in 27 U.S. states by March 31, 2022. The Company earned combined device sales and technology fee income totaling $7.65 million during the year ended March 31, 2022, a 126% increase over $3.4 million earned in the preceding fiscal year. During the year ended March 31, 2022, Biotricity incurred a net loss of $30.2 million (loss per share of 66.5 cents), such that from its inception in 2009 to this date, the Company has generated an accumulated deficit of $93.0 million. We devoted, and expect to continue to devote, significant resources in the areas of sales and marketing and research and development costs. We also expect to incur additional operating losses, as we build the infrastructure required to support higher sales volume.
For the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2022 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 were $22.6 million compared to $14.6 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, as further described below.
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 increased to $19.8 million compared to $12.6 million during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The increase of $7.2 million was primarily due to the cost of expanding our sales force, product marketing and promotion incurred for our go-to-market efforts, as well as investor relation spending.
Research and development expenses
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 we recorded research and development expenses of $2.7 million compared to $2.1 million incurred in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The research and development activity related to existing and new products. In addition, the activity related to engineering of future product enhancements continuously increased during the year ended March 31, 2022.
Accretion and amortization expenses
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021, we incurred accretion expense of $9.3 million and $2.5 million, respectively. The increase in accretion and amortization expenses corresponded to an increase in convertible note borrowing.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
During the year ended March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021, the Company recognized $684 thousand in expenses, and $408 thousand in gains related to the change in fair value of derivative liabilities.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expenses (EBITDA) and Adjusted EBITDA, which are presented below, are non-generally accepted accounting principles (non-GAAP) measures that we believe are useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability . EBITDA is calculated by adding back interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expenses to net income.
Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by excluding from EBITDA the effect of the following non-operational items: equity in earnings and losses of unconsolidated businesses and other income and expense, net, as well as the effect of special items that related to one-time, non-recurring expenditures . We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating the effectiveness of our operations and underlying business trends in a manner that is consistent with management’s evaluation of business performance. Further, the exclusion of non-operational items and special items enables comparability to prior period performance and trend analysis. See notes in the table below for additional information regarding special items.
It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to enhance the understanding of Biotricity’s GAAP financial information, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures in addition to the GAAP measures allows management, investors and other users of our financial information to more fully and accurately assess business performance. The non-GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to that of other companies.
(1) This relates to one-time recognition of accretion expenses relate to the remaining debt discount balances on notes that were converted.
(2) This relates to one-time recognition of expenses reflecting the difference between the book value of the convertible note and relevant unamortized discounts, and the fair value of shares that the notes were converted into.
(3) Fair value changes on derivative liabilities corresponds to changes in the underlying stock value and thus does not reflect our day to day operations
(4) These are one-time legal, professional and regulatory fees related to uplisting to Nasdaq during Q2 2022
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, the net loss attributable to common stockholders for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 was $30.2 million compared to a net loss of $16.5 million during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
Translation Adjustment
Translation adjustment for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 was a loss of $134 thousand compared to a gain of $223 thousand for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. This translation adjustment represents gains and losses that result from the translation of currency in the financial statements from our functional currency of Canadian dollars to the reporting currency in U.S. dollars over the course of the reporting period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company is in commercialization mode, while continuing to pursue the development of its next generation MCT product as well as new products that are being developed.
We generally require cash to:
● purchase devices that will be placed in the field for pilot projects and to produce revenue,
●
launch sales initiatives,
●
fund our operations and working capital requirements,
●
develop and execute our product development and market introduction plans,
●
fund research and development efforts, and
●
pay any expense obligations as they come due.
The Company is in the early stages of commercializing its first products and is concurrently in development mode, operating a research and development program in order to develop, obtain regulatory approval for, and commercialize other proposed products. As a result of its early-revenue-stage operations, the Company has incurred recurring losses from operations, and as at March 31, 2022, has an accumulated deficit of $93,037,142 and working capital of $10,455,997. Management anticipates the Company will continue on its revenue growth trajectory and improve its liquidity through continued business development and after additional equity or debt capitalization of the Company. On August 30, 2021, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of its common stock that concurrently facilitated its listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market. Prior to listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market, The Company had also filed a shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 (No. 333-255544) with the Securities and Exchange Commission on April 27, 2021, which was declared effective on May 4, 2021. This facilitates better transactional preparedness when the Company seeks to issue equity or debt to potential investors, since it continues to allow the Company to offer its shares to investors only by means of a prospectus, including a prospectus supplement, which forms part of an effective registration statement. As such, the Company has developed and continues to pursue sources of funding that management believes will be sufficient to support the Company’s operating plan and alleviate any substantial doubt as to its ability to meet its obligations at least for a period of one year from the date of these consolidated financial statements. During the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021, the Company raised $499,900 through government EIDL loan. In addition, during the fiscal quarter ended Sept 30, 2021, the Company raised total net proceeds of $14,545,805 through the underwritten public offering that was concurrent with its listing onto the Nasdaq Capital Markets. Furthermore, during the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2021, the Company raised an additional net proceeds of $11,756,563 through a term loan transaction (Note 6) and made repayment of the previously issued promissory notes (Note 5 (a)) and short-term loan (Note 5 (a)). In connection with this loan, the Company and Lender also entered into a Guarantee and Collateral Agreement wherein the Company agreed to secure the Credit Agreement with all of the Company’s assets. The Company and Lender also entered into an Intellectual Property Security Agreement dated December 21, 2021 wherein the Credit Agreement is also secured by the Company’s right title and interest in the Company’s Intellectual Property.
As we proceed with the commercialization of the Bioflux product development, we expect to continue to devote significant resources on capital expenditures, as well as research and development costs and operations, marketing and sales expenditures.
Based on the above facts and assumptions, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents can meet our base operating financial needs and, together with anticipated near-term debt and equity financings, will be sufficient to meet our growth capital needs for the next twelve months from the filing date of this report. However, we will need to seek additional debt or equity capital to respond to business opportunities and challenges, including our ongoing operating expenses, protecting our intellectual property, developing or acquiring new lines of business and enhancing our operating infrastructure. The terms of our future financings may be dilutive to, or otherwise adversely affect, holders of our common stock. We may also seek additional funds through arrangements with collaborators or other third parties. There can be no assurance we will be able to raise this additional capital on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding on a timely basis, we may be required to modify our operating plan and otherwise curtail or slow the pace of development and commercialization of our proposed product lines.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, we used cash in operating activities of $15.2 million compared to $11.1 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. For each of the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021, the cash in operating activities was primarily due to selling expenses as well as research, product development, business development, marketing and general operations.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $25.2 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 compared to $12.2 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, the cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the issuance of shares from up listing of $14.5 million (net proceeds) and proceeds of $11.7 million from term loans, net of other financing and repayment activities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $30 thousand in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 (2011: Nil).
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.