Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contain certain forward-looking statements. Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events; are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. Factors that may cause differences between actual results and those contemplated by forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” herein. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, including any changes that might result from any facts, events, or circumstances after the date hereof that may bear upon forward-looking statements. Furthermore, we cannot guarantee future results, events, levels of activity, performance, or achievements.
Basis of Presentation
We have ten wholly-owned subsidiaries. Hardrock Promotions LLC which owns Hardrock MMA in Kentucky, United Combat League MMA LLC, Pinnacle Combat LLC, Strike Hard Productions, LLC, One More Gym Tuscaloosa LLC, One More Gym Birmingham, Inc. and B2 Productions LLC.
The consolidated financial statements, which include the accounts of the Company and its ten wholly owned subsidiaries, are prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated.
Forward-Looking Statements
Some of the statements under “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K constitute forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements relate to expectations, beliefs, projections, future plans and strategies, anticipated events or trends and similar matters that are not historical facts. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “should,” and “would” or the negatives of these terms or other comparable terminology.
You should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. The cautionary statements set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K identify important factors, which you should consider in evaluating our forward-looking statements. These factors include, among other things:
· The unprecedented impact of COVID-19 pandemic on our business, customers, employees, consultants, service providers, stockholders, investors, and other stakeholders;
· The speculative nature of the business we intend to develop;
· Our reliance on suppliers and customers;
· Our dependence upon external sources for the financing of our operations, particularly given that there are concerns about our ability to continue as a “going concern;”
· Our ability to effectively execute our business plan;
· Our ability to manage our expansion, growth, and operating expenses;
· Our ability to finance our businesses;
· Our ability to promote our businesses;
· Our ability to compete and succeed in highly competitive and evolving businesses;
· Our ability to respond and adapt to changes in technology and customer behavior; and
· Our ability to protect our intellectual property and to develop, maintain and enhance strong brands.
Although the forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on our beliefs, assumptions, and expectations, considering all information currently available to us, we cannot guarantee future transactions, results, performance, achievements or outcomes. No assurance can be made to any investor by anyone that the expectations reflected in our forward-looking statements will be attained, or that deviations from them will not be material and adverse. We undertake no obligation, other than as maybe be required by law, to update this Annual Report on Form 10-K or otherwise make public statements updating our forward-looking statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Basis of Accounting
The accompanying consolidated financial statements were prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP.
Use of Estimates
Management uses estimates and assumptions in preparing financial statements. Those estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported revenues and expenses. The most significant assumptions and estimates relate to the valuation of derivative liabilities and the valuation of assets and liabilities acquired through business combinations. Actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash equivalents. The Company maintains deposits primarily in four financial institutions, which may at times exceed amounts covered by insurance provided by the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC"). The Company has not experienced any losses related to amounts in excess of FDIC limits or $250,000. The Company did not have any cash in excess of FDIC limits at March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments consist primarily of accounts payable and accrued liabilities. The carrying amounts of such financial instruments approximate their respective estimated fair value due to the short-term maturities and approximate market interest rates of these instruments. The three levels of valuation hierarchy are defined as follows:
Level 1 inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2 inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
Level 3 inputs to the valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement.
The Company analyzes all financial instruments with features of both liabilities and equity under ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC 815.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are carried at cost. Depreciation is provided on the straight-line method over the assets’ estimated service lives. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to expense in the period in which they are incurred, and betterments are capitalized. The cost of assets sold or abandoned, and the related accumulated depreciation are eliminated from the accounts and any gains or losses are reflected in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations of the respective period. The estimated useful lives range from three to seven years.
Assets Held for Sale
We consider properties to be Assets held for sale when management approves and commits to a plan to dispose of a property or group of properties. The property held for sale prior to the sale date is separately presented on the balance sheet as Assets held for sale. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 management initiated the sale of the gyms located in Indiana: One More Gym Kokomo, One More Gym Valparaiso and One More Gym Merrillville. We completed the sale during the first quarter of fiscal 2023 with proceeds of $80,000, reflecting a loss of $162,298. We have no additional assets held for sale.
Long-Lived Assets
Management reviews long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets, for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Cash flows expected to be generated by the related assets are estimated over the asset’s useful life on an undiscounted basis. For assets held for use, the Company groups assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which cash flows are separately identifiable. If the evaluation indicates that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable, the potential impairment is measured using fair value. Impairment losses for assets to be disposed of, if any, are based on the estimated proceeds to be received, less costs of disposal.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. In addition, the standard requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. The amount of revenue that is recorded reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods. The Company applies the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 at contract inception, the Company reviews the contract to determine which performance obligations the Company must deliver and which of these performance obligations are distinct.
Live Event Revenue
The Company recognizes as revenues the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied. The majority of revenues are received from ticket and beverage sales before and during the live events. Sponsorship revenue is also recognized when the live event takes place. Any revenue received for events that have yet to take place are recorded in deferred revenue.
Gym Revenue
The Company recognizes as revenues the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied. The majority of revenues are received for gym membership dues. Members pay their dues on the monthly anniversary of when they join the gym. Dues are recognized as revenue over the period they are earned. Any unearned dues are recorded in deferred revenue.
Income Taxes
The Company follows Section 740-10-30 of the FASB ASC, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the consolidated financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the fiscal year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the fiscal years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the consolidated Statements of Operations in the period that includes the enactment date. Through March 31, 2022, the Company has an expected loss. Due to uncertainty of realization for these losses, a full valuation allowance is recorded. Accordingly, no provision has been made for federal income taxes in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk are cash, accounts receivable and other receivables arising from its normal business activities. The Company places its cash in what it believes to be credit-worthy financial institutions. The Company controls credit risk related to accounts receivable through credit approvals, credit limits and monitoring procedures. The Company routinely assesses the financial strength of its customers and, based upon factors surrounding the credit risk, establishes an allowance, if required, for uncollectible accounts and, as a consequence, believes that its accounts receivable credit risk exposure beyond such allowance is limited.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360-10, the Company, on a regular basis, reviews the carrying amount of long-lived assets for the existence of facts or circumstances, both internally and externally, that suggest impairment. The Company determines if the carrying amount of a long-lived asset is impaired based on anticipated undiscounted cash flows, before interest, from the use of the asset. In the event of impairment, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset. Fair value is determined based on appraised value of the assets or the anticipated cash flows from the use of the asset, discounted at a rate commensurate with the risk involved. There were no impairment charges recorded during the years ended March 31, 2022, and 2021.
Inventory
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost (determined on a weighted average basis) or market. Management compares the cost of inventories with the market value and allowance is made to write down inventories to market value, if lower. As of March 31, 2022 and 2021, the Company did not have balances in finished goods inventory, respectively.
Earnings Per Share (EPS)
The Company utilizes FASB ASC 260, Earnings per Share. Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing earnings (loss) available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted earnings (loss) per share is computed similar to basic earnings (loss) per share except that the denominator is increased to include additional common shares available upon exercise of stock options and warrants using the treasury stock method, except for periods of operating loss for which no common share equivalents are included because their effect would be anti-dilutive. As of March 31, 2022, the convertible notes are indexed to 3,606,309,640 shares of common stock.
The following table sets for the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021:
Stock Based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC Topic 718, Accounting for Stock Compensation, which establishes accounting standards for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods or services. In accordance with guidance provided under ASC.
Topic 718, the Company recognizes an expense for the fair value of its stock awards at the time of grant and the fair value of its outstanding stock options as they vest, whether held by employees or others. As of March 31, 2022, there were no options outstanding.
On June 20, 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting. ASU 2018-07 is intended to reduce cost and complexity and to improve financial reporting for share-based payments to nonemployees (for example, service providers, external legal counsel, suppliers, etc.). Under the new standard, companies will no longer be required to value non-employee awards differently from employee awards. Meaning that companies will value all equity classified awards at their grant-date under ASC 718 and forgo revaluing the award after this date. The Company adopted ASU 2018-07 on April 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
During the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, the Company recorded $626,050 and $409,333 in stock-compensation expense, respectively.
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The updated guidance requires lessees to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities for most operating leases. In addition, the updated guidance requires that lessors separate lease and non-lease components in a contract in accordance with the new revenue guidance in ASC 606.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU No. 2016-02, applying the package of practical expedients to leases that commenced before the effective date whereby the Company elected to not reassess the following: (i) whether any expired or existing contracts contain leases and; (ii) initial direct costs for any existing leases. For contracts entered into on or after the effective date, at the inception of a contract the Company assessed whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. The Company’s assessment is based on: (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether the Company obtains the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether it has the right to direct the use of the asset. The Company will allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments.
Operating lease right of use (“ROU”) assets represents the right to use the leased asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities are recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company uses an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the adoption date in determining the present value of future payments. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is amortized on a straight-line basis over the lease term and is presented on the statements of operations.
As permitted under the new guidance, the Company has made an accounting policy election not to apply the recognition provisions of the new guidance to short term leases (leases with a lease term of twelve months or less that do not include an option to purchase the underlying asset that the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise); instead, the Company will recognize the lease payments for short term leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In September 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326), which replaces the incurred-loss impairment methodology and requires immediate recognition of estimated credit losses expected to occur for most financial assets, including trade receivables. Credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities with unrealized losses will be recognized as allowances for credit losses limited to the amount by which fair value is below amortized cost. The new guidance was effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. Recently, the FASB voted to delay the implementation date for this accounting standard, for smaller reporting companies, the new effective date is beginning after December 15, 2022, and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the adoption of this ASU on the consolidated financial statements and is collecting and analyzing data that will be needed to produce historical inputs into any models created as a result of adopting this ASU. At this time, the Company does not believe the adoption of this ASU will have a material effect on the financial statements.
Organization and Nature of Business
We are the premier development league for MMA. We operate in two major branded segments: The B2 Fighting Series and The Official B2 Training Facilities Network, which is comprised of our two ONE MORE Gym Facilities. We primarily derive revenues from live event ticket sales, pay-per-view ticket sales, content media marketing, and fitness facility memberships.
The Live Events segment (the B2 Fighting Series) is primarily engaged with scheduling, organizing, and producing live MMA events, marketing those events, and generating both live audience and PPV ticket sales, as well as creatively marketing the archived content generated through its operations in this segment. We own all media rights, merchandising rights, digital distribution networks of the B2 Fighting Series. We also plan to generate additional revenues over time from endorsement deals with global brands as its audience grows. The B2 Fighting Series is licensed in 20 U.S. states to operate LIVE MMA Fights. Most B2 Fighting Series events sell out at the gate. We now operate at a pace of more than 40 events per year.
The B2 Training Facilities segment operates primarily through our ONE More Gym Facilities brand. We currently operate two ONE More Gym locations.
For more information about B2Digital, visit our website at www.B2FS.com. We do not incorporate the information on or accessible through our website into this 10-K. We have included our website address in this 10-K solely as an inactive textual reference.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended March 31, 2022, Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2021
Revenue
We had total revenues of $2,502,302 for the year ended March 31, 2022, versus revenues of $951,302 for the year ended March 31, 2021. There was an increase in live event revenue of $749,430, or 247%, due to an increase in live events related to less restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. There was an increase in gym revenue of $801,570, or 124%, due to the increase in the number of gym locations over the prior period.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are all expenses including merchant fees, payroll, utilities, professional fees, all costs associated with marketing, press releases, public relations, rent, sponsorships, and other expenses. We incurred operating expenses of $10,552,426 for the year ended March 31, 2022, versus operating expenses of $3,563,734 for the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase of $6,988,692 was primarily due to an increase in the number of live events, increased operations as a result of gym acquisitions, increased salaries, investor relations and professional fees due to the growth of the business. Additionally, a loss on impairment of assets was recorded for $560,156.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
We incurred depreciation and amortization expense of $462,004 for the year ended March 31, 2022, versus depreciation expense of $186,063 for the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase of $275,941 was due to an increase in capitalized assets and intangible assets as a result of business acquisitions.
Other Income (Expense)
Our other income and expenses include gain on forgiveness of loan, gain on bargain purchase, grant income, loss on extinguishment of debt, gain on extinguishment of debt, change in fair value of derivative liabilities and interest expense. We incurred other expenses of $2,764,691 for the year ended March 31, 2022, versus other expenses of $2,581,775 for the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase in other expenses of $182,916 was primarily due to an increase in interest expense. This increase was primarily offset by gains recorded in the extinguishment of debt.
Net Losses
We incurred a net loss of $11,276,819 for the year ended March 31, 2022, versus a net loss of $5,380,270 for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Current Liquidity and Capital Resources for the Year Ended March 31, 2022, Compared to the Year Ended March 31, 2021
Operating Activities
Cash used in operations of $6,518,124 during the year ended March 31, 2022 was primarily a result of our $11,276,819 net loss reconciled with our net non-cash expenses relating to stock compensation, depreciation and amortization expense, loss on settlement of debt, loss on extinguishment of debt, loss on goodwill impairment, gain on forgiveness of loan, gain on bargain purchase, gain on extinguishment of debt, amortization of debt discount, day one derivative loss, changes in fair value of derivative liabilities, inventory, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and deferred compensation. Cash used in operations of $2,052,264 during the year ended March 31, 2021 was primarily a result of our $5,380,270 net loss reconciled with our net non-cash expenses relating to stock compensation, depreciation and amortization expense, loss on settlement of debt, loss on extinguishment of debt, loss on goodwill impairment, gain on forgiveness of loan, gain on bargain purchase, gain on extinguishment of debt, amortization of debt discount, day one derivative loss, changes in fair value of derivative liabilities, inventory, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and deferred compensation.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended March 31, 2022, of $757,170 resulted from payments for capital expenditures related to capital expenditures in the amount of $592,170 and business acquisitions in the amount of $165,000. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended March 31, 2021, of $715,737 resulted from payments related to business acquisitions in the amount of $215,000 and capital expenditures in the amount of $500,737.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $7,192,741 for the year ended March 31, 2022, which consisted of $150,000 from proceeds from the issuance of notes payable, $6,456,855 from proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable, $540,733 payments on convertible notes payable, $23,681 payment on notes payable, $74,700 for the repurchase of common stock and proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $1,225,000. Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,843,448 for year ended March 31, 2021, which consisted of $122,766 from proceeds from the issuance of notes payable, $1,200,000 from proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable, $15,000 in payments related to payable due for business acquisitions, $107,500 payments on convertible notes payable, $11,818 payment on notes payable, and $1,655,000 in proceeds from the issuance of common stock.
Future Capital Requirements
Our current available cash and cash equivalents are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements. Our capital requirements for the fiscal year 2022-23 will depend on numerous factors, including management’s evaluation of the timing of projects to pursue. Subject to our ability to generate revenues and cash flow from operations and our ability to raise additional capital (including through possible joint ventures and/or partnerships), we expect to incur substantial expenditures to carry out our business plan, as well as costs associated with our capital raising efforts and being a public company.
Our plans to finance our operations include seeking equity and debt financing, alliances or other partnership agreements, or other business transactions, that would generate sufficient resources to ensure continuation of our operations.
The sale of additional equity or debt securities may result in additional dilution to our shareholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any such required additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we were unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to reduce the scope of, delay or eliminate some or all our planned activities and limit our operations which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Inflation
The amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements do not provide for the effect of inflation on our operations or financial position. The net operating losses shown would be greater than reported if the effects of inflation were reflected either by charging operations with amounts that represent replacement costs or by using other inflation adjustments.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis. For the year ended March 31, 2022, the Company had a net loss of $(11,276,819), had net cash used in operating activities of $6,518,124, had negative working capital of $(11,387,636), accumulated deficit of $(20,474,067), and stockholders’ deficit of $(10,204,271). These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the date of this filing. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to obtain the necessary financing to meet its obligations and repay its liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due, to fund possible future acquisitions, and to generate profitable operations in the future. Management plans to provide for the Company’s capital requirements by continuing to issue additional equity and debt securities. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted at this time and there are no assurances that, if achieved, the Company will have sufficient funds to execute its business plan or generate positive operating results. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
In the ordinary course of our business, we are not exposed to market risk of the sort that may arise from changes in interest rates or foreign currency exchange rates, or that may otherwise arise from transactions in derivatives.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our significant estimates and assumptions include the fair value of our common stock, stock-based compensation, the recoverability and useful lives of long-lived assets, and the valuation allowance relating to our deferred tax assets.
Contingencies
Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company, but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. Our management, in consultation with its legal counsel as appropriate, assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against us or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, we, in consultation with legal counsel, evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims, as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein. If the assessment of a contingency indicates it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in our financial statements. If the assessment indicates a potentially material loss contingency is not probable, but is reasonably possible, or is probable, but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, together with an estimate of the range of possible loss, if determinable and material, would be disclosed. Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed.