Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 6, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Report as our “initial business combination”. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the initial public offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Business Combination Agreement
On December 13, 2021, the Company entered into the Business Combination Agreement with the Sponsor, Biote, BioTe Management, LLC, a Nevada limited liability company, Dr. Gary Donovitz, in his individual capacity, and the Members’ Representative. Upon the Closing, the Company will change its name to “biote Corp.” The aggregate consideration that will be paid to or retained by the Members immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination upon the Closing is approximately $555,000,000, subject to the purchase price adjustments set forth in the Business Combination Agreement. Following the Closing, the Combined Company will be organized in an “UP-C”
structure in which substantially all of the assets and business of the Combined Company will be held by the Biote Companies, and the Company’s only direct assets will consist of Biote Units.
Prior to the Closing, the Company may issue up to $100,000,000 in shares of Class A common stock in an Equity Financing, so long as the price per share is not less than $10.00. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the amended and restated certificate of incorporation, in connection with the Closing, all then- outstanding shares of Class B common stock will be converted into shares of Class A common stock on a one-for-one
basis subject to adjustment and Class B Common Stock shall not be convertible into Class A Common Stock at a rate of less than one-to-one.
Immediately prior to the Closing, Biote will (i) effectuate a recapitalization, pursuant to which all its Class A Units, Class AA Units, Class AAA Units and Class AAAA Units held by the Members will be converted or exchanged (whether by direct exchange, merger or otherwise) into a number of equity interests in Biote designated as Biote Units in the amounts determined in accordance with the Biote A&R OA, which will be entered into prior to the Closing, the result of which will be that the Members will hold a single class of Biote Units as of immediately prior to the Closing and (ii) convert into a Delaware limited liability company. In connection with the Business Combination, Biote Medical, a subsidiary of Biote, has entered into a debt commitment letter with Truist Bank and Truist Securities, Inc. to obtain (i) a $50,000,000 senior secured revolving credit facility in favor of Biote Medical and (ii) a $125,000,000 senior secured term loan A facility in favor of Biote Medical. Each Phantom Equity Holder has entered into a Phantom Equity Acknowledgement effective as of the Closing, which shall, among other things, confirm the number of shares of Class A common stock to be issued to such Phantom Equity Holder pursuant to the Incentive Plan in satisfaction of his or her phantom equity rights and the vesting schedule for such shares.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain conditions set forth therein, at the time of the Closing, (x) in exchange for the Closing Biote Units, the Company will transfer cash in an amount equal to (i) the cash in the trust account and any cash held by the Company outside of the trust account, less (ii) the amounts required by the redemptions of Class A common stock by the public stockholders, plus (iii) the aggregate proceeds to be received by the Company pursuant to any Equity Financing, (y) the Biote Companies will receive the aggregate proceeds from the Debt Financing in accordance with and in the priority set forth in the Business Combination Agreement and as described further below, and (z) the Company will issue to Biote a number of shares of its Class V Voting Stock equal to the number of Retained Biote Units, which will entitle the holder thereof to one vote per share but no right to dividends or distributions. Biote will immediately thereafter distribute the Class V Voting Stock to its Members pursuant to the Biote A&R OA. The “Cash Consideration” will be equal to the portion of the aggregate
consideration paid or payable to the “Selling Member that is paid in cash, which amount shall in no event exceed $199,000,000.
At the Closing and in consideration for the acquisition of Biote Units by the Company, the Company and the Biote Companies will, subject to the Business Combination Agreement and the Trust Agreement, disburse the Closing Date Cash for the following purposes and in the following order of priority: (a) first, payment of unpaid Transaction Expenses, (b) second, payment to Biote (for use by the Biote Companies) in the amount of $75,000,000, (c) third, payment of Cash Consideration to the Selling Member in the amount of $50,000,000, (d) fourth, payment to Biote (for use by the Biote Companies) in the amount of $75,000,000, (e) fifth, payment of Cash Consideration to the Selling Member in the amount of $75,000,000, (f) sixth, payment to Biote and the Selling Member such that Biote and the Selling Member receive 37.8% and 62.2%, respectively, of the remaining Closing Date Cash until Biote and the Selling Member have received aggregate payments pursuant to this clause (f) equal to $45,000,000 and $74,000,000, respectively, and (g) seventh, payment to Biote (for use by the Biote Companies).
At the Closing, Biote will issue to the Company the Closing Biote Units equal to the aggregate number of shares of Class A common stock issued and outstanding as of immediately prior to the Closing (after giving effect to any redemptions of Class A common stock, any Equity Financing, the Class B Common Stock Conversion and the forfeiture of up to 793,750 shares of Class B common stock held by the sponsor in the event cash available to the Company at the Closing is less than $206,400,000). The Members will, immediately following the Closing, retain the Retained Biote Units equal to the following (without duplication between clauses (y) and (z)): (w) (i) (A) Biote’s equity value (i.e., $555,000,000), minus (B) the aggregate amount of Company Transaction Expenses, minus (C) the Cash Consideration, if any, divided by (ii) $10.00, plus (x) the Member Earnout Units, minus (y) a number of Biote Units equal to the number of shares of Class A common stock to be issued to the Phantom Equity Holders pursuant to the Phantom Equity Acknowledgements (or the existing underlying phantom equity documentation with respect to any Phantom Equity Holder who has not entered into a Phantom Equity Acknowledgement as of the Closing), minus (z) a number of Biote Units equal to the quotient of (i) the amount of cash payable to the Phantom Equity Holders pursuant to the Phantom Equity Acknowledgments (or the existing underlying phantom equity documentation with respect to any Phantom Equity Holder who has not entered into a Phantom Equity Acknowledgement as of the Closing), divided by (ii) $10.00.
In connection with the Closing, on the Closing Date (a) the Members on a pro rata basis will subject (i) the Member Earnout Units and (ii) the Earnout Voting Shares, (b) the Sponsor Earnout Shares, and (c) the “Sponsor Earnout Units, to certain restrictions and potential forfeiture pending the achievement (if any) of certain earnout targets pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement
or the occurrence of a Change of Control. The Earnout Securities will have voting rights but no right to dividends or distributions (except for certain tax distributions from Biote in accordance with the Biote A&R OA) until such restrictions and potential forfeiture have lapsed. One third of each of the Member Earnout Units, Earnout Voting Shares, Sponsor Earnout Shares and Sponsor Earnout Units will vest upon the occurrence of each of the following events: (i) the first time, prior to the Earnout Deadline, the VWAP of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.50 per share for 20 Trading Days of any 30 consecutive Trading Day period following the Closing, (ii) the first time, prior to the Earnout Deadline, the VWAP equals or exceeds $15.00 per share for 20 Trading Days of any 30 consecutive Trading Day period following the Closing, and (iii) the first time, prior to the Earnout Deadline, the VWAP equals or exceeds $17.50 per share for 20 Trading Days of any 30 consecutive Trading Day period following the Closing. If a definitive agreement with respect to a Change of Control (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) is entered into on or prior to the Earnout Deadline, then effective as of immediately prior to closing of such Change of Control, unless previously vested pursuant to clauses (i) through (iii) of the preceding sentence, each of the Member Earnout Units, Earnout Voting Shares, Sponsor Earnout Shares and Sponsor Earnout Units will vest.
Assuming that none of the Company’s current stockholders exercise their right to redeem their shares of Class A common stock of the Company and Company Transaction Expenses equal $11,521,000, as of immediately following the Closing and without giving effect to the outstanding warrants to purchase Class A common stock or issuance of any shares under the Incentive Plan or biote Corp. 2022 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, but including the Earnout Securities, the Combined Company is expected to own, directly or indirectly, approximately 49.9% of the Biote Units and will control Biote as the sole manager of Biote in
accordance with the terms of the Biote A&R OA and all remaining Biote Units will be owned by the Members. The Members are expected to hold a controlling interest in the Company after the Closing and will therefore have the ability to control Biote.
Beginning on the six month anniversary of the Closing, each Retained Biote Unit held by the Members may be redeemed, together with one share of Class V Voting Stock and subject to certain conditions, in exchange for either one share of Class A common stock or in certain circumstances, at the election of the Company in its capacity as the sole manager of Biote, the cash equivalent of the market value of one share of Class A common stock, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Biote A&R.
Consummation of the Business Combination is subject to customary mutual conditions and covenants of the respective parties, including the receipt of the requisite approval of the Company’s stockholders. The Business Combination Agreement may be terminated at any time prior to the consummation of the Business Combination by mutual written consent of the Company and Biote and in certain other limited circumstances, including if the consummation of the Business Combination has not occurred on or before June 13, 2022, which is prior to the Company’s initial business combination deadline of March 4, 2023. The Business Combination Agreement contains usual and customary representations and warranties for transactions of this nature by the parties thereto. The Business Combination Agreement has been approved by the Company’s board of directors, and the board has recommended that the Company’s stockholders adopt the Business Combination Agreement and approve the Business Combination.
On February 11, 2022, the Company filed a preliminary proxy statement with the SEC setting forth all of the above information and inviting the Company’s stockholders to attend the special meeting in lieu of the 2022 annual meeting of the stockholders to approve, among other things, the Business Combination Agreement and the Business Combination.
Other Agreements - Business Combination
The Business Combination Agreement contemplates the execution of various additional agreements and instruments, on or before the Closing, including, among others, the following:
Tax Receivable Agreement
Simultaneously with the Closing, the Combined Company, Biote, the Members and the Members’ Representative will enter into the Tax Receivable Agreement, which will provide for, among other things, payment by the Combined Company to the Members of 85% of the U.S. federal, state and local income tax savings realized by the Combined Company as a result of the increases in tax basis and certain other tax benefits related to the transactions contemplated under the Business Combination Agreement and the redemption of Retained Biote Units in exchange for Class A common stock or cash (as more fully described in the Tax Receivable Agreement). These payments are an obligation of the Combined Company and not of the Biote Companies. The Combined Company’s only material asset will be its ownership interest in Biote and, accordingly, the Combined Company will depend on distributions from Biote to make any payments required to be made by the Combined Company under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
The term of the Tax Receivable Agreement will continue until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired unless the Combined Company exercises its right to terminate the Tax Receivable Agreement for an amount representing the present value of anticipated future tax benefits under the Tax Receivable Agreement or certain other acceleration events occur. The actual increase in the Combined Company’s allocable share of tax basis in the Biote Companies’ assets, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of redemptions of shares of Retained Biote Units, the market price of shares of the Class A common stock at the time of the exchange, the extent to which such exchanges are taxable and the amount and timing of the Combined Company’s income. Any payments the Combined Company makes under the Tax Receivable Agreement will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to the Combined Company. To the extent that the Combined Company is unable to make timely payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for any reason, the unpaid amounts will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid; however, nonpayment for a specified period and/or under certain circumstances may constitute a material breach of a material obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreement and therefore accelerate payments due under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
The Tax Receivable Agreement provides that, in the event that (i) the Combined Company exercises its early termination rights under the Tax Receivable Agreement, (ii) certain changes of control occur (as described in the Tax Receivable Agreement), (iii) the Combined Company, in certain circumstances, fails to make a payment required to be made pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement by the applicable final payment date, which non-payment continues for 30 days following such final payment date or (iv) the Combined Company materially breaches any of its material obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which breach continues without cure for 30 days following receipt by the Combined Company of written notice thereof (unless, in the case of clauses (iii) and (iv), certain liquidity exceptions apply) the Combined Company’s obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement will accelerate and the Combined Company will be required to make a lump-sum cash payment to the applicable parties to the Tax Receivable Agreement equal to the present value of all forecasted future payments that would have otherwise been made under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which lump-sum payment would be based on certain assumptions, including those relating to our future taxable income.
Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Company and Amended and Restated Bylaws of the Company
In connection with the Closing, the Company will amend and restate (i) subject to receipt of Company Stockholder Approval, its current Certificate of Incorporation by adopting the Second A&R Certificate of Incorporation and (ii) the current Bylaws of the Company by adopting the A&R Bylaws, to establish a structure containing Class A Common Stock, which will carry such economic and voting rights as set forth in the Second A&R Certificate of Incorporation and A&R Bylaws, and Class V Voting Stock, which will carry only such voting rights as set forth in the Second A&R Certificate of Incorporation and A&R Bylaws (as more fully described in the Second A&R Certificate of Incorporation and A&R Bylaws).
Second Amended and Restated Operating Agreement of Biote
At the Closing, the Combined Company, Biote and the Members will enter into the Biote A&R OA, which will, among other things, permit the issuance and ownership of Biote Units as contemplated to be issued and owned upon the consummation of the Business Combination, designate the Combined Company as the sole manager of Biote, provide for the Exchange Rights, set forth the rights and preferences of the Biote Units, and establish the ownership of the Biote Units by the persons or entities indicated in the Biote A&R OA, in each case, as more fully described in the Biote A&R OA.
Sponsor Letter
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, certain of the Company’s officers and directors, the Company, the Sponsor, Biote and the Members’ Representative entered into the Sponsor Letter, pursuant to which, among other things, the Sponsor agreed to (i) vote, at any duly called meeting of stockholders of the Company, in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, (ii) subject to certain exceptions, not to effect any sale or distribution of any of its shares of Class B common stock or private placement warrants and (iii) waive any and all anti-dilution rights described in the amended and restated certificate of incorporation or otherwise with respect to the shares of Class B common stock held by the Sponsor that may be implicated by the Business Combination such that the Class B Common Stock Conversion will occur as discussed herein (and as more fully described in the Sponsor Letter).
Investor Rights Agreement
At the Closing, the Company, the Members, the Sponsor, the Members’ Representative and certain other parties will enter into the Investor Rights Agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, (i) the Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of March 1, 2021, entered into in connection with the Company’s initial public offering will be terminated, (ii) the lock-up
period set forth in the Investor Rights Agreement will supersede the lock-up
period set forth in the letter agreement, dated March 1, 2021, entered into in connection with the Company’s initial public offering, (iii) the Company will provide certain registration rights for the shares of Class A common stock held by the Members, the Sponsor, and certain other parties, (iv) the Members will agree not to, subject to certain exceptions, transfer, sell, assign or otherwise dispose of the shares of Class A common stock, Class V Voting Stock and the Biote Units held by such Members for six months following the Closing, and the Member Earnout Units until the date such securities have been earned in
accordance with the Business Combination Agreement and (v) the Sponsor will agree not to, subject to certain exceptions, transfer, sell, assign or otherwise dispose of its (a) shares of Class A common stock (other than the Sponsor Earnout Shares) for six months following the Closing, (b) Sponsor Earnout Shares until the date such securities have been earned in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement and (c) warrants issued to the Sponsor pursuant to that certain Private Placement Warrants Purchase Agreement, dated March 1, 2021, by and between the Company and the Sponsor, and the underlying shares of Class A common stock, for 30 days following the Closing Date (in each case, as more fully described in the Investor Rights Agreement).
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from July 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, and, after our initial public offering, identifying target companies for a business combination, conducting due diligence on such target companies and negotiating the Business Combination Agreement with BioTE, which will give effect to our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $11,112,910, which resulted from a gain on change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of 18,826,459 and unrealized gain on marketable securities held in trust account in the amount of $81,791, offset in part by operating costs of $3,121,694, transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $966,646, franchise tax expense of $200,000, and a loss on the sale of private placement warrants of $3,507,000.
For the period from July 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had no net income or loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 4, 2021, we consummated an initial public offering of 30,000,000 units generating gross proceeds to the Company of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of 5,333,333 warrants to the Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.50 per warrant (the “Private Placement Warrants”), generating gross proceeds of $8,000,000. The proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the initial public offering held in a trust account (the “Trust Account”). If we do not complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in part and on March 5, 2021, 1,750,000 additional Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $17,500,000. In connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option, on March 5, 2021, the Company sold 233,333 Private Placement Warrants (“Additional Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $350,000. As a result, an additional $17,500,000 (which amount includes $612,500 of the underwriters’ deferred discount) was placed in the Trust Account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,370,775, which was due to a non-cash
gain on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $18,826,459, and interest and dividend income on investments held in Trust Account of $81,791 offset in part by our net income of $11,112,910, changes in working capital of $1,950,919, transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $966,646, and a non-cash
loss on the sale of private placement warrants of $3,507,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $317,500,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from our initial public offering being deposited to the Trust Account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 net cash provided by financing activities of $318,999,539 was comprised of $311,150,000 in proceeds from the issuance of units in our initial public offering net of underwriter’s discount paid, $8,350,000 in proceeds from the issuance of warrants in a private placement to our Sponsor, and $41,500 in proceeds from the Sponsor note, offset in part by the payment of $377,961 for offering costs associated with the initial public offering and repayment of the outstanding balance on a promissory note to our Sponsor of $164,000.
For the period from July 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 net cash provided by financing activities of $1,594 was comprised of proceeds from the issuance of a promissory note to our Sponsor of $122,500, and $25,000 from the issuance of Class B common stock to our Sponsor, offset in part by the payment of offering costs in the amount of $145,906.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash of $130,359 and $1,594, respectively, held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required on a non-interest
basis. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account. On February 28, 2022, the Company entered into a working capital loan with the Sponsor in the amount of $350,000, pursuant to which the Company received proceeds of $208,827.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. We may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $130,359 in cash held outside of the trust account and a working capital deficit of $1,820,560. The Company has incurred and expects to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of its acquisition plans. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of time within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Management plans to address this uncertainty through the Business Combination as discussed above and potential working capital loans, as discussed in Note 5. There is no assurance that the Company’s plans to consummate the Business Combination will be successful or successful within the Combination Period, which will end on March 4, 2023, at which time the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating, or if the Sponsor will commit to the working capital loans. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants) will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day
option to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On March 5, 2021 the underwriters purchased an additional 1,750,000 Units at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating additional gross proceeds of $17,500,000 to the Company.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting fee of $0.20 per Unit, or $6,350,000 in the aggregate. In addition, $0.35 per Unit, or $11,112,500 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity
(“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging
(“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants was estimated using a binomial lattice model and the fair value of the Private Warrants was estimated using a Black-Scholes Option Pricing model (see Note 9). The subsequent measurement of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is classified as Level 1, as such, an observable market quote in an active market, which has been available since April 29, 2021, under the ticker HYACW was used.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 31,750,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of the Units in the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all Class A common stock has been classified outside of permanent equity.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
Net income per common share is computed by dividing net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period (for all periods during which these shares were subject to forfeiture, the calculation of weighted average shares outstanding excludes an aggregate of 1,125,000 shares held by the Sponsor that were subject to forfeiture to the extent that the underwriter’s over-allotment was not exercised in full). Net income is allocated between Class A and Class B shares based on weighted average shares outstanding. The Company has not considered the effect of the Warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 13,504,166 shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the Warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such Warrants would be antidilutive. The calculation does not include the remeasurement of Class A common stock to possible redemption amount because redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging -Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective for the Company on January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06
effective January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method of transition. The adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not have a material impact on the financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.