ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those identified below, those discussed in the section titled “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to the final prospectus/offer to exchange dated December 16, 2021 filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b) of the Securities Act. Unless otherwise stated or as the context otherwise requires, references to “the Company”, “Billtrust”, “we”, “us”, "our”, "it", and similar references refer to BTRS Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our Consolidated Financial Statements or Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Business Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud-based software and integrated payment processing solutions that simplify and automate business-to-business (“B2B”) commerce. For businesses around the world, there is a high degree of cost, risk, and complexity in timely receiving cash and recognizing revenue; We solve these problems by addressing both sides of the payment equation, delivering an order-to-cash platform that spans credit-to-cash application and collection, integrated with an open network connecting the B2B payments ecosystem.
Our solution is at the forefront of the ongoing digital transformation of accounts receivable (“AR”), providing mission-critical solutions that span credit decisioning and monitoring, online ordering, invoicing, cash application, and collections. Our Business Payments Network (“BPN”) connects B2B buyers and sellers to a community of banks, FinTechs, and card brands. Billtrust automates payments from digital lockbox to final posting in ERP, bridging receivables with buyers’ payment processes so sellers can manage cash flow more strategically and make it easier for customers to do business with them.
Customers use our software as a service (“SaaS”) platform to transition from expensive paper invoicing and check acceptance to efficient electronic billing and payments, simplifying and accelerating transactions. Our scalable platform lets our customers maximize straight-through processing of invoicing, payments, and cash application while also reducing headcount. The machine learning capabilities and rules engine within our SaaS platform continuously evolve to solve order-to-cash challenges and deliver a higher rate of touchless transactions. We work with industry-leading security partners and take proactive steps to keep data secure from threats. Collectively our platform reduces the complexity of B2B commerce for our customers.
Our secure, proprietary platform offers customers multiple ways to present invoices (online, email, AP portal, and print/mail) and receive payments (credit card, automated clearing house (“ACH”), email, phone and paper check). Our electronic solutions (“eSolutions”) team works closely with our customers to transition their users from paper invoices and payments to electronic, which results in accelerated savings, faster realization of cash, a reduced environmental footprint, and a better user experience. In turn, we benefit from margin expansion and incremental revenue through the monetization of electronic payments. We help customers prioritize which problems to solve, regularly assess ROI, optimize the impact of digitization across processes, and drive more value for their companies, allowing AR teams to play a more strategic role in moving a business forward.
Segments and Financial Summary
Our operations are grouped into two reportable segments: (1) Print, and (2) Software and Payments. Our Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) is the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”), who reviews discrete financial and other information presented for print services and software and payment services for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating the Company's financial performance. The accounting policies used by the reportable segments are the same as those used in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Print - The Print segment is primarily responsible for printing customer invoices and optimizing the amount of time and costs associated with billing customers via mail.
•Software and Payments - The Software and Payments segment primarily operates using software and cloud based services, optimizes electronic invoice presentment, electronic payments, credit decisioning, collections automation, cash application and deduction management, and e-commerce of B2B customers.
We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on revenues, cost of revenues, and gross profit. All of the revenues shown in the reportable segments is revenue from external customers; there is no revenue from transactions with other operating segments. Segment expenses include the direct expenses of each segment's operations and exclude sales and marketing expenses, research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, and certain other identified costs that we do not allocate to the segments for purposes of evaluating their operational performance.
Given the nature of our business, the amount of assets does not provide meaningful insight into our operating performance. As a result, we do not identify or allocate assets by reportable segment and total assets are not included in our segment financial information.
We have expanded our product reach and customer base over the past years and scaled our business operations in recent periods. Our total revenues were $166.4 million and $145.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. respectively. As a result of our continued expenditures for product development, sales and marketing, and the related requirements as a result of becoming a public company in 2021, we have generated net losses of $61.2 million and $17.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our Business Model
Our business model focuses on maximizing the lifetime value of a customer relationship by providing measurable efficiencies along the entire order-to-cash process, and we continue to make significant investments in order to grow our customer base. We target middle-market and enterprise companies that serve a wide variety of customers across a variety of industry verticals and have high-frequency sales with complicated AR processing requirements. The breadth of our platform enables us to market modules for digital transformation across the entire AR spectrum and also allows us to focus on particular customer pain points. This includes functional areas of credit, order, invoicing, payments, cash application and collection. In most cases, our new customer acquisitions are initially for one to two modules, including integrated payments. This creates a significant land-and-expand opportunity, which is a key underlying objective and value driver in our business.
We generate revenue from subscription and transaction models. These models includes subscription, transaction, and services from:
•Subscription fees to provide our customers access to our cloud-based SaaS platform and modules that automate processes across the accounts receivable function;
•Transaction fees consisting of per-item processing fees charged at contracted rates based on the number of envelopes, invoices delivered, payments processed, or basis points on the amount of credit card payments processed; and
•Professional services revenue from contracted fees associated with implementation of new customers, implementations of new products for existing customers, as well as separately contracted project services provided to customers after implementation.
The profitability of any customer in a particular period depends upon the mix of revenue between the Software and Payments and Print segments, as well as, in part, upon the length of time they have been a customer. We believe that, over time, as our customer base grows and a relatively higher percentage of subscription, transaction, and services revenue are attributable to a mature customer base versus new customers or expansion of our offerings to existing customers, associated sales and marketing expenses and other allocated upfront costs as a percentage of revenues will decrease, subject to investments we plan to make in our business. Over the lifetime of the customer relationship, we also incur sales and marketing costs to manage the account or sell existing customers more modules on our platform. These costs, however, are significantly less than the costs initially incurred to acquire the customer. We calculate the lifetime value of our customers and associated customer acquisition costs for a particular fiscal year by comparing (1) estimated gross profit from contracted revenues in the period, multiplied by one divided by the estimated customer cancellation rate to (2) total sales and marketing expense for the same period. On this basis, we estimate that for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the calculated lifetime value of our customers exceeded six times the associated cost of acquiring them.
Recent Developments
Business Combination with South Mountain
On October 18, 2020, as amended on December 13, 2020, South Mountain, BT Merger Sub I, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of South Mountain (“First Merger Sub”), BT Merger Sub II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of South Mountain (“Second Merger Sub”) and Legacy Billtrust, entered into a Business Combination Agreement, pursuant to which (i) First Merger Sub was merged with and into Legacy Billtrust (the “First Merger”), with Legacy Billtrust surviving the First Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of South Mountain (“Surviving Corporation”) and (ii) the Surviving Corporation merged with and into Second Merger Sub (the “Second Merger”, and together with the First Merger, the “Mergers”), with Second Merger Sub surviving the Second Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of South Mountain.
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination, on October 18, 2020, South Mountain entered into separate subscription agreements (“Subscription Agreements”) with a number of investors (“PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to purchase, and South Mountain sold to the PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 20,000,000 shares of South Mountain Class A common stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and at an aggregate purchase price of $200.0 million, in a private placement (“PIPE Financing”).
The Business Combination and PIPE Financing closed on January 12, 2021 (the "BCA Closing Date"). The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP"). Under this method of accounting, South Mountain was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. For accounting purposes, we were the accounting acquirer in the transaction and, consequently, the transaction was treated as a recapitalization of Billtrust (i.e., a capital transaction involving the issuance of stock by South Mountain for the stock of Legacy Billtrust). Accordingly, the assets, liabilities, and results of operations of Legacy Billtrust became the historical financial statements of "New Billtrust," which was renamed BTRS Holdings Inc., and South Mountain’s assets, liabilities, and results of operations were consolidated with Legacy Billtrust beginning on the BCA Closing Date. All amounts of BTRS Holdings Inc. reflect the historical amounts of Legacy Billtrust carried over at book value with no step up in basis to fair value. After the Business Combination, our Common Stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the ticker symbol “BTRS”.
Acquisition of iController BV
On October 7, 2021, we acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of iController BV (“iController”), a privately-held company based in Ghent, Belgium and Amsterdam, the Netherlands. iController is a B2B provider of SaaS intelligent solutions for collections management. Their SaaS offerings enable a wide range of users, from credit and collections managers to chief financial officers, to see payment and collections information and communication in real time, providing visibility into cash flow management. The acquisition is part of our strategic plan to expand our physical presence in the European market while enhancing our global collections capabilities. Pursuant to the terms of the purchase agreement, we paid $56.8 million in cash for the acquisition.
Acquisition of Order2Cash
On February 14, 2022, we acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of Anachron Beheer BV and subsidiaries, d/b/a Order2Cash ("Order2Cash"), a privately-held company headquartered in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Order2Cash is a European B2B order-to-cash platform provider. Their enterprise customer base, global interoperability capabilities, and established connections to over 70 B2B and business-to-government (“B2G”) e-invoicing networks broaden the BPN’s reach to deliver fully compliant and secure e-invoicing across multiple markets. The acquisition is part of our strategic plan to continue expanding our physical presence in the European market while also enhancing our global invoicing and payments capabilities. Pursuant to the terms of the purchase agreement, we paid an initial amount of $58.2 million in cash at closing. Refer to Note 19 - Subsequent Events in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the acquisition. As the acquisition of Order2Cash occurred after December 31, 2021, the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations does not factor in the acquisition of Order2Cash, other than as explicitly indicated.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in government authorities and businesses throughout the world implementing numerous measures intended to contain and limit the spread of COVID-19, including travel restrictions, border closures, quarantines, shelter-in-place and lock-down orders, mask and social distancing requirements, and business limitations and shutdowns. Since the start of the pandemic, we have continued to operate despite the disruption to some of our customer's operations. The pandemic has served to increase awareness and urgency around accelerating the digital transformation of accounts receivable through our platform and offerings. While this helped avoid significant business, bookings, or revenue disruptions thus far, during the second quarter of 2020, the pandemic did cause a decrease in our transaction revenues for certain customers. This was a result of the pandemic's broader economic impact on some companies in heavily transaction-based industries and the related slowing of their business activity. These revenues rebounded in the second half of 2020. Throughout 2021, we remained focused on investing in our products and supporting our long-term growth, including global expansion. Additionally, shifts from in-person buying and traditional payment methods (such as cash or check) towards e-commerce and digital payments, and the related increase in consumer and B2B demand for safer payment and delivery solutions, have benefited us as it has further ingrained Billtrust’s platform in our customers’ critical day-to-day order-to-cash operations. The impact of the pandemic in 2021 was not significant, as evidenced by the growth in revenues across our subscription and transactional offerings.
Further, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused us to modify our business practices, such as enabling and encouraging our workforce to work from anywhere, establishing strict health and safety protocols in our offices, restricting physical participation in meetings, events and conferences, and reducing employee travel. We continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, and partners.
We are unable to predict the full impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our future results of operations, liquidity, financial condition, and business practices due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration, severity, and spread of the virus, actions that may be taken by government authorities, the impact to our employees, customers, and partners, and various other factors beyond our knowledge or control.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe our performance and future growth depends on a number of factors that present significant opportunities, but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section titled “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For additional information related to key performance metrics we use to evaluate the health of our business, identify trends affecting our growth, formulate goals and objectives, and make strategic decisions, see the section below titled “Key Performance Metrics.” We believe the most significant factors affecting our results of operations include:
Investment in Technology
Our goal is to transform the way businesses send and capture payments in order to be the leader in the order-to-cash process by digitizing areas including credit decisioning, ordering, invoicing, payments, cash application, and collections. We continue to invest in technology and the digitizing of our platforms. Further,
we continue to invest in certain internal initiatives targeted at improving internal processes and enhancing the efficiency, security, and scalability of our platforms. Our investment in technology is expected to have a positive impact on our long-term profitability and operations. We also intend to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive product and market expansion. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market, and sell existing and new products.
Acquisition of New Customers
We reach new customers through our proven go-to-market strategies, which include digital marketing campaigns, our direct sales force, and partnerships with financial institutions and other complementary companies. Our growth largely depends on our ability to acquire new customers.
As of December 31, 2021, we had customers across a wide variety of industries and geographies, including distributors of building materials, electrical, plumbing and technology equipment, healthcare, construction, and consumer products, primarily located in North America. We continue to invest in our sales, marketing, and go-to-market strategies in order to acquire customers in our target markets. Our marketing efforts are campaign and content driven and targeted depending on the size and industry of the customer. Marketing initiatives focus on demand generation and include promotional activity and with an emphasis on online digital marketing programs (e.g., webinars, virtual events). We believe there is a long-term opportunity to expand into large, new markets with compatible trends.
Our ability to attract new customers depends on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of our products, our competitors' offerings, and successfully executing our marketing efforts. Our financial performance depends in large part on the overall demand for our platforms, and acquisition of new customers is expected to have a positive impact on our long-term profitability and operations.
Expansion of Relationships with Existing Customers
Our revenue growth depends on our customers’ usage of our range of solutions. Our ability to monetize transactions and payments is an important part of our business model. As we solve customers’ problems and become more integrated into their daily businesses, we see an increased opportunity to cross-sell to these existing customers. This strategy is achieved by driving adoption of an existing solution across different divisions and/or subsidiaries of an existing customer and then expanding the scope of service with additional solutions. Our ability to influence customers to process more transactions and payments on our platforms has a direct impact on our revenue.
Our revenue from existing customers is generally reliable due to both the pricing structure and the business-critical nature of the functions our products support for customers. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, 95% or more of our subscription and transaction fees revenue came from customers who had entered into contracts prior to the start of each such calendar year. We expand within our existing customer base by selling additional modules on our platform, adding divisions, increasing transactions per customer through proven e-solutions, as well as through effective pricing and packaging our services. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers depends on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our solutions, competition, pricing, and overall changes in our customers’ spending levels with us.
Key Performance Metrics
We monitor the following key metrics to help us evaluate the health of our business, identify trends affecting our growth, formulate goals and objectives, and make strategic decisions.
Total Payment Volume
Total Payment Volume (“TPV”) is the dollar value of customer payment transactions that we process on our platform during a particular period. TPV is made up of the two payment categories:
•TPV - ACH/Wire - payments made via our software, portals, gateways, and our Business Payments Network that are processed via ACH or wire transfers.
•TPV - Card - payments through our software, portals, gateways, and third-party processors, and includes our payment facilitator (“PayFac”) customers.
To grow payments revenue from customers, we must deliver software platforms that both simplify the process of accepting electronic payments and streamline the reconciliation of remittance data. Additionally, as we increase the digital delivery of invoices, the probability increases that digitally delivered invoices will be paid electronically by our customers’ end customers. The more customers use our software platforms, the more payments transactions they are likely to process through our various products. TPV provides an important indication of the dollar value of transactions that customers are completing on the platform and is helpful to investors as an indicator of our ability to generate revenue from our customers.
TPV for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $77.7 billion compared to $54.7 billion in 2020, an increase of 42% year over year. TPV - ACH/Wire for 2021 was $50.2 billion compared to $37.0 billion in 2020, an increase of 36% year over year. The growth in TPV was driven by the increase in TPV - ACH/Wire which was primarily due to the addition of new customers and an increase in existing customer transactions. TPV - Card for 2021 was $27.5 billion compared to $17.7 billion in 2020, an increase of 55% year over year, reflecting a higher absolute dollar growth, partially moderated by lower growth in the first half of the year.
Total Net Dollar Retention and Software and Payments Net Dollar Retention
Total net dollar retention is an annual measure of retention and growth of existing customers. Net dollar retention is an important indicator of customer satisfaction and usage of our platform, as well as an indicator of potential revenue for future periods. This metric is helpful for investors in evaluating our growth. We use this metric in evaluating performance of the our platform. Net dollar retention is calculated at the end of each period by taking the average of the retention rates for the trailing four quarters. For each quarter, a numerator consisting of revenues from subscription and transaction fees for all billing accounts that had subscription and transaction fees for the corresponding quarter of the prior year is divided by a denominator consisting of revenues from subscription and transaction fees for those same billing accounts in the given quarter of the prior year. The calculation includes additional solutions purchased, pricing changes, transaction volume changes, and cancellations, but excludes new billing accounts added between those periods.
Software and Payments net dollar retention is an annual measure of retention and growth of existing customers in the Software and Payments segment. We calculate Software and Payments net dollar retention at the end of each period by taking the average of the retention rates for the trailing four quarters for the segment. For each quarter, a numerator consisting of segment revenues from subscription and transaction fees for all billing accounts that had subscription and transaction fees in the corresponding quarter of the prior year is divided by a denominator consisting of segment revenues from subscription and transaction fees for those same billing accounts in the given quarter of the prior year. The calculation includes additional solutions purchased, pricing changes, transaction volume changes, and cancellations, but excludes new billing accounts added between those periods.
The increases in both total net dollar retention and software and payments net dollar retention for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year was due primarily to continued growth in our payments revenue, new customer contracts, and the favorable impact of accelerated deferred revenue from a terminated customer in the first quarter of 2021, which is not expected to recur.
The declines in both total net dollar retention and software and payments net dollar retention for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the prior year was due primarily to the impact of COVID-19 on customer transaction volumes, particularly for second quarter of 2020.
In any period, the primary drivers of changes in the total net dollar retention rate are customer transaction volumes, customer cancellations, and the mix of revenues by segment. Additionally, total net dollar retention is adversely impacted by decreases in Print segment revenue due to average transaction rates exceeding those in the Software and Payments segment. For software and payments net dollar retention rates, the primary drivers are customer transaction volumes, and customer cancellations, particularly from legacy agreements.
Number of Electronic Invoices Presented
Electronic invoices presented is the number of invoices sent via email, fax, or loaded to a presentment or AP portal, and includes volumes from acquired platforms, where volumes are normalized to best match equivalents on our platform. The measure also includes invoices that are charged on a per transaction basis for legacy customer agreements, as well as for subscription customers with defined tiers of electronic transactions for a fixed price. Electronic invoices presented has historically been an indicator of the growth of our Software and Payments segment revenues, as well as the opportunity for an electronic payment on those invoices.
Our number of electronic invoices presented for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 304 million compared to 273 million in 2020, an increase of 11% year over year. The growth rate is primarily driven by increased adoption for existing customers as well as the addition of new customers, and are moderated by flat or declining business to consumer (“B2C”) customers on legacy platforms as they move off of those platforms. During 2021, a B2C customer moved off a legacy platform, resulting in a decline in the volume of electronic invoices presented as compared to 2020.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from the following sources: (1) Subscription, (2) Transaction, (3) Professional Services, and (4) Reimbursable Costs.
Subscription Revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of contractually agreed upon fees to provide our customers access to our cloud-based SaaS platform and modules that automate processes across the accounts receivable function (including electronic invoice presentment, payments solutions, credit decisioning and monitoring, cash application, collections automation, and e-commerce).
Our subscription agreements do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of the software, are typically non-cancellable, and do not contain general rights of returns. Subscription agreements typically have an initial term of one to three years and are typically invoiced in annual installments in advance of each year. After the initial term, subscription agreements renew annually and are typically invoiced in advance of each renewal year. In some cases, subscriptions may be billed on a quarterly or monthly basis in advance. Subscription services are recognized ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement, beginning on the date the service is made available to the customer.
Transaction Revenue
Transaction revenue consists of per-item processing fees charged at contracted rates based on the number of envelopes, invoices delivered, payments processed, or basis points on the amount of credit card payments processed. Our transaction fees are billed monthly based on the volume of items processed each month, at the contractual rate per item processed. Transaction revenue is recognized at the same time as the transactions are processed.
Professional Services Revenue
Professional services revenues consists of implementation services for new customers, or implementations of new products for existing customers. It also includes separately contracted project services provided to customers after implementation.
Implementation services are typically sold on a time and materials basis, and billed monthly based on actual hours incurred. Typically, our implementation services are not capable of being distinct from the related subscription service, and accordingly, they are combined with the subscription service and recognized over the term of the agreement. Since the initial contract with a customer includes both the subscription and implementation fees, and is therefore higher than subscription renewal fees in subsequent years, our contracts convey a ‘material right’ to the customer (i.e., an option for the customer to renew the contract at a lower price in relation to the initial contract price). Material rights are treated separately and are recognized over the period which the right is expected to be exercised by a customer, which we estimate as four to five years. This period may be different for services sold from acquired companies.
Project services are considered separate and distinct from other products or services purchased and are recognized at the same time as the services are provided.
Reimbursable Costs
Reimbursable costs revenue consist primarily of amounts charged to our customers for postage on printed and mailed invoices to their end customers. The related revenues are recorded on a gross basis, with an offsetting amount recorded as a cost of revenue.
Cost of Revenues
Costs of Subscription, Transaction, and Services
Cost of subscription, transaction, and services consists primarily of personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for our customer success, professional services, file, and payment operations teams, print operations equipment costs, costs directly attributed to processing customers’ transactions (such as the cost of printing and mailing invoices, excluding postage), expenses for processing payments (ACH and credit card), direct and amortized costs for implementing and integrating our cloud-based platforms with customers’ systems, cloud hosting and related costs for the infrastructure directly associated with production platforms, rent and utilities expense for our leased print operations facilities, and allocated overhead costs. Cost of subscription, transaction, and services excludes depreciation and amortization. We expect that cost of subscription, transaction, and services will increase in absolute dollars, but may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenues from period to period as we continue to invest in growing our business.
Cost of Reimbursable Costs
Cost of reimbursable costs consists of fees for postage related costs, primarily paid to the United States Postal Service or third parties associated with printed and mailed invoice deliveries for our customers, and are recorded at no incremental margin on reimbursable costs revenues.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, incurred in developing and engineering new products or enhancing existing products, quality assurance and testing of new and existing product technology, maintenance, and enhancement of our existing technology and infrastructure, and allocated overhead costs. We capitalize certain software development costs that are attributable to developing new products and adding incremental functionality to our platforms, and amortize such costs over the estimated life of the new product or incremental functionality, which is typically four years.
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”), we expense a substantial portion of research and development expenses as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenues from period to period as we continue to expand our research and development team to develop new products and product enhancements, as well as to support our growing infrastructure.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, sales commissions, marketing program expenses, travel-related expenses, and costs to market and promote our platforms through advertisements, marketing events, partnership arrangements, direct customer acquisition, and allocated overhead costs. Sales commissions that are incremental to obtaining customer contracts are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period of the customer relationship, which is estimated to be four to five years.
Our sales and marketing efforts are focused on increasing revenue from the acquisition of new customers, the expansion of subscription revenue from existing customers, and from facilitating increased electronic adoption and resulting digital processing activity between our customers and their end customers. Sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate from period to period based on a variety of factors, including changes in the broader economic environment and our return on this spend.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, for our executive team, talent (human resources), finance, procurement, legal and compliance, and other administrative teams, facility costs (including rent and utilities expense for our leased office space, excluding those used in our print operations) and allocated overhead costs. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, expenses related to compliance, and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, as well as higher expenses for director and officer insurance, investor relations, and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our general and administrative functions to support the growth in our business. As a result, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars, but may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenues from period to period.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense includes the costs associated with depreciating our owned furniture and fixtures, computer equipment, software, and technology assets, as well as amortization of leasehold improvements, capitalized software, and amortizable intangible assets.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities.
Interest Expense and Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Interest expense and loss on extinguishment of debt consists of interest on any outstanding debt, amortization of associated debt issuance costs, payment of early termination fees, and writing off unamortized debt discounts associated with repaying our outstanding debt facilities prior to maturity.
Change in Fair Value of Financial Instruments and Other Income (Expense)
Change in fair value of financial instruments and other income (expense) consists primarily of the change in the fair value of equity instruments that do not meet the criteria to be classified as equity (including Earnout Shares issued in connection with the Business Combination), changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, gains (losses) related to foreign exchange, and other non-operating income (expense).
Income Taxes
Income taxes consist primarily of income taxes related to federal, state, and foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets for our U.S. federal taxes and certain foreign and state taxes as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be utilized.
Segments
Our operations are grouped into two reportable segments: (1) Print, and (2) Software and Payments. Our Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) is the Chief Executive Officer ("CEO"), who reviews discrete financial and other information presented for print services and software and payment services for purposes
of allocating resources and evaluating the Company's financial performance. The accounting policies used by the reportable segments are the same as those used in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Print - The Print segment is primarily responsible for printing customer invoices and optimizing the amount of time and costs associated with billing customers via mail.
•Software and Payments - The Software and Payments segment primarily operates using software and cloud based services, optimizes electronic invoice presentment, electronic payments, credit decisioning, collections automation, cash application and deduction management, and e-commerce of B2B customers.
We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on revenues, cost of revenues, and gross profit. All of the revenues shown in the reportable segments is revenue from external customers; there is no revenue from transactions with other operating segments. Segment expenses include the direct expenses of each segment's operations and exclude sales and marketing expenses, research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, and certain other identified costs that we do not allocate to the segments for purposes of evaluating their operational performance.
Given the nature of our business, the amount of assets does not provide meaningful insight into our operating performance. As a result, we do not identify or allocate assets by reportable segment and total assets are not included in our segment financial information.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth select Consolidated Statements of Operations data, and such data as a percentage of total revenues, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total Revenues
The increase in total revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to (1) a $22.7 million increase in the software and payments segment as a result of contracting with new customers, existing customers purchasing additional products, price increases, increased transaction volumes primarily from payments, and includes $3.3 million of subscription and transaction fees revenue from the recognition of previously paid and deferred revenue from a customer who terminated during the first quarter of 2021, (2) a $1.3 million increase in services revenue from existing customers purchasing additional professional services engagements, and (3) the acquisition of iController. These increases were partially offset by (1) a $2.3 million in print segment reimbursable costs, primarily postage, associated with lower print volumes and (2) a $1.0 million decrease in transactional volumes in the print segment as a result of existing customers converting to electronic invoicing.
Cost of Revenues
The increase in total cost of revenues, excluding depreciation and amortization, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to (1) a 6.5 million increase in personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation resulting from the grant of stock options to substantially all employees in January 2021 and the impact of Earnout RSUs associated with the Business Combination, and reinstating incentive programs that were eliminated as part of the cost-reduction measures implemented in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This increase was partially offset by (2) a $2.3 million decrease in reimbursable costs, primarily postage, associated with lower print volumes, and (3) a $2.0 million decrease in print related costs resulting from efficiencies in our operations and lower print transactional volumes as a result of existing customers converting to electronic invoicing.
Research and Development
The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was due primarily to a $12.4 million increase in personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation resulting from the grant of stock options to substantially all employees in January 2021 and the impact of Earnout RSUs associated with the Business Combination, reinstating incentive programs that were eliminated as part of the cost-reduction measures implemented in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and increased headcount, and a $0.9 million increase in software expenses directly
related to product development activities. The remainder of the increase was primarily due to the acquisition of iController and amortization of capitalized software development costs.
Sales and Marketing
The increase in sales and marketing expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was due primarily to a $13.8 million increase in personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation resulting from the grant of stock options to substantially all employees in January 2021 and the impact of Earnout RSUs associated with the Business Combination, reinstating incentive programs that were eliminated as part of the cost-reduction measures implemented in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and increased headcount, and a $1.6 million increase in marketing initiatives spend related to promoting our products and product enhancements. The remainder of the increase was primarily due to the acquisition of iController and an increase in travel due to the easing of COVID-19 restrictions.
General and Administrative
The increase in general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was due primarily to (1) a $17.0 million increase in personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation resulting from the grant of stock options to substantially all employees in January 2021 and the impact of certain Earnout RSUs associated with the Business Combination, and reinstating incentive programs that were eliminated as part of the cost-reduction measures implemented in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and increased headcount, (2) a $5.2 million increase in insurance, professional, software, and consulting fees for reporting, compliance, and other related requirements as a result of becoming a public company in 2021, and (3) a $2.7 million increase in capital structure costs related to a secondary offering of our Common Stock in July 2021 and retiring all of our outstanding warrants in December 2021. The remainder of the increase was primarily due to the acquisition of iController and an increase in travel due to the easing of COVID-19 restrictions.
Depreciation and Amortization
The decrease in depreciation and amortization expense compared to the prior year was due primarily to a certain customer relationship intangible assets that were fully amortized in 2021, offset by an increase due to the acquisition of iController and amortization of the acquired intangible assets.
Total Other Income (Expense)
The increase in other expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was due primarily to a $9.5 million increase in fair value measurements, primarily related to Earnout Shares and a $2.4 million increase due to a loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the early payment of all of our outstanding borrowings, both as part of the Business Combination. These increases were partially
offset by a $4.1 million reduction in interest expense as all of our outstanding borrowings were paid off in the first quarter of 2021.
Income Taxes Expense (Benefit)
The change from income tax expense to income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the decrease in deferred tax liability related to the acquisition of iController in the fourth quarter of 2021, and the ability to utilize certain tax losses in the future. Overall, our effective tax rate is low due to our U.S. net operating loss position. We have a valuation allowance on our deferred taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, cash flows from financing activities, and through a public offering of our equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $187.7 million and marketable securities of $45.1 million. Our primary uses of liquidity are operating expenses, capital expenditures, and acquiring businesses.
On October 7, 2021, we completed the acquisition of iController for approximately $56.8 million in cash. On February 14, 2022, we completed the acquisition of Order2Cash for an initial purchase price of approximately $58.2 million in cash. Both acquisitions were funded entirely with cash on hand.
We believe our current cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, and cash flows from financing activities, including the reduction in cash used to acquire Order2Cash and additional consideration payable within the next year, if any, related to our recent acquisitions, are sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for a period of at least twelve months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, our anticipated results are subject to significant uncertainty and may be affected by events beyond our control, including the prevailing economic, financial, and industry conditions, including the continued impact of COVID-19.
Our liquidity is influenced by a variety of factors, including our revenue growth rate, timing of payments and collections, development of new products, cash paid for acquisitions, capital expenditures, and the issuance of debt and stock. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our pace of growth, subscription activity, retention of existing customers, the timing and extent of spend to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced services offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our services. Further, we continually assess potential acquisitions and expect to continue to pursue acquisitions of complementary businesses, services, and technologies. To the extent that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities are insufficient to fund future activities or requirements to continue operating our business, we may need to raise additional capital. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition would be adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operations have historically been negative as we continue to invest in our product features and platform, develop new products, increase our sales and marketing efforts to sign contracts with new customers, and expand the product breadth within existing customers. We do not expect this trend to change on an annual basis, although we do see quarterly shifts where cash flows from operations may be positive, primarily associated with invoicing and collecting subscription fees from customers which are typically payable in advance.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $9.6 million compared to cash used in operating activities of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher net losses from investments in sales and marketing, product development, and insurance, professional, compliance, and other related requirements as a result of becoming a public company in 2021, and decreasing uses of cash for working capital, net of the impact of deferred revenues and costs.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $103.6 million, which consisted of $56.8 million paid for the acquisition of iController, $45.1 million for purchases of marketable securities, and $1.6 million of purchases of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million, which consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $287.1 million, which primarily consisted of $329.7 million of proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, net of offering costs. These proceeds were partially offset by $46.2 million used to fully repay our outstanding borrowings, including debt extinguishment costs, pursuant to the Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $15.0 million, which primarily consisted of $49.6 million in proceeds from borrowings under a line of credit, and was partially offset by $34.9 million in repayments of our outstanding borrowings.
Future Cash Obligations
In addition to the future cash obligations described below, we have other payables and liabilities that may be legally enforceable but are not considered contractual commitments. Refer to Note 15 - Accrued Expenses and Other Current Liabilities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our payables and liabilities.
Leases
We lease office space for our employees and facilities for our print operations under non-cancellable operating lease agreements (refer to Note 10 - Leases in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). The remaining duration of non-cancellable operating leases ranges from less than 1 year to 13 years.
Remaining lease payments within one year, within two to three years, within four to five years, and after five years from December 31, 2021 are $5.1 million, $9.6 million, $8.4 million, and $24.1 million, respectively.
Purchase Obligations
We enter into purchase commitments with certain vendors to secure pricing for materials necessary for our print operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.5 million remaining under such purchase commitments.
Contingent Consideration
Our acquisition of iController includes contingent cash consideration with an estimated fair value of $5.1 million to be paid to the seller based on the amount and timing of iController’s achievement of certain recurring revenue growth targets over a three year period subsequent to the acquisition date.
On February 14, 2022, we completed the acquisition of Order2Cash. Additional amounts are payable during the three-year period following the closing date based on the financial performance of Order2Cash and other certain conditions.
Letters of Credit
We have commitments under letters of credit for $2.5 million that are maintained pursuant to certain of our lease arrangements. $2.4 million of the letters of credit expire in 2024, and the remainder in greater than five years from December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates are based on both our current and historical experience, general economic conditions, known trends and events, and various other factors we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We consider the policies discussed below to be critical to an understanding of our Consolidated Financial Statements because their application requires complex and subjective management estimates and judgment.
•Revenue Recognition - We generate revenues from subscription fees for our hosted SaaS platform and modules, transaction fees for processing customer’s print invoicing or payments, professional service fees for implementation or consulting services, and other reimbursable costs.
We follow the five-step framework prescribed by ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, to determine revenue recognition:
1.Identify the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
2.Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
3.Determine the transaction price;
4.Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
5.Recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Under this framework, revenues are recognized when an approved contract with a customer exists, the fees, payment terms, and rights regarding the products or services to be transferred can be identified, it is probable we will collect substantially all of the consideration for the products and service expected to be provided, and we have transferred control of the products and services to the customer. We continually evaluate customers’ ability and intention to pay by reviewing factors including the customer’s payment history, our ability to mitigate credit risk, and experience selling to similarly situated customers.
Subscription Revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of contractually agreed upon fees to provide our customers access to our cloud-based SaaS platform and modules that automate processes across the accounts receivable function (including electronic invoice presentment, payments solutions, credit decisioning and monitoring, cash application, collections automation, and e-commerce).
Our subscription agreements do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of the software, are typically non-cancellable, and do not contain general rights of returns. Subscription agreements typically have an initial term of one to three years and are invoiced in annual, quarterly, or monthly installments in advance. After the initial term, subscription agreements renew annually and are invoiced in advance of each renewal year. Subscription services are recognized ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement, beginning on the date the service is made available to the customer.
Transaction Revenue
Transaction revenue consists of per-item processing fees charged at contracted rates based on the number of envelopes, invoices delivered, payments processed, or basis points on the amount of credit card payments processed. Our transaction fees are billed monthly based on the volume of items processed each month at the contractual rate per item processed.
We recognize revenue at the same time as the transactions are processed as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of our transaction processing services.
Professional Services Revenue
Professional services revenue consists of implementation services for new customers, or implementations of new products for existing customers. It also includes separately contracted project services provided to customers outside of implementations. Professional services are typically sold on a time-and-materials basis and billed monthly based on actual hours incurred.
Implementation services are typically considered a single, combined performance obligation with our subscription services. Refer to ‘Significant Judgments’ below for a discussion on a single, combined performance obligation.
For project services, which are considered a separate performance obligation, we recognize revenue at the same time as the services are performed.
Significant Judgments
We determine the transaction price of our contracts based on the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to, which can be variable. Any variable amounts are constrained to the minimum guaranteed contractual amount so that a reversal of cumulative revenue does not occur in future periods. Once there is no longer uncertainty over a variable amount, any incremental fees we are entitled to are allocated to the current and future subscription term.
Our contracts may include either a single promise (referred to as a performance obligation) to transfer a product or service or a combination of multiple performance obligations to transfer products or services. We evaluate the existence of multiple performance obligations within our contracts by using judgment to determine if: (1) the customer can benefit from each contractual promise on its own or together with other readily available resources; and (2) the transfer of each contractual promise is separately identifiable from other promises in a contract. When both criteria are met, each promise is accounted for as a separate performance obligation.
Typically, our implementation services are not capable of being distinct from the related subscription service, and accordingly, they are combined with the subscription service into a single performance obligation recognized over the term of the agreement. Since the initial contract with a customer includes both the subscription and implementation fees, and are therefore higher than subscription renewal fees in subsequent years, our contracts convey a ‘material right’ to the customer (i.e. an option for the customer to renew the contract at a lower price in relation to the initial contract price). Material rights are treated as a separate performance obligation and are recognized over the period which the right is expected to be exercised by a customer, which requires judgment and is typically four to five years. This period may be different for services sold from acquired companies.
For arrangements that contain multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated among the separate performance obligations on a relative basis according to their standalone selling prices (“SSP”). The determination of SSP for each performance obligation requires judgment. We determine SSP for our performance obligations based on factors including an analysis of historical standalone sales data, contractual rates and renewal fees, internal pricing objectives, market conditions, factors used to set list prices, and pricing of similar products.
•Leases - We enter into both operating and finance leases. Leases are classified as operating or finance at the lease commencement date. A lease is classified as a finance lease if any one of the following criteria are met:
1.The lease transfers ownership of the asset by the end of the lease term;
2.The lease contains an option to purchase the asset that is reasonably certain to be exercised;
3.The lease term is for a major part of the remaining useful life of the underlying asset;
4.The present value of the lease payments equals or exceeds substantially all of the fair value of the asset; or
5.The underlying asset is of such a specialized nature that it is expected to have no alternative use to the lessor at the end of the lease term.
A lease is classified as an operating lease if it does not meet any one of these criteria. Operating leases are primarily for office space for our employees or facilities for our print operations. Finance leases are primarily for print equipment, computer hardware, and vehicles.
Lease liabilities and right-of-use (“ROU”) assets are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the estimated present value of future minimum lease payments over the lease term. ROU assets exclude lease incentives and are adjusted for initial direct costs incurred, if any. Lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease and ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term. We use judgement to determine the discount rate in the present value calculation as an implicit rate in our lease agreements is typically not determinable. Currently, at lease commencement or at the time of lease modification, we use our incremental borrowing rate. Our leases do not include residual value guarantees or covenants. We have elected to not recognize leases with a lease term upon commencement of 12 months or less (“short-term leases”) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Lease expense for operating leases and short-term leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Lease expense for finance leases includes straight-line amortization of ROU assets and interest expense by applying the effective interest rate method to remaining lease liabilities.
Some of our lease agreements contain options to extend or terminate the lease. When determining the lease term at commencement, these options are included in the measurement and recognition of the ROU asset and lease liability when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise the option, which requires judgment. We consider various economic factors when making this determination, including, but not limited to, the significance of leasehold improvements incurred in the office space, the difficulty in replacing the lease, underlying contractual obligations, or specific characteristics unique to a particular lease. Subsequent to entering into a lease, if it becomes reasonably certain that we will exercise an option that was not included in the lease term, we account for the change in circumstances as a lease modification, which results in the remeasurement of the ROU asset and lease liability as of the modification date. We continually evaluate whether facts or events indicate it is reasonably certain that we will exercise an option.
•Goodwill, Intangible Assets, and Other Long-Lived Assets - When acquiring a business, we determine the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date, which may include a significant amount of intangible assets such as customer relationships, technology, trademarks and trade names, and non-compete agreements, as well as goodwill. The determination of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed involves significant judgment in selecting inputs used in a valuation methodology, including expected future cash flows, future changes in technology, estimated replacement costs, covenants not to compete, acquired developed technologies, discount rates, and assumptions about the period of time the brand will continue to be used in our product portfolio. In a typical acquisition, we engage a third-party valuation expert to assist us with the fair value analyses. Our estimates of fair value are based upon
assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
Goodwill is required to be assessed for impairment at least annually or whenever events or circumstances indicate that there may be an impairment. An impairment assessment requires evaluating the potential impairment at the reporting unit level using either a qualitative assessment, to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or a quantitative analysis, to determine and compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value, or a combination of both. Reporting units are determined based on the components of our operating segments that constitute a business for which financial information is available and for which operating results are regularly reviewed by segment management. Judgment is required in determining the use of a qualitative or quantitative assessment, as well as in determining each reporting unit’s estimated fair value, as it requires us to make estimates of market conditions and operational performance, including projected financial results, discount rates, control premium, and valuation multiples for key financial metrics.
Absent an event that indicates a specific impairment may exist, we have selected October 1st as the date to perform the annual goodwill impairment test. We completed the annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2021 utilizing a qualitative assessment to determine if it was more likely than not that the fair values of each of our reporting units was less than their respective carrying values and concluded that no impairments existed. Future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that goodwill associated with our acquired businesses is impaired. Any resulting impairment loss could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations.
Intangible assets with finite lives as of December 31, 2021 consisted of customer relationships, technology, trademarks and trade names, and non-compete agreements and were recorded at their estimated fair values as described above. These assigned values are amortized on a basis which best matches the periods in which the economic benefits are expected to be realized. Determining an acquired intangible asset’s useful life requires significant judgment and is based on evaluating a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the expected use of the asset, historical client retention rates, consumer awareness, trademark and trade name history, and any contractual provisions that could limit or extend an asset's useful life.
Tangible assets with finite lives consist of property and equipment, which are depreciated over their estimated useful lives. Other long-lived assets consist primarily of operating lease right-of-use assets, as described in the section titled ‘Leases’ of our Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.
We continually evaluate whether events or circumstances have occurred that indicate the estimated remaining useful life of any of our intangible assets, tangible assets, or the estimated remaining lease term of any of our operating lease right-of-use assets may warrant revision, or that the carrying value of these assets may be impaired. To compute whether these assets have been impaired, the estimated undiscounted future cash flows for the estimated remaining useful life / estimated lease term of the assets are compared to the carrying value. To the extent that the future cash flows are less than the carrying value, the assets are written down to their estimated fair value.
•Stock-Based Compensation - We offer equity awards, primarily stock options, restricted stock units (RSUs”), and purchase rights to an employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”), under equity incentive plans approved and administered by our Board of Directors.
Stock-based compensation expense for stock options and purchase rights is measured at fair value on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and for RSUs is measured based on the closing market price of our Common Stock on the date of grant. We recognize expense for stock awards on a straight-line basis over the award’s requisite service period, which is typically the vesting period for stock options and RSUs, and the offering period for purchase rights under the ESPP. As applicable, forfeitures are estimated at the date of grant and, if necessary, revised in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We estimate the forfeiture rate based on historical experience.
The Black-Scholes model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including:
1.Expected Term - The period that the stock option is expected to be outstanding. We estimate the expected term based on historical experience, which we believe is representative of the actual characteristics of the awards.
2.Expected Volatility - The estimated volatility of our Common Stock price over the Expected Term. We estimate the expected volatility based on the historic volatility of comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the Expected Term. The comparable companies were chosen based on their industry, similar product offerings, or similar size.
3.Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on yields from United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term consistent with the Expected Term.
4.Expected Dividend Yield - We have never declared or paid cash dividends on Common Stock and we have no plans to do so. Consequently, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected adoption dates and effects on our financial position and results of operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We present these non-GAAP measures to assist investors in understanding our financial performance from the perspective of management. We believe these measures provide an additional tool for investors to use in comparing our financial performance over multiple periods with other companies in our industry. While we believe the use of these non-GAAP measures provides useful information to investors and management in analyzing our financial performance, non-GAAP measures have inherent limitations in that they do not reflect all of the amounts and transactions that are included in our financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Non-GAAP measures do not serve as an alternative to U.S. GAAP, nor do we consider our non-GAAP measures in isolation. Accordingly, we present non-GAAP financial measures only in connection with U.S. GAAP results. We urge investors to consider non-GAAP measures only in conjunction with our U.S. GAAP financials and to review the reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, as described below, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net Revenue (non-GAAP)
Net revenue (non-GAAP) is defined as total revenues less reimbursable costs revenue. Reimbursable costs revenue consists primarily of amounts charged to customers for postage (with an offsetting amount recorded as a cost of revenue) which we do not consider internally when monitoring operating performance.
We believe net revenue (non-GAAP) allows investors to evaluate comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of core operations. The most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure to net revenue (non-GAAP) is total revenues on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Adjusted Gross Profit (non-GAAP) & Adjusted Gross Margin (non-GAAP)
Adjusted gross profit (non-GAAP) is defined as total revenues less total cost of revenues, excluding depreciation and amortization, plus stock-based compensation expense included in total cost of revenues. Adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) is defined as our adjusted gross profit (non-GAAP) divided by total revenues less reimbursable costs revenue or net revenue (non-GAAP).
We believe adjusted gross profit (non-GAAP) and adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) are useful financial measures to investors as they eliminate the impact of certain non-cash expenses and allow a direct comparison of our cash operations and ongoing operating performance between periods. We expect adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) to continue to improve over time to the extent that we are able to increase our scale by successfully growing revenues, both from cross-selling existing customers and upselling current and future offerings. However, our ability to improve adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) over time is not guaranteed and will be impacted by the factors affecting our performance discussed above and outlined in the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A. this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure to adjusted gross profit (non-GAAP) and adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) is total revenues on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our net revenue (non-GAAP), adjusted gross profit (non-GAAP), and adjusted gross margin (non-GAAP) to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures (in thousands, except percentages):
Reconciliation of Total Revenues to Net Revenue (non-GAAP), Adjusted Gross Profit (non-GAAP) and Adjusted Gross Margin (Non-GAAP)
Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP)
Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) is defined as net loss, plus (1) income tax expense (benefit), (2) the change in fair value of financial instruments and other income (expense), including the change in the fair value of liabilities (for Earnout Shares, warrants, contingent consideration, or other equity instruments classified as liabilities), (3) interest expense and loss on extinguishment of debt, (4) depreciation and amortization, (5) stock-based compensation expense, (6) restructuring and severance costs, (7) acquisition and integration costs, and (8) other capital structure transaction costs, minus (9) interest income.
We believe adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) is a key measure for us to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets, and to develop operational and strategic goals. Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) helps identify underlying trends since the expenses we exclude in the calculation may not directly correlate to our overall operating performance in any specific period. Accordingly, we believe adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) also provides useful information to investors in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as management. The most directly comparable GAAP measure to adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) is net loss on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
We believe that excluding the impact of these expenses in calculating adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core operating performance. We believe it is useful to exclude certain non-cash charges, such as share-based compensation expense from our non-GAAP financial measures because the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations. Restructuring and severance costs are associated with realigning our organization or cost structure. Acquisition and integration expenses are related to the third-party costs associated with acquiring companies and internal direct costs associated with integrating acquired companies, employees, and their customers. These costs are not expected to recur within two years for prior acquisitions, and will only reoccur for new acquisitions. Other capital structure transaction costs are related to third-party fees, including investment banking, legal, accounting, and other professional advisory fees associated with financing transactions, such as the secondary offering of our Common Stock completed in July 2021 and the warrant exchange in December 2021. These costs are not expected to recur over the next two years as the secondary offering was a one-time transaction between existing and new shareholders, with no new shares being issued or offered by us, and the warrant exchange was a one-time transaction to convert all outstanding warrants to Common Stock.
The following table reconciles adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure (in thousands):
Reconciliation of Net Loss to Adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) was a loss of $13.7 million, a decrease of $11.5 million compared to the prior year due primarily to higher expenses for sales and marketing growth, and costs incurred as a result of becoming a public company in 2021, offset by higher gross profit, excluding depreciation and amortization, and overall lower adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) in 2020 related to expense reduction initiatives related to COVID-19 for part of that year.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, adjusted EBITDA (non-GAAP) was a loss of $2.2 million, an increase of $8.8 million compared to the prior year due primarily to expense reduction initiatives related to COVID-19, which commenced in the second quarter of 2020 and continued through the third quarter of 2020.
Free Cash Flow (non-GAAP)
Free cash flow (non-GAAP) is defined as net cash used in operating activities, less purchases of property and equipment (which includes capitalized internal-use software costs).
We believe free cash flow (non-GAAP) is an important liquidity measure of the cash available for our operational expenses and investment in business growth. It is useful to investors as a liquidity measure of our ability to generate or use cash to, maintain a strong balance sheet, and invest in future growth. The most directly comparable GAAP measure to free cash flow (non-GAAP) is net cash used in operating activities on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands):
Reconciliation of Net Cash Used in Operating Activities to Free Cash Flow (non-GAAP)