ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion includes forward-looking statements about our business, financial condition and results of operations, including discussions about management’s expectations for our business. The financial condition, results of operations and cash flows discussed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are those of Better Choice Company Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, collectively, the “Company,” “Better Choice Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”. These statements represent projections, beliefs and expectations based on current circumstances and conditions and in light of recent events and trends, and you should not construe these statements either as assurances of performance or as promises of a given course of action. Instead, various known and unknown factors are likely to cause our actual performance and management’s actions to vary, and the results of these variances may be both material and adverse. A description of material factors known to us that may cause our results to vary or may cause management to deviate from its current plans and expectations, is set forth under “Risk Factors.” See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements including the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this filing. Accordingly, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements which may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date hereof or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.
Overview and Outlook
Better Choice is a rapidly growing pet health and wellness company committed to leading the industry shift toward pet products and services that help dogs and cats live healthier, happier and longer lives. Our mission is to become the most innovative premium pet food company in the world, and we are motivated by our commitment to making products with integrity and treating pets and their parents with respect. We believe that our portfolio of brands are well positioned to benefit from the trends of growing pet humanization and an increased consumer focus on health and wellness, and have adopted a laser focused, channel specific approach to growth that is driven by new product innovation. Our executive team has a proven history of success in both pet and consumer-packaged goods, and has over 50 years of combined experience in the pet industry and over 100 years of combined experience in the consumer-packaged goods industry.
We sell our premium and super-premium products (which we believe generally includes products with a retail price greater than $0.20 per ounce) under the Halo and TruDog brands, both of which have a long history of providing high quality products to pet parents. Our diverse and established customer base has enabled us to penetrate multiple channels of trade, which we believe enables us to deliver on core consumer needs and serve pet parents wherever they shop. We believe this omni-channel approach has also helped us respond more quickly to changing channel dynamics that have accelerated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as the increasing percentage of pet food that is sold online. We group these channels of trade into four distinct categories: E-Commerce, which includes the sale of product to online retailers such as Amazon and Chewy; Brick & Mortar, which includes the sale of product to pet specialty chains such as Petco, PetSmart, Pet Supplies Plus, select grocery chains and neighborhood pet stores; Direct to Consumer (“DTC”) which includes the sale of product through our online web platform to more than 20,000 unique customers and access to more than 500,000 customer emails; and International, which includes the sale of product to foreign distribution partners and to select international retailers.
The impact that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related supply chain challenges will have on our consolidated results of operations is uncertain. Although we have not observed a material reduction in demand as of December 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen some impact to our revenue growth as a result of supply chain issues and a notable reduction in our safety stocks during the second half of 2021. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the pandemic's impact to our business, consolidated results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity, and our results presented herein are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for future periods in 2022. Management cannot predict the full impact of the global supply chain challenges on the sourcing, manufacturing and distribution of our products or general economic conditions, including the effects on consumer spending. The ultimate extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on us is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time.
The Global Pet Food and Treat Market
The U.S. represents the largest and most developed market for pet food globally, with food and treats accounting for approximately $39 billion of consumer sales in 2019, or 36% of the total US pet care market, according to AlphaWise and Morgan Stanley Research. According to the American Pet Product Association, between 66% and 70% of all households in the U.S. own a pet, equating to a total pet population of more than 130 million companion animals and an average of 1.7 pets per household. Pet spending represents a significant portion of household spend on consumer products, as this translates to an average annual spend on pet care of more than $1,500 per pet owning household, with $460 of this spend attributed to pet food and treats.
Historically, consumer spending on pets grew at an approximately 3% CAGR in the decade leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, driven by steady annual increases in household pet ownership of approximately 1%, the continued premiumization of the category and the humanization of pets. These industry tailwinds have been magnified in the post-COVID landscape, as stay-at-home orders have driven a more than tripling of annual pet ownership growth alongside fundamental changes in consumer purchasing behavior. This surge in pet acquisition has led to a dramatic increase in the forecasted growth of the pet care industry over the next ten years.
Beyond the estimated $3.9 billion permanent increase to annual spend on pet food and treats, this “Pet Boom” was driven by the acceleration of pet ownership by millennial and Gen-Z households. From a demographic perspective, younger pet owners are more likely to spend a higher percentage of their income on pets, treat their pet as an important member of the family and to purchase products from pet specialty and online retailers rather than from grocery stores. Along these lines, women are 3.2 times more interested in purchasing pet food than men, and are 2.4 times more likely to engage with search ads than men. Taken holistically, these traits suggest a preference to purchase more premium and super-premium pet food and treats from brands like Halo and TruDog, with a tendency to purchase products in the channels where we compete.
Globally, Asia is the second largest market for pet products, with China representing the largest market opportunity for growth. Like the U.S., growth in the Asian pet care industry has been driven by dramatic increases in household pet ownership. We believe that growth in Asia is fueled by increasing levels of economic financial status and demand for premium, western manufactured products as a result of product quality concerns. This demand has been supported by a rapidly growing middle class in China, where a recent McKinsey report estimated that in 2018 roughly 730 million people in urban areas fell into the income categories of “aspirants” and “affluents,” with the Brookings group estimating that approximately 60 million people are added to these income categories each year. We believe that this growth drove the increase in the number of dog-owning Chinese households as measured by Euromontior, which increased from 12% in 2015 to 20% in 2020, according to Euromonitor. Although significantly lower than the nearly 50% of households that own a dog in the U.S., there are already more companion animals in China due to sheer population size. According to Euromonitor, the Chinese market for premium dry dog and cat food is anticipated to grow at a 20% CAGR and 28% CAGR, respectively, from 2015 through 2025, suggesting that the Chinese pet market has significant room for growth in the foreseeable future. We are focused on targeting Chinese pet owners with the highest willingness to pay, which tend to be urban dwelling millennial and Gen-Z women. In 2021, 80% of our products were purchased online, and approximately 50% of our end-consumers were born after 1990. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically changed the U.S. retail landscape, the pet industry has proven to be resilient and we anticipate that our ability to reach a growing base of customers online will only increase as approximately 53% of Better Choice’s net sales in 2021 were made via our DTC and E-Commerce channels. Conversely, we believe that our long-established relationships with key Brick & Mortar customers such as Petco and Pet Supplies Plus will enable us to jointly launch new products in the future that are designed for in-store success, such as the national launch of Halo Elevate® in more than 2,000 Brick & Mortar locations in 2022. In addition to our domestic sales channels, our International sales channel grew 71% in 2021, driven primarily by significant new customer acquisition and increased brand awareness in our key Asian markets.
Our Growth Strategy
•Strong Innovation Pipeline. We have a robust and growing pipeline of new products, and believe our size is an advantage as we are nimble enough to quickly bring new products to market, but large enough to benefit from strong existing customer relationships and established economies of scale with our co-manufacturers.
•Ability to Leverage Differentiated Omni-Channel Strategy for Growth. We believe that we can leverage our differentiated omni-channel strategy to design and sell products purpose-built for success in specific channels while maintaining our ability to leverage marketing and sales resources cross-channel. We believe that this strategy will allow us to deliver on core consumer needs, maximize gross margin and respond to changing channel dynamics that have accelerated because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Capitalize on Continuing Trends of Humanization of Pets. We believe our combination of innovative products designed specifically for certain channels can assist our growth to become a leader in the premium and super-premium categories across dog and cat food.
•Well Positioned to Capitalize On a Once-in-a-Generation Demographic Shift in China. We believe that China represents the largest macro-growth opportunity in the global pet food industry. In China, the number of households that own a pet has doubled in the last five years, with younger pet owners leading growth.
•Ability to Pursue Strategic Acquisitions. Through our longstanding industry contacts we are able to source proprietary opportunities and transactions. Our preference is to maintain the asset light business model we currently operate and identify products and brands that are complementary to our existing portfolio. We believe we have a platform to effectively meet public company reporting requirements. Furthermore, our public company structure has historically enabled us to offer transaction consideration in the form of cash and stock.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated results for the periods presented (in thousands):
Net sales
We sell our products through online retailers, pet specialty retailers, our online portal directly to our consumers and internationally to foreign distribution partners (transacted in U.S. dollars). Generally, our sales transactions are single performance obligations that are recorded at the time the product is shipped from our distribution centers and when control transfers. We offer a variety of trade promotions, discounts and incentives to our customers, which impacts the transaction price of our products and our net sales accordingly. DTC net sales include revenue derived from shipping fees and are net of loyalty points earned (a portion of revenue is deferred at the time of the sale as points are earned and not recognized until the redemption of the points, estimated based on historical experience). We record a revenue reserve based on historical return rates to account for customer returns.
Information about our revenue channels is as follows (in thousands):
(1)The Company's E-Commerce channel includes two customers that each amount to greater than 10% of the Company's total net sales. These customers had $7.6 million and $7.0 million of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, respectively and $6.8 million and $6.9 million of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
(2)The Company's International channel includes $9.1 million of net sales from one customer in China that amounts to greater than 10% of the Company's total net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021. None of the Company's international customers represented greater than 10% of net sales during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net sales increased $3.4 million, or 8%, to $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $42.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by growth in our International and E-commerce channels, partially offset by lower Brick & Mortar sales as we reshuffle our product lineup ahead of our new product launch in 2022 and lower DTC sales driven by an intentional decrease in marketing spend as we expect to shift the focus of these investments to our longer-term DTC strategy rather than chasing short-term revenue gains. Our revenue growth has been negatively impacted throughout the year by the supply chain issues being felt globally as the COVID-19 pandemic continues to present challenges. We are navigating through short-term shortages in raw materials as well as production delays stemming from supply chain shortages and labor constraints.
Key factors that we expect to affect our future sales growth include new product innovation, our new product launch, our expansion strategy in each of the sales channels and our key supplier relationships.
Gross profit
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of the cost of product obtained from co-manufacturers, packaging materials, freight costs for shipping inventory to the warehouse, as well as third-party warehouse and order fulfillment costs. We review inventory on hand periodically to identify damages, slow moving inventory, and/or aged inventory. Based on the analysis, we record inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with any reduction in value expensed as cost of goods sold.
Our products are manufactured to our specifications by our co-manufacturers using raw materials. We work with our co-manufacturers to secure a supply of raw materials that meet our specifications. In addition to procuring raw materials that meet our formulation requirements, our co-manufacturers manufacture, test and package our products. We design our packaging for our co-manufacturers and the packaging is shipped directly to them.
Our gross profit has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily product sales mix, volumes sold, discounts offered to newly acquired and recurring customers, the cost of our manufactured products, and the cost of freight from the manufacturer to the warehouse.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, gross profit decreased $0.7 million, or 5%, to $15.4 million compared to $16.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit margin decreased 5% to 33% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 38% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was driven by cost increases from our primary suppliers as a result of broad-scale inflation in the industry, partially offset by $0.9 million of non-cash expense related to the amortization of a purchase accounting adjustment to inventory recorded in connection with the Halo acquisition in the first quarter of 2020. We are actively working with our co-manufacturing and freight partners as well as transitioning some of our primary suppliers to generate future cost savings. Additionally, we have taken price increases to our customers starting late in the third quarter to help cover cost increases. We will continue to refine and optimize our overall pricing strategy as we evaluate the future impact of inflation and align ourselves with the market. Although we expect to improve our gross profit margin in the future, if we fail to effectively optimize our pricing strategy, it could have a material negative impact on our future profitability.
Operating expenses
Our Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses consist of the following:
•Sales and marketing costs, including specific customer promotional programs, paid media, content creation expenses and our DTC selling platform. Marketing costs are geared towards customer acquisition and retention and building brand awareness. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Sales and marketing costs increased approximately $4.5 million or 73%, to $10.7 million from $6.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by increased promotional spend in our E-commerce and International sales channels and higher advertising and market research costs related to developing our new Halo Elevate® product line.
•Employee compensation and benefits decreased approximately $0.1 million or 1% during the year ended December 31, 2021 to $7.2 million from $7.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, we have added several key members to our management team that have significant operating experience in the pet and consumer-packaged good sectors which we believe will enable us to successfully execute our growth strategy.
•Freight, which is primarily related to the shipping of DTC orders to customers, increased $0.3 million or 24% during the year ended December 31, 2021 to $1.8 million from $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by overall shipping industry inflation.
•Non-cash charges including depreciation, amortization, disposal or sale of assets and bad debt expense remained flat at $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
•Other general and administrative costs for various general corporate expenses, including professional services, information technology, rent, travel, costs related to merchant credit card fees, insurance, product development costs, and warehousing costs. During the year ended December 31, 2021, other general and administrative costs decreased $10.7 million, or 61% to $6.8 million compared to $17.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by non-recurring warrant expense of $10.0 million during 2020, contract termination costs of $1.1 million incurred in 2020, warehouse cost savings from outsourcing in 2020, higher audit fees during 2020, a reduction in rent expense as a result of prior lease terminations, other terminations in early 2021 and non-cash reductions of our sales tax liability during 2021. The decrease was partially offset by higher overall legal fees in 2021 due to a favorable legal settlement during the fourth quarter of 2020, development costs related to new product innovation, and increased investor relations and professional service costs related to our recent IPO.
Share-based compensation includes expenses related to equity awards issued to employees and non-employee directors. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Share-based compensation decreased $4.8 million, or 54%, to $4.1 million, as compared to share-based compensation of $8.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily driven by a lower monthly expense due to an overall decrease in the fair value of the outstanding options in 2021 as compared to 2020, as well as certain warrant and restricted stock grants for which compensation expense was recognized immediately during 2020 with no comparable grants in 2021; this was partially offset by accelerated vesting on certain stock option grants during 2021.
Interest expense, net
During the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense decreased $6.0 million, or 65% to $3.2 million from $9.2 million for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense is comprised of interest on our term loan, revolving credit facility, PPP loans, payable in-kind interest on our senior subordinated convertible notes, and the amortization of debt issuance costs and accretion of debt discounts. See "Note 8 - Debt" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our outstanding debt.
Gain (Loss) on extinguishment of debt
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net gain on extinguishment of debt of $0.5 million, while there was a loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gain on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to extinguishment accounting applied in connection with forgiveness of our PPP Loans, partially offset by the loss on termination of a term loan and ABL Facility. Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to extinguishment accounting applied in connection with us entering into the ABL Facility. See "Note 8 - Debt" for additional information.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities
Common stock warrants classified as liabilities are revalued at each balance sheet date subsequent to the initial issuance and changes in the fair value are reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as Change in fair value of warrant liability. The change in fair value for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the change in the fair value of the Series F Warrants. The change in fair value for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the change in the fair value of the Series F Warrants and the change in fair value of the May Acquisition Warrants. See "Note 12 - Warrants" for additional information.
Income taxes
Our income tax provision consists of an estimate of federal and state income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for any allowable credits, deductions and uncertain tax positions as the arise. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded income tax expense of less than $0.1 million, which relates to indefinite-lived assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not record income tax expense due to the continued losses incurred by us. The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 1% and 0%, respectively, which differs from the U.S. Federal statutory rate of 21% due to permanent differences attributable to the change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities and because our losses have been fully offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainty of realizing the tax benefit of NOLs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources
In connection with our IPO, we issued and sold 8,000,000 shares of common stock at a price of $5.00 per share. On July 1, 2021 we received total net proceeds of approximately $36.1 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $2.8 million, and offering costs of approximately $1.1 million. Upon commencement of our common stock trading on the NYSE, all outstanding convertible notes were converted into 4,732,420 shares of common stock and upon consummation of the IPO, all shares of convertible preferred stock were converted into 5,764,533 shares of common stock.
We have financed our operations primarily through the sales of shares of our common stock, warrants, preferred stock, and loans. On December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash of $28.9 million and $4.0 million, respectively.
We have historically incurred losses and expect to continue to generate operating losses and consume significant cash resources for the foreseeable future; however, due to our high level of working capital and minimal debt after the IPO, we do not anticipate substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We have implemented and continue to implement plans to achieve cost savings, including realized cost savings from the consolidation of our third-party logistics operations and reduction of certain overhead costs and we expect to achieve further cost savings from the consolidation of co-manufacturers and optimization of shipping costs. Additionally, we have implemented and continue to implement margin improvement initiatives, including the optimization of our pricing strategy and ingredient profiles, and new product innovation. The business is focused on growing the most profitable channels while reducing investments in areas that are expected to have lower long-term benefits.
We are subject to risks common in the pet wellness consumer market including, but not limited to, dependence on key personnel, competitive forces, successful marketing and sale of its products, the successful protection of proprietary technologies, ability to grow into new markets, and compliance with government regulations. As of December 31, 2021, we have not experienced a significant adverse impact to our business, financial condition or cash flows resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. However, uncertainties regarding the continued economic impact of COVID-19 are likely to result in sustained market turmoil, which could negatively impact our business, financial condition, and cash flows in the future.
A summary of our cash flows is as follows (in thousands):
Cash flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities increased $4.4 million, or 58%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Net loss from operations adjusted for non-cash expenses was $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $7.7 million for the comparable prior year period. The increase was driven by lower gross profit driven by inflationary cost increases, as well as increased marketing spend, both of which are discussed above. Additionally, the increase in cash used in operating activities was driven by a comparative increase in accounts receivable balances of $3.3 million due to the timing of sales and collections, as well as increased costs related to developing our new Halo Elevate® product line which also led to higher inventory spend of $2.1 million as we built inventory during Q4 2021 for the launch in 2022. This was partially offset by a reduction in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $3.2 million.
Cash flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash used in investing activities is related to capital expenditures.
Cash flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $37.2 million, during the year ended December 31, 2021 and $9.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to net proceeds from the IPO of $36.1 million, proceeds from the January Private Placement of $4.1 million and cash received from warrant exercises of $1.7 million, partially offset by net payments on the term loans of $2.5 million, net payments on the revolving line of credit of $0.3 million, $0.1 million in debt issuance costs, and $1.6 million related to share repurchases. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to proceeds of $18.1 million associated with the Series F Private Placement, proceeds of $2.4 million from the issuance of the June 2020 Notes and the PPP loans, proceeds from warrant exercises of $1.0 million, and net proceeds from the revolving line of credit of $0.3 million, partially offset by a $12.5 million pay down on the term loan and debt issuance costs of $0.1 million.
Wintrust Credit Facility
On January 6, 2021, Halo entered into a credit facility with Old Plank Trail Community Bank, N.A., an affiliate of Wintrust, consisting of a $6.0 million term loan and a $6.0 million revolving line of credit, each scheduled to mature on January 6, 2024. The Wintrust Credit Facility is secured by a general guaranty and security interest on the assets, including the intellectual property of us and our subsidiaries. We have also pledged all of the capital stock of Halo held by us as additional collateral.
The Wintrust Credit Facility subjects us to certain financial covenants, including the maintenance of a fixed charge coverage ratio of no less than 1.25 to 1.00, tested as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. For the test as of December 31, 2021, we failed to satisfy the fixed charge coverage ratio and entered into a default waiver agreement with Wintrust in which Wintrust waived the existing default through the next testing date, March 31, 2022. Additionally, on March 25, 2022, the Company entered into the second amendment to the Wintrust Credit Facility, which removed the financial covenant to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio and included a new financial covenant to maintain a minimum liquidity, as well updated the rate at which the Wintrust Credit Facility bears interest.
See "Note 8 - Debt" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Contractual Commitments and Obligations
We are contractually obligated to make future cash payments for various items, including debt arrangements, certain purchase obligations, as well as the lease arrangement for our office. See "Note 8 - Debt" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about our debt obligations. Our purchase obligations include certain ongoing marketing projects, software subscriptions as well as in-transit or in-production purchase orders with our suppliers, for which amounts vary depending on the purchasing cycle. The majority of our software subscriptions are not under long-term contracts, and we do not have long-term contracts or commitments with any of our suppliers beyond active purchase orders. These purchase obligations were not material as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements and, therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting estimates. Accordingly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. See "Note 1 - Nature of business and summary of significant accounting policies" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our significant accounting policies.
Goodwill Impairment
We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually. We monitor the existence of potential impairment indicators throughout the year and will evaluate for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value. Impairment testing is based on our current business strategy in light of present industry and economic conditions, as well as future expectations.
When performing a quantitative assessment, the fair value units is determined using widely accepted valuation techniques, including the discounted cash flow, guideline transaction and guideline company methods. These types of analyses contain uncertainties because they require management to make significant assumptions and judgments including: (1) an appropriate rate to discount the expected future cash flows; (2) the inherent risk in achieving forecasted operating results; (3) long-term growth rates; (4) expectations for future economic cycles; (5) market comparable companies and appropriate adjustments thereto; and (6) market multiples. When performing a qualitative assessment, qualitative factors are assessed to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. Fair value measurements used in the impairment review of goodwill are Level 3 measurements. See "Note 1 - Nature of business and summary of significant accounting policies" for further information about our policy for fair value measurements. See "Note 7 - Goodwill and intangible assets" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation expense is measured based on the estimated fair value of awards granted to employees, directors, officers and consultants on the grant date. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur, therefore there are no forfeiture related estimates required.
The fair value of an option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, which requires the development of input assumptions, as described in "Note 13 - Share-based compensation". Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described in "Note 13 - Share-based compensation". The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. See "Note 13 - Share-based compensation" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Accounting for Warrants
The fair value of warrants is estimated using a Monte Carlo and/or Black-Scholes valuation model. The assumptions used in these models included the simulation of future stock prices based on future financing events, likelihood of mandatory exercise of the warrants, and timing and likelihood of fundamental transactions, such as a change in control. Both valuation methodologies use key inputs, including expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option and the expected dividend yield. Expected volatility is calculated based on the analysis of other public companies within the pet wellness and internet commerce (e-commerce) sectors. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on risk-free rates for the appropriate term. The expected life is estimated based on contractual terms as well expected exercise dates. The dividend yield is based on the historical dividends issued by us. The valuation of the warrants is subject to uncertainty as a result of the unobservable inputs. If the volatility rate or risk-free interest rate were to change, the value of the warrants would be impacted.
Warrants that are classified as liabilities due to the terms of the warrant obligation are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at the end of each reporting period and as a result, we recorded an adjustment to the warrant liabilities to reflect the fair value as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The warrants accounted for as a derivative included a reset function which is triggered if we issue or sell shares of common stock or common stock equivalents at a price per share that is less than the exercise price of the warrants. Subsequent to the issuance of the warrants, additional common stock equivalents were awarded, triggering the reset clause under the terms of the warrants. Accordingly, the fair value analysis performed during the period ended December 31, 2020 included the impact of the trigger. Warrants that are classified as equity or considered compensation are measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis on the date of issuance. See "Note 12 - Warrants" to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.