Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes, included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. Unless otherwise specified all dollar amounts are in U.S. Dollars. Except for per share amounts, all amounts are in thousands, unless otherwise noted.
Overview
Our mission is to address unmet needs for treatment of cardiometabolic diseases such as diabetes and heart disease. The U.S. spends approximately $4.0 trillion per year on healthcare, and approximately 90% of that spending is for the treatment of chronic diseases. Most chronic diseases are caused predominantly by behaviors, including cardiometabolic diseases such as diabetes and heart disease. The root causes of cardiometabolic diseases are behaviors relating to diet, physical activity, and other lifestyle factors, yet current treatments are focused on reducing the effects of those diseases rather than addressing the root causes.
In response to addressing the root causes of cardiometabolic diseases, we developed a proprietary platform for the development of FDA-regulated, software-based, PDTs for treating diabetes, heart disease, and other cardiometabolic conditions. Our PDTs deliver a novel form of cognitive behavioral therapy that enables changes in neural pathways of the brain so that lasting changes in behavior become possible. In November 2021, we completed enrolling patients in a pivotal study of our lead product candidate for the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes, BT-001, designed to support a regulatory submission for marketing authorization from the FDA. Participants were randomized to receive standard of care with or without BT-001. We announced primary endpoint data from our clinical trial of BT-001 in March 2022. The primary efficacy endpoint was the difference in mean change from baseline in A1c after 90 days of treatment between the two groups and showed highly statistically significant improvement in A1c between the intervention and control groups (-0.4%, p <0.001). Clinically meaningful changes (A1c reductions of 0.4% or more) occurred in 42.7% of the group receiving standard of care and BT-001 versus 25.4% in the group receiving standard of care alone (difference of 17.3%, p <0.001). We believe this demonstrates that the use of BT-001 significantly improved A1c compared to standard of care alone. The unique characteristics of prescription digital therapeutics and CMDx, may make it possible for us to launch multiple products now in development for the treatment of other CMDx over the next few years.
We are building a fully integrated PDTs company focused on treating the root causes of cardiometabolic diseases. Our therapeutics are intended to fill a known gap in the treatment of cardiometabolic diseases and integrate within the existing healthcare system. We expect primary care providers to prescribe our therapeutics and insurers to reimburse them much like they would a drug, and for the patient to remain in the care of their provider while using them.
Financial Overview
Since our inception in 2015, we have focused substantially all of our resources on conducting research and development activities, including discovery and preclinical studies, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property, hiring personnel, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We have recorded revenue from a pilot program with a private health insurance provider to provide a digital therapeutic program that includes a mobile app. We have funded our operations to date primarily from the issuance of convertible notes and simple agreements for future equity ("SAFEs"), the issuance and sale of our preferred units, borrowing on our term loan agreement and funding from the merger with MCAD.
We have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $40,335 and $6,387 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $71,743 and $31,408, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses over at least the next several years. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•advance our products through clinical trials;
•pursue regulatory authorization or clearance of our products;
•operate as a public company;
•continue our preclinical programs and clinical development efforts; and
•continue research activities for the discovery of new products.
We were initially formed as a limited liability company under the laws of the State of Delaware and converted to a Delaware Corporation in August 2020. In connection with our conversion to a Delaware corporation, each of our outstanding shares of the members of the limited liability company was converted into shares of capital stock. On the date of conversion, the following conversions of limited liability shares took place: (i) each Series Seed convertible preferred unit converted into one share of Series Seed convertible preferred stock, (ii) each Series A convertible preferred unit converted into one share of Series A convertible preferred stock, (iii) each of the common units issued by the limited liability company (each a "Common Unit") was converted into one share of common stock, and (iv) each outstanding convertible note converted into a SAFE with a corresponding investment balance as the converted convertible notes.
On April 6, 2021, the Company entered into a merger agreement with MCAD, a special purpose acquisition company. In connection with the merger agreement, MCAD entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) dated as of April 6, 2020, with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which, among other things, MCAD agreed to issue and sell, in a private placement immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, an aggregate of 5,000,000 shares of Common Stock for $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Shares”). On October 28, 2021, we completed the merger with MCAD. We raised $59 million in funding upon the completion of the merger with MCAD. Under the merger Agreement, MCAD acquired all of the outstanding shares of Legacy BTX in exchange for 15,174,729 shares of MCAD. In connection with the merger, MCAD was renamed Better Therapeutics, Inc.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant impact on our operations. Management is unable to estimate the future financial effects, if any, to our business as a result of COVID-19 because of the high level of uncertainties and unpredictable outcomes of this disease.
We are continuing to evaluate the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of new variants of COVID-19, on our business and are taking proactive measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, as well as to maintain business continuity. Based on guidance issued by federal, state and local authorities, we transitioned to a fully remote work model for our employees, effective July 2020. We believe that the measures we are implementing are appropriate, reflecting both regulatory and public health guidance, to maintain business continuity. We will continue to closely monitor and seek to comply with guidance from governmental authorities and adjust our activities as appropriate.
The ultimate impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, our clinical trial, healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could harm our operations, and we will continue to monitor the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic closely.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Since our inception in 2015, we have recognized an immaterial amount of revenue resulting from a pilot program with a private health insurer. We expect that our primary sources of revenue will be through reimbursement coverage for our treatments by commercial insurers, Medicare, and Medicaid in the U.S. and our near-term plan is to obtain broad reimbursement coverage for our first PDT for treating type 2 diabetes, BT-001. We expect to be successful in obtaining a broad reimbursement coverage through demonstrating and generating a comprehensive set of evidence to substantiate the value of BT-001 based on its impact on clinical outcomes, total cost of care, and durability of effect. Obtaining a broad reimbursement coverage and timing of obtaining such coverage for BT-001 and our other product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, the timing and the amount of revenue we expect to recognize from monetizing our product candidates may vary based on various factors.
We also may explore opportunities to partner with pharmaceutical companies marketing traditional drug therapies for cardiometabolic diseases that may benefit from an increase in efficacy and durability when combined with our prescription digital therapeutic.
Operating Expenses
We classify operating expenses into three main categories: (i) research and development (ii) sales and marketing and (iii) general and administrative.
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist of external and internal expenses incurred in connection with our research activities and development programs. These expenses include external expenses, including expenses associated with contract research organizations engaged to manage and conduct clinical trials; and other research and development expenses associated with software development and licenses, and other external development spend. Additionally, our research and development expenses include internal personnel expenses, including expenses for salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, and allocation of certain overhead expenses.
Research and development costs incurred to develop software and our platform for internal use are capitalized and separately presented on the balance sheet as capitalized software development costs. Costs incurred during the preliminary planning and evaluation stage of the project are expensed as incurred. Costs incurred during the application development stage of the project are capitalized. To date, the majority of these expenses have been incurred to advance our lead product candidate, BT-001.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities related to developing our platform and our product candidates, as our product candidates advance into later stages of development, and as we continue to conduct clinical trials. The successful development of our platform and our product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising and public relations costs and consulting services. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we prepare to prepare for commercialization of BT-001. Our sales and marketing efforts are expected to focus on targeting patients and primary care physicians through general awareness and branded promotional activities. We expect to incur significant investments in building a primary care sales force, and our plan and expectation is to have recruited and deployed such sales force during the first year of commercialization of our initial product candidate.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs and professional services including legal, recruiting, audit and accounting services. Personnel-related costs consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future due to anticipated increases in headcount to advance our product candidates and as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net primarily consists of interest expense related to convertible notes and long-term debt entered into in 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparisons of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented:
N/M - The percentage change is not meaningful
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $19,436 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3,660 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $15,776. The increase was primarily due to a $11,218 increase in costs incurred for clinical trials in 2021 and a $4,268 increase, net of capitalized costs, in personnel related costs as additional full-time personnel were hired within clinical research, product design and engineering.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses were $2,336 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $216 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $2,120. The overall increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily related to an increase of $583 in consulting fees, $691 increase in personnel related expenses and $374 for marketing and advertising related expenses as we prepare for product commercialization.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $8,788 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2,455 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $6,333. The overall increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily related to an increase of $3,075 in personnel related costs, an increase of $1,631 in outside services including consulting, audit, and legal fees related to the business combination and an increase in business related insurance of $751.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $185 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $100 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $85. The increase in interest expense, net was the result of interest expense incurred on the new secured term loan agreement with Hercules Capital.
Change in Fair Value of SAFEs
The expense related to the change in fair value of our SAFEs was $10,390 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a gain of $189 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in expense was the result of the issuance and subsequent change in fair value of the SAFEs during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gain on Loan Forgiveness
On May 9, 2020 (the “Origination Date”), the Company received $640 in aggregate loan proceeds (the “PPP Loan”) from Celtic Bank Corporation (the “Lender”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act of 2020 (the CARES Act"). In May 2021, the Company received approval of loan forgiveness and recorded a gain on loan forgiveness of $647.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception through September 30, 2021, our operations had been financed primarily by the sale of convertible promissory notes, sale of SAFEs and the sale and issuance of Series Seed and Series A preferred units, which has resulted in net proceeds of approximately $46,132.
On April 6, 2021, we entered into a merger agreement with MCAD. In connection with the merger agreement, MCAD entered into Subscription Agreements with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which, among other things, MCAD agreed to issue and sell, in a private placement immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, an aggregate of 5,000,000 PIPE Shares. On October 28, 2021, we completed the merger with MCAD. We raised $59,000 in funding upon the completion of the merger with MCAD. Under the merger Agreement, MCAD acquired all of the outstanding shares of Legacy BTX in exchange for 15,174,729 shares of MCAD.
On August 18, 2021, we entered into a $50,000 secured term loan agreement with Hercules Capital. The term loan has a maturity date of August 1, 2025, which can be extended to February 1, 2026, and is secured by substantially all of our assets. Payments due for the term loan are interest-only until March 1, 2023 (subject to extension to September 1, 2023 or September 1, 2024 upon the achievement of certain milestones), after which principal shall be repaid in equal monthly installments. Interest is payable monthly in arrears. The outstanding principal bears interest at the greater of (a) 8.95% or (b) 8.95% plus the prime rate minus 3.25%. Prepayment of the outstanding principal is permitted under the secured term loan agreement and subject to certain prepayment fees. The Company incurred $518 of debt issuance costs related to the borrowings under the secured term loan agreement. Debt issuance costs are being amortized through the maturity date of the secured term loan and are reported as a direct reduction of long-term debt on the balance sheet. Amortization expense, included in interest expense, net on the accompanying statements of operations and comprehensive loss totaled $23 and zero for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, we will be required to pay an end of term charge of the greater of (a) $893 and (b) 5.95% of the aggregate outstanding principal upon repayment of the loan. The secured term loan agreement contains customary representations, warranties, non-financial covenants, and events of default. We are permitted to borrow the loans in four tranches based on the completion of certain milestones which include, as set forth more fully in the secured term loan agreement: (i) $15,000 upon the closing of the Business Combination, (ii) $10,000 when we achieve certain positive clinical trial results sufficient to submit a de-novo classification request with respect to BT-001, (iii) $10,000 when we have received FDA approval for such marketing of BT-001 for the improvement of glycemic control and initiated a pivotal trial for a new indication in people with type 2 diabetes and received, prior to March 15, 2023, net cash proceeds of at least $40,000 from equity financings, and (iv) $15,000 on or before June 15, 2023, subject to Hercules Capital' approval. In October 2021, we borrowed $10,000 under the secured term loan agreement.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist of research and development expenses related to our lead product candidate, BT-001, and preclinical programs, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenses. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We have incurred negative cash flows from operating activities and investing activities and significant losses from operations in the past. We expect to continue to incur operating losses at least for the next 12 months due to the investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business.
We expect to incur substantial expenses in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates and ongoing internal research and development programs. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or aggregate amount of costs for our development, potential commercialization, and internal research and development programs. However, in order to complete our planned product development, and to complete the process of obtaining regulatory authorization or clearance for our product candidates, as well as to build the sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved, we may require substantial additional funding in the future. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding the Company's ability to continue as a going concern.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the periods presented below:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
In 2021, cash used in operating activities was $30,818 which consisted of a net loss of $40,335 and a net change of $2,339 in our net operating assets and liabilities partially offset by $11,856 in non-cash charges. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due a net increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $4,613 partially offset by a net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2,274. The non-cash charges of $11,856 consisted of share-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, loss on the change in fair value of SAFEs and gain on PPP Loan forgiveness.
In 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $5,774 which consisted of a net loss of $6,387 partially offset by a net change of $306 in our net operating assets and liabilities and $307 in non-cash charges. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due a net decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $252 and a net decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $54. The non-cash charges of $307 consisted of share-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes, depreciation expense, loss on the write-off of property and equipment and change in fair value of SAFEs.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
In 2021, cash used in investing activities was $1,071 and was primarily related to capitalized internal-use software costs.
In 2020, cash used in investing activities was $2,305 and was primarily related to capitalized internal-use software costs.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
In 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $72,332 consisting of $44,174 in net proceeds from the business combination and PIPE investment, $18,675 in net proceeds from the issuance of SAFEs and $9,482 in net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt.
In 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $7,445 consisting of $3,650 in net proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, $3,155 in net proceeds from the issuance of SAFEs and $640 from proceeds from the Payroll Protection Program note.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contractual obligations are cash amounts that we are obligated to pay as part of certain contracts that we have entered into during the normal course of business. We terminated our lease on August 31, 2020, and as such, we do not have any contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since the date of our incorporation, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Reclassification
Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified for consistency with the current year presentation. These reclassifications had no effect on the reported results of operations. An adjustment has been made to the Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 to reclassify $682 thousand of cost of sales into research and development expense to align with industry standards. This change in classification does not affect previously reported net loss in the Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Simple Agreements for Future Equity (“SAFE”)
We classify SAFEs as contingently redeemable liabilities under ASC 480 as a result of certain redemption provisions which may result in the SAFEs being redeemed for cash or other assets upon a liquidity event with such events not solely within our control. Additionally, the SAFEs are settleable into a variable-number of shares of preferred stock, at a stated discount, upon a preferred stock financing event. As further discussed in footnote 9 of our financial statements for the period ending on December 31, 2020, we have determined that our preferred stock is contingently redeemable upon certain events not solely within our control. As a result, the SAFEs would potentially be settled in contingently redeemable shares with redemption of such shares being outside of our control.
The SAFEs are measured and recognized at fair value using a Monte Carlo valuation approach and are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date. The Monte Carlo valuation approach takes into consideration the probability of various events, including liquidity events and equity financing events, and places a value for each event. The fair value of SAFEs was determined to be $0 and $11,740 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
At the end of each reporting period, changes in fair value during the period are recognized and presented as a financial statement line item in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
We account for share-based compensation expense by measuring and recognizing compensation expense for all share-based awards made to employees and non-employees based on estimated grant-date fair values.
Excluding performance-based stock awards, we recognize compensation costs on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the employee and non-employee, which is generally the option vesting term of four years. For performance-based awards, share-based compensation expense will be recognized when it is probable that the performance criteria will be achieved. We recognize actual forfeitures by reducing the share-based compensation expense in the same period as the forfeitures occur.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including fair value of the underlying profit interest unit or stock award, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield, which are described in greater detail below. Estimating the fair value of stock options and profit interest units as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by assumptions regarding several complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much share-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. These inputs are as follows:
•Fair value of common stock - Historically, as there has been no public market for our common stock, the fair value of our common stock was determined by our Board based in part on valuations of our common stock prepared by a third-party valuation firm. See the subsection titled “Determination of Fair Value of Common Stock” below. Now that the business combination is complete we will determine the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the grant date.
•Expected term - The expected term represents the period that our options granted are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method for employees (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term) and is based on the remaining contractual term for non-employees. We have very limited historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior for our stock option grants.
•Expected volatility - Since Legacy BTX was a privately-held company, we have limited trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected term of stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, life cycle stage, or area of specialty.
•Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. constant maturity rates with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the stock options.
•Expected dividend yield - We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms, and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis.
Prior to our conversion into a Delaware corporation in August 2020, we had granted profit interest units to employees and non-employees. In August 2020, in conjunction with the conversion of the company to a Delaware corporation, the profits interest units were converted to common stock of Legacy BTX, and the common stock issued in exchange for the profit interest units continue to be subject to the same vesting conditions as the previously granted profit interest. We accounted for the conversion of profit interest units into common stock as a modification under ASC 718.
The profits interest units were common units with a profits interest distribution threshold and give the holder a right to share in the appreciation in the value of Legacy BTX and share in any distributions of profits. The profit interest unit awards generally vest over four years and automatically in full upon a sale of the business. The grantees had the right to retain vested units upon termination of employment or when non-employees ceasing to provide services or goods to us. Prior to the conversion, we had not made distributions to the holders of the profits interest units.
Determination of Fair Value of Profit Interests and Common Stock
As there has been no public market for our profit interests or common stock prior to the date of the business combination, the estimated fair value of our common stock has been determined by our Board as of the date of each stock award grant, with input from management, considering contemporaneous independent third-party valuations of our profit interests and common stock, and the Board’s assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These independent third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid. The methodology to determine the fair value of our common stock included estimating the fair value of the enterprise using a market approach, which estimates the fair value of a company by including an estimation of the value of the business based on guideline public companies under a number of different scenarios. The assumptions used to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock are based on numerous objective and subjective factors, combined with management judgment, including external market conditions affecting the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry and trends within the industry; our stage of development; the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; the prices at which we sold shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock; our financial condition and operating results, including our levels of available capital resources; the progress of our research and development efforts and business strategy; the timing and probability of future financings; equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; general U.S. market conditions; and the lack of marketability of our common stock.
The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating enterprise value across classes and series of capital stock to determine the estimated fair value of common stock at each valuation date. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock, the Board considered numerous subjective and objective factors to determine the best estimate of fair value of our profit interests and common stock underlying the stock options granted to our employees and non-employees.
The grant date fair value of our common stock was determined using the Option Pricing Method ("OPM"). Under the OPM, shares are valued by creating a series of call options with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences and conversion terms of each equity class. The estimated fair values of the preferred and common stock are inferred by analyzing these options. This method is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is so difficult to predict that estimates would be highly speculative, and dissolution or liquidation is not imminent.
Application of the OPM involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding time from valuation date to the option or incentive unit expiration, volatility of the underlying stock or incentive unit, and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions, or the relationships between those assumptions, impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of common stock. The assumptions underlying these valuations represent our management’s best estimate, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different.
Now that the Business Combination is completed, we determine the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
JOBS Act
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act permits emerging growth companies to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards, delaying the adoption of these accounting standards until they would apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We could be an emerging growth company until the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our IPO, although circumstances could cause us to lose that status earlier, including if we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act or if we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more during any fiscal year before that time, in which cases we would no longer be an emerging growth company as of the following December 31 or, if we issue more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during any three year period before that time, we would cease to be an emerging growth company immediately.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our annual financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.