Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements, including those that reflect or imply plans, estimates and beliefs. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, without limitation, those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Such reports and other information filed by the Company with the SEC are available free of charge on our website at www.bvhcorp.com and on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
Company Overview
The Company is a holding company for Bluegreen, which became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company during May 2021 as a result of the statutory short-form merger described below. Prior to the merger, the Company held approximately 93% of Bluegreen’s common stock. Bluegreen is a leading vacation ownership company that markets and sells VOIs and manages resorts in popular leisure and urban destinations.
On September 30, 2020, the Company completed its spin-off of BBX Capital, Inc. (“BBX Capital”) BBX Capital was a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company prior to the spin-off and became a separate public company as a result of the spin-off. BBX Capital holds all of the historical business and investments of the Company other than the Company’s investment in Bluegreen. As a result of the spin-off, all of the Company’s operations and activities relate to the operations and activities of Bluegreen. BBX Capital and its subsidiaries are presented as discontinued operations in the Company’s financial statements.
In connection with the spin-off, the Company’s name was changed from BBX Capital Corporation to Bluegreen Vacations Holding Corporation. The Company also issued a $75.0 million note payable to BBX Capital (of which $50.0 million remained outstanding at December 31, 2021). The note accrues interest at a rate of 6% per annum and requires payments of interest on a quarterly basis. Under the terms of the note, the Company has the option in its discretion to defer interest payments under the note, with interest on the entire outstanding balance thereafter to accrue at a cumulative, compounded rate of 8% per annum until such time as the Company is current on all accrued payments under the note, including deferred interest. All remaining outstanding amounts under the note will become due and payable in in September 2025 or earlier upon certain other events.
On May 5, 2021, the Company acquired all of the approximately 7% of the outstanding shares of Bluegreen’s common stock not previously owned by the Company through a statutory short-form merger under Florida law. In connection with the merger, Bluegreen’s shareholders (other than the Company) received 0.51 shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock for each share of Bluegreen’s common stock that they held at the effective time of the merger (subject to rounding up of fractional shares). The Company issued approximately 2.66 million shares of its Class A Common Stock in connection with the merger. As a result of the completion of the merger, Bluegreen became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and its common stock is no longer publicly traded.
In July 2020, the Company effected a one-for-five reverse split of its Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. Share and per share amounts set forth herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the one-for-five reverse stock split as if it had occurred as of January 1, 2019.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total consolidated assets of approximately $1.2 billion and shareholders’ equity of approximately $243.4 million.
Summary of Consolidated Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
The following summarizes key financial highlights for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
Total consolidated revenues of $757.1 million, a 46% increase compared to 2020.
Income before income taxes from continuing operations of $98.6 million compared to a loss of $46.8 million during 2020.
Net income attributable to common shareholders of $58.7 million compared to net loss attributable to common shareholders of $80.5 million in 2020.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $2.79 compared to a diluted loss per share of $2.82 in 2020.
The Company’s consolidated results from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 were significantly impacted by the following:
An increase in the Company’s revenues primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic having a more significant impact on operations in 2020.
An increase in the provision for loan losses as a percentage of sales during 2020 as a result of the estimated impact at that time of the COVID-19 pandemic on customer defaults.
An increase in selling, general and administrative expenses primarily attributable to improved industry and economic conditions in 2021, as well as expansion of our sales and marketing operations. In addition, results for 2020 reflect the steps taken at the time to mitigate costs in anticipation of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Segment Results
The Company reports the results of its business activities through the following reportable segments: Sales of VOIs and Financing; and Resort Operations and Club Management.
Information regarding income before income taxes by reportable segment is set forth in the table below:
Executive Overview
Bluegreen is a leading vacation ownership company that markets and sells VOIs and manages resorts in popular leisure and urban destinations. Bluegreen’s resort network includes 45 Club Resorts (resorts in which owners in its Vacation Club have the right to use most of the units in connection with their VOI ownership) and 23 Club Associate Resorts (resorts in which owners in its Vacation Club have the right to use a limited number of units in connection with their VOI ownership). These Club Resorts and Club Associate Resorts are primarily located in high-volume, “drive-to” vacation locations, including Orlando, Las Vegas, Myrtle Beach, Charleston and New Orleans, among others. Through Bluegreen’s points-based system, the approximately 217,000 owners in Bluegreen’s Vacation Club have the flexibility to stay at units available at any of Bluegreen’s resorts and have access to over 11,300 other hotels and resorts through partnerships and exchange networks. Bluegreen’s sales and marketing platform is supported by marketing relationships with nationally-recognized consumer brands, such as Bass Pro and Choice Hotels. The Company believes these marketing relationships help generate sales within its core demographic. In 2019, Bluegreen launched its Bluegreen Renewal Program, which is part of its Company wide effort to revitalize sales, grow revenue and increase efficiency.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic caused an unprecedented disruption in the U.S. and global economies and the industries in which the Company operates due to, among other things, government ordered “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders and advisories, travel restrictions, and restrictions on business operations, including government guidance with respect to travel, public accommodations, social gatherings, and related matters. These disruptions and the reaction of the general public to the pandemic had a significant adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and operations throughout 2020, including, without limitation, due to the temporary closure beginning in March 2020 of all of Bluegreen’s VOI sales centers, its retail marketing operations at Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s stores and outlet malls, and its Choice Hotels call transfer program, Bluegreen’s cancellation of existing owner reservations through May 15, 2020 and new prospect guest tours through June 30, 2020, and the temporary closure of certain of Bluegreen’s Club Resorts and Club Associate Resorts in accordance with government mandates and advisories. While adverse conditions continued during 2021, including due to the emergence of new variants such as the Delta variant and Omicron variant which emerged as a variant of concern during the fourth quarter of 2021, Bluegreen’s business and results generally improved during 2021.
Status of Current Operations
As of December 31, 2021, Bluegreen was operating marketing kiosks at 128 Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s stores, including 28 new Cabela’s locations and 2 new Bass Pro locations opened during the year ended December 31, 2021; the Choice Hotels call transfer program was close to pre-pandemic volume; and all of Bluegreen’s VOI sales centers and resorts were open, except for one resort and sales center in Surfside, Florida which was closed due to conditions unrelated to the pandemic. Further, resort occupancy rates were approximately 81% at resorts with sales centers for the year ended December 31, 2021 and we sold approximately 211,000 vacation packages in 2021 compared to approximately 132,000 in 2020. Bluegreen’s pipeline of vacation packages was 187,200 at December 31, 2021 compared to 121,900 at December 31, 2020, which we believe reflected the impact of the temporary cessation of marketing activities at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and the current and uncertain future outlook of the pandemic may to continue to have, a significant adverse effect on Bluegreen’s business, financial condition, liquidity and results of operations.”
VOI Sales and Financing
Bluegreen’s primary business is the marketing and selling of deeded VOIs, developed either internally or by third parties. Customers who purchase these VOIs receive an allotment of points, which can be redeemed for stays at one of the Bluegreen’s resorts or at 11,300 other hotels and resorts available through partnerships and exchange networks. Bluegreen’s goal is to employ a flexible model with a mix of sales of our owned, acquired or developed VOIs and sales of VOIs on behalf of third-party developers, as determined by management to be appropriate from time to time based on market and economic conditions, available cash, and other factors. Our relationships with third-party developers enables us to generate fees from the sales and marketing of their VOIs without incurring the significant upfront capital investment generally associated with resort acquisition or development. While sales of Bluegreen
owned inventory typically result in a greater contribution to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, fee-based sales typically do not require an initial investment or involve development financing risk. Both Bluegreen owned VOI sales and fee-based VOI sales result in recurring, incremental and long-term fee streams by adding owners to the Bluegreen Vacation Club and new resort management contracts. Fee-based sales of VOIs comprised 31% of system-wide sales of VOIs during both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. While Bluegreen intends to remain flexible with respect to its sales of the different categories of its VOI inventory in the future based on economic conditions, business initiatives and other considerations, Bluegreen currently expects that its percentage of fee-based sales will continue to decrease over time compared to prior years as Bluegreen continues to increase its focus on Bluegreen owned VOI sales, including developed VOI sales, JIT sales and secondary market sales. In conjunction with sales of VOIs, the Company generates interest income by providing financing to qualified purchasers. Collateralized by the underlying VOIs, Bluegreen’s loans are generally structured as 10-year, fully-amortizing loans with a fixed interest rate ranging from approximately 13% to approximately 17% per annum. As of December 31, 2021, the weighted-average interest rate on the Company’s VOI notes receivable was 15%. In addition, the Company earns fees for various other services, including title and escrow services in connection with the closing of VOI sales, and mortgage servicing.
Resort Operations and Club Management
Bluegreen enters into management agreements with the HOAs that maintain most of the resorts in Bluegreen’s Vacation Club and earns fees for providing management services to those HOAs and the approximately 217,000 Vacation Club owners. These resort management services include providing or oversight of front desk operations, housekeeping services, maintenance, and certain accounting and administration functions. Our management contracts generally yield recurring cash flows and do not have the traditional risks associated with hotel management contracts that are generally linked to daily rate or occupancy. Our management contracts are typically structured as “cost-plus,” with an initial term of three years and automatic one year renewals. In connection with the management services provided to the Vacation Club, the Company manages the reservation system and provides owner, billing and collection services.
Principal Components Affecting the Our Results of Operations
Principal Components of Revenue
Fee-Based Sales. Represent sales of third-party VOIs where Bluegreen is paid a commission.
Bluegreen Owned VOI Sales. Represent sales of VOIs in resorts that Bluegreen has developed or acquired, VOIs acquired from HOAs or other owners, typically in connection with maintenance fee defaults, or secondary market sales. VOI inventory acquired from HOAs or other timeshare owners are generally purchased at a greater discount to retail price compared to developed VOI sales and VOIs purchased by Bluegreen for sale as part of its just-in-time (“JIT”) sales activities.
Financing Revenue. Represents revenue from the financing of VOI sales, which includes interest income and loan servicing fees. Bluegreen also earns fees from providing loan servicing to certain third-party developers relating to VOI receivables sold by them.
Resort Operations and Club Management Revenue. Represents recurring fees from managing the Vacation Club and transaction fees for Traveler Plus and other member services. Bluegreen also earns recurring management fees under its management agreements with HOAs for day-to-day management services, including oversight of housekeeping services, maintenance, and certain accounting and administrative functions.
Other Fee-Based Services. Represents revenue earned from various other services that produce recurring, predictable and long-term revenue, such as title services.
Principal Components of Costs and Expenses
Cost of VOIs Sold. Represents the cost at which Bluegreen owned VOIs sold during the period were relieved from inventory. Compared to the cost of Bluegreen developed VOI inventory, VOIs acquired in connection with JIT
arrangements typically have a relatively higher associated cost of sales as a percentage of sales while those acquired in connection with secondary market arrangements typically have a lower cost of sales as a percentage of sales as secondary market inventory is generally obtained from HOAs at a significant discount to retail price. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs varies between periods based on the relative costs of the specific VOIs sold in each period and the size of the point packages of the VOIs sold (primarily due to offered volume discounts, and taking into account consideration of cumulative sales to existing owners). Additionally, the effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of projected sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs. Cost of sales is typically favorably impacted in periods where a significant amount of secondary market VOI inventory is acquired and actual defaults and equity trades are higher and the resulting change in estimate is recognized. While Bluegreen believes that there is additional inventory that can be obtained through the secondary market at favorable prices to Bluegreen in the future, there is no assurance that such inventory will be available.
Net Carrying Cost of VOI Inventory. Represents the maintenance fees and developer subsidies for unsold VOI inventory paid or accrued to the HOAs that maintain the resorts. Bluegreen attempts to offset this expense, to the extent possible, by generating revenue from renting its VOIs and through utilizing them in Bluegreen’s sampler programs. Bluegreen may also house marketing guest in our unsold VOIs in which case the cost of such unit is recognized as sales and marketing expense. Bluegreen nets such revenue from this expense item.
Selling and Marketing Expense. Represents costs incurred to sell and market VOIs, including costs relating to marketing and incentive programs, tours, and related wages and sales commissions. Revenue from vacation package sales are netted against selling and marketing expenses.
Financing Expense. Represents financing interest expense related to Bluegreen’s receivable-backed debt, amortization of the related debt issuance costs and other expenses incurred in providing financing and servicing loans, including administrative costs associated with mortgage servicing activities for Bluegreen’s loans and the loans of certain third-party developers. Mortgage servicing activities include, among other things, payment processing, reporting and collection services.
Resort Operations and Club Management Expense. Represents costs incurred to manage resorts and the Vacation Club, including payroll and related costs and other administrative costs to the extent not reimbursed by the Vacation Club or HOAs.
General and Administrative Expense. Primarily represents compensation expense for personnel supporting Bluegreen’s business and operations, professional fees (including consulting, audit and legal fees), and administrative and related expenses.
Key Business and Financial Metrics Used by Management
Operating Metrics
Sales of VOIs. Represent sales of Bluegreen owned VOIs, including developed VOIs and those acquired through JIT and secondary market arrangements, reduced by equity trade allowances and an estimate of uncollectible VOI notes receivable. In addition to the factors impacting system-wide sales of VOIs (as described below), sales of VOIs are impacted by the proportion of system-wide sales of VOIs sold on behalf of third-parties on a commission basis, which are not included in sales of VOIs.
System-wide Sales of VOIs. Represents all sales of VOIs, whether owned by Bluegreen or a third party immediately prior to the sale. Sales of VOIs owned by third parties are transacted as sales of VOIs in Bluegreen’s Vacation Club through the same selling and marketing process Bluegreen uses to sell Bluegreen owned VOI inventory. Bluegreen considers system-wide sales of VOIs to be an important operating measure because it reflects all sales of VOIs by Bluegreen’s sales and marketing operations without regard to whether Bluegreen or a third party owned such VOI inventory at the time of sale. System-wide sales of VOIs is not a recognized term under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to sales of VOIs or any other measure of financial performance derived in accordance with GAAP or to any other method of analyzing Bluegreen’s results as reported under GAAP.
Guest Tours. Represents the number of sales presentations given at Bluegreen’s sales centers during the period.
Sale to Tour Conversion Ratio. Represents the rate at which guest tours are converted to sales of VOIs and is calculated by dividing guest tours by number of VOI sales transactions.
Average Sales Volume Per Guest (“VPG”). Represents the sales attributable to tours at Bluegreen’s sales locations and is calculated by dividing VOI sales by guest tours. Bluegreen considers VPG to be an important operating measure because it measures the effectiveness of Bluegreen’s sales process, combining the average transaction price with the sale-to-tour conversion ratio.
For further information see Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 2: Basis of Presentation and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders. The Company defines EBITDA as earnings, or net income, before taking into account interest income (excluding interest earned on VOI notes receivable), interest expense (excluding interest expense incurred on debt secured by VOI notes receivable), and depreciation and amortization. The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA, adjusted to exclude amounts of loss (gain) on assets held for sale, share-based compensation expense, and items that the Company believes are not representative of ongoing operating results. Accordingly, in calculating Adjusted EBITDA, the Company excludes certain items which it believes are not representative of ongoing operating results, such as severance charges net of employee retention tax credits and incremental costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and for 2019, the payments made to Bass Pro pursuant to the settlement agreement entered into with Bass Pro at that time. Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders is Adjusted EBITDA excluding amounts attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations (in which Bluegreen owns a 51% interest). For purposes of the calculation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders, no adjustments were made for interest income earned on VOI notes receivable or the interest expense incurred on debt that is secured by such notes receivable because they are both considered to be part of the ordinary operations of the Company’s business.
The Company considers EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders and Segment Adjusted EBITDA to be indicators of operating performance, and they are used by the Company to measure its ability to service debt, fund capital expenditures and expand its business. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also used by companies, lenders, investors and others because they exclude certain items that can vary widely across different industries or among companies within the same industry. For example, interest expense can be dependent on a company’s capital structure, debt levels and credit ratings. Accordingly, the impact of interest expense on earnings can vary significantly among companies. The tax positions of companies can also vary because of their differing abilities to take advantage of tax benefits and because of the tax policies of the jurisdictions in which they operate. As a result, effective tax rates and provision for income taxes can vary considerably among companies. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders also exclude depreciation and amortization because companies utilize productive assets of different ages and use different methods of both acquiring and depreciating productive assets. These differences can result in considerable variability in the relative costs of productive assets and the depreciation and amortization expense among companies.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders are not recognized terms under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity, including cash flow, derived in accordance with GAAP, or to any other method or analyzing results as reported under GAAP. The limitations of using EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders as an analytical tool include, without limitation, that EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders do not reflect (i) changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs; (ii) interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on indebtedness (other than as noted above); (iii) tax expense or the cash requirements to pay taxes; (iv) historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments; or (v) the effect on earnings or changes resulting from matters that the Company does not believe to be indicative of our future operations or performance. Further, although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized often have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to
Shareholders do not reflect any cash that may be required for such replacements. In addition, the Company’s definition of Adjusted EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders may not be comparable to definitions of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders or other similarly titled measures used by other companies.
‎
Reportable Segments Results of Operations
Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The Company considers Segment Adjusted EBITDA in connection with its evaluation of its business segments as described in Note 17: Segment Reporting to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See above for a discussion of the Company’s definition of Adjusted EBITDA and related measures, how management uses it to manage its business and material limitations on its usefulness. The following tables set forth Segment Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders, EBITDA and a reconciliation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Shareholders to net income, the most comparable GAAP financial measure:
FOOT
(1)Share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $1.0 million, related to restricted stock awards granted in June 2021.
(2)Amounts for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019 consisted of severance costs only. Amounts for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of severance, net of employee retention credits, of $5.5 million, a special bonus paid to all non-executive employees of $3.3 million and COVID-19 incremental costs of $0.9 million.
The following tables reconcile system-wide sales of VOIs to gross sales of VOIs, the most comparable GAAP financial measure.
‎
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Sales of VOIs and Financing
(1)Bluegreen owned VOI sales represent sales of VOIs acquired or developed by Bluegreen.
(2)Percentages for provision for loan losses are calculated as a percentage of gross sales of VOIs, which excludes Fee-Based sales (and not of system-wide sales of VOIs).
(3)Percentages for costs of VOIs sold and gross profit are calculated as a percentage of sales of VOIs (and not based on system-wide sales of VOIs).
(4)Percentages for Fee-Based sales commission revenue are calculated as a percentage of Fee-Based sales (and not based on system-wide sales of VOIs).
(5)Represents the applicable line item, calculated as a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, unless otherwise indicated in the above footnotes.
System-wide sales of VOIs. System-wide sales of VOIs were $617.6 million and $367.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. System-wide sales of VOIs are driven by the number of guest attending a timeshare sale presentation (a “guest tour”) and our ability to convert such guest tours into purchases of VOIs. The number of guest tours is driven by the number of existing owner guests Bluegreen has staying at a resort with a sales center and new guests who agree to attend a sales presentation. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and Bluegreen’s decision to temporarily cease marketing activities from March through May 2020, guest tours and as a result, system-wide sales of VOIs were significantly adversely impacted during 2020. During 2021, Bluegreen experienced an increase in guest tours resulting an increase in system-wide sales of VOIs. The COVID-19 pandemic
significantly impacted, and may continue to adversely impact, system-wide sales of VOIs. The ultimate extent and duration of the impact cannot be predicted at this time.
Included in system-wide sales are Fee-Based Sales and Bluegreen-owned sales. Sales by category are tracked based on which deeded VOI is conveyed in each transaction. The individual VOIs sold is based on several factors, including the needs of fee-based clients, the Company’s debt service requirements and default resale requirements under term securitizations and similar transactions. These factors and business initiatives contribute to fluctuations in the amount of sales by category from period to period.
Sales of VOIs. Sales of VOIs were $353.7 million and $174.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Sales of VOIs were impacted by the factors described in the discussion of system-wide sales of VOIs above, primarily the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Gross sales of VOIs were reduced by $72.8 million and $56.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for the provision for loan losses. The provision for loan losses varies based on the amount of financed, non-fee based sales during the period and changes in estimates of future notes receivable performance for existing and newly originated loans. The provision for loan losses as a percentage of gross sales of VOIs was 17% and 25% during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The percentage of sales which were realized in cash within 30 days from sale was 41% during the year ended December 31, 2021, and 42% during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In March 2020, Bluegreen recorded an additional allowance of $12.0 million which included Bluegreen’s estimate at that time of customer defaults as a result of changing economic factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Bluegreen believes that the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have an impact on the collectibility of its VOI notes receivable. In addition to the COVID-19 pandemic, the provision for loan losses continues to be impacted by defaults which Bluegreen believes are attributable to the receipt of letters from third parties and attorneys who purport to represent certain VOI owners and who have encouraged such owners to become delinquent and ultimately default on their obligations. See Note 12: Commitments and Contingencies to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding such letters and actions we have taken in connection with such letters. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the continued impact of actions taken by timeshare exit firms are highly uncertain and there is no assurance that steps taken to mitigate the impact of the pandemic or actions taken by timeshare exit firms will be successful or that the pandemic will not otherwise continue to impact the collectability or our VOI notes receivable to a greater extent than estimated. As a result, actual defaults may differ from our estimates and the allowance for loan losses may not prove to be adequate.
The average annual default rates and delinquency rates (more than 30 days past due) on our VOI notes receivable were as follows:
(1)The Average Default Rates in the table above includes VOIs which have been defaulted but had not yet charged off due to the provisions of certain of our receivable-backed notes payable transactions, as well as certain VOI loans over 127 days past due where we received cease and desist letters from attorneys and other third-party exit firms. Accordingly, these are excluded for purposes of calculating the delinquency rates above.
‎
The following table sets forth certain information for system-wide sales of VOIs for 2021 and 2020:
Cost of VOIs Sold. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cost of VOIs sold was $29.5 million and $13.6 million, respectively, and represented 8% of sales of VOIs for each year. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs varies between periods based on the relative costs of the specific VOIs sold in each period and the size of the point packages of the VOIs sold (due to offered volume discounts, including consideration of cumulative sales to existing owners). Additionally, the effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs. Therefore, cost of sales is typically favorably impacted in periods where a significant amount of Secondary Market VOI inventory is acquired or actual defaults and equity trades are higher than anticipated and the resulting change in estimate is recognized. Cost of VOIs sold as a percentage of sales of VOIs was consistent for both 2021 and 2020.
Fee-Based Sales Commission Revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Bluegreen sold $191.1 million and $136.1 million, respectively, of third-party VOI inventory under commission arrangements and earned sales and marketing commissions of $128.3 million and $90.0 million, respectively, in connection with those sales. The increase in sales of third-party developer inventory on a commission basis during 2021 reflected the increase in new guest tours as a result of the more significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on operations in 2020 and the other factors described above. Bluegreen earned an average sales and marketing commission of 67% and 66% during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which is net of a reserve for commission refunds in connection with early defaults and cancellations pursuant to the terms of certain of the fee-based service arrangements. Bluegreen typically recognizes a sales and marketing commission between 65% and 68% on sales of third-party VOI inventory.
Financing Revenue, Net of Financing Expense - Sales of VOIs. Interest income on VOIs notes receivable was $81.3 million and $77.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was partially offset by interest expense on receivable backed debt of $15.5 million and $17.0 million, respectively. The increase in finance revenue, net of finance expense during 2021 as compared to 2020 is primarily due to higher VOI notes receivable balances as a result of higher sales of VOIs in 2021 due to the more significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on operations in 2020 and the other factors described above, lower outstanding receivable-backed debt balances and a lower weighted-average cost of borrowings attributable to the lower interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenue from third-party mortgage servicing during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 of $5.0 million and $5.9 million, respectively, are included in financing revenue, net of mortgage servicing expenses of $5.3 million and $4.6 million, respectively. The decrease in revenues from third-party mortgage servicing reflects a decrease of 9% in the principle balance of loans serviced.
Other Fee-Based Services - Title Operations, net. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenue from title operations was $12.2 million and $7.6 million, respectively, which was partially offset by expenses directly related to title operations of $3.4 million and $3.8 million, respectively. Resort title fee revenue varies based on VOI sales volumes as well as the relative title costs in the jurisdictions where the inventory being sold is located. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to higher system-wide sales of
VOIs in 2021 due to the greater impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on operations in 2020 and the other factors described above.
Net Carrying Cost of VOI Inventory. The gross carrying cost of VOI inventory was $42.2 million and $40.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was partially offset by rental and sampler revenue of $19.9 million and $6.2 million, respectively. The decrease in net carrying costs of VOI inventory was primarily related to increased rentals of developer inventory and increased sampler stays due to the more significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on operations in 2020, partially offset by increased maintenance fees and developer subsidies associated with the increase in VOI inventory. In certain circumstances, marketing costs are offset by using inventory for marketing guest stays.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. Selling and marketing expenses were $338.3 million and $217.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, selling and marketing expenses were 55% and 59% during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, is primarily attributable to the fixed nature of certain costs and the cost of maintaining certain sales and marketing associates on temporary furlough in 2020 due to the temporary closure of VOI sales centers and marketing operations in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed above. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Bluegreen incurred $3.2 million in severance and $13.6 million of payroll and benefits expenses relating to employees on temporary furlough or reduced work hours as a result of actions taken in connection with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Bluegreen incurred $2.4 million in severance but no such COVID-19 related expense. In addition, Bluegreen was also impacted by costs incurred associated with the commencement of marketing operations at 28 and 10 additional Cabela’s stores during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and two new Bass Pro stores during the year ended December 31, 2021. Bluegreen utilizes these stores to sell discounted vacation packages to customers for future travel which require the customers to attend a timeshare presentation. Additionally, during 2021, Bluegreen incurred costs associated with redesigning its sales and marketing platform, including updating sales offices, refreshing marketing material, and adding new sales and marketing senior leadership positions. Further, Bluegreen has invested in various local and national marketing programs in an effort to attract new customers. These program changes may not be successful or generate a sufficient number of prospects to offset the program costs incurred.
The following table sets forth certain new customer marketing information, excluding sampler and other returning owner vacation packages, for 2021 and 2020:
(1)Excludes vacation packages sold to customers more than one year prior to the period presented and vacation packages sold to customers who had already toured but purchased an additional vacation package.
During 2020, Bluegreen eliminated certain of its lower performing mini-vacation programs, including a lead generation operation at various malls. While the elimination of these programs has resulted in lower sales of vacation packages, we believe our expansion into Cabela’s and other local and national marketing programs has to date offset the impact of this decrease in vacation packages.
In addition to vacation packaged sold to new prospects, we also sell vacation packages to customers who have already toured and whom purchased a VOI, and have indicated they would tour again. As of December 31, 2021, the pipeline of such packages was approximately 15,000. There is no assurance that such packages will convert to sales at historical or expected levels.
General and Administrative Expenses - Sales and Marketing Operations. General and administrative expenses, representing expenses directly attributable to sales and marketing operations, were $36.7 million and $27.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As a percentage of system-wide sales of VOIs, general and administrative expenses directly attributable to sales and marketing operations were 6% and 7% during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the fixed nature of certain costs, the costs of maintaining certain sales associates on temporary furlough due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (as described above), and lower VOI system-wide sales of VOIs in 2020.
Resort Operations and Club Management
Resort Operations and Club Management Revenue. Resort operations and club management revenue increased 7% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost reimbursement revenue, which consists of payroll and other operating expenses which we incur and pass through to the HOAs, increased 7% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost reimbursement revenue was primarily attributable to the reduction in headcount in 2020 due to actions taken in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. Excluding cost reimbursement revenue, resort operations and club management revenue increased 7% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to increased resort retail operations and third-party rental commissions as a result of the significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Our resort network included 68 Club and Club Associate Resorts as of both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. We managed 49 resort properties as of both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Resort Operations and Club Management Expense. Excluding cost reimbursement expense, resort operations and club management expense decreased 19% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
‎
Bluegreen Corporate and Other
General and Administrative Expenses - Corporate and Other. General and administrative expenses directly attributable to Bluegreen’s corporate overhead were $88.0 million and $68.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to $7.1 million of employee retention credit earned in 2020 under the CARES Act with no such related credit in 2021, coupled with increased employee benefits and higher executive and management incentive compensation during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), net. Other income (expense), net was $0.9 million and ($0.4) million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was primarily related to increased forfeiture income from VOI Sales during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Interest Expense Interest expense unrelated to receivable-backed debt was $12.6 million and $15.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a lower outstanding debt balances partially offset by a higher weighted-average cost of borrowing. The weighted average cost of borrowing excluding receivable-backed debt as of December 31, 2021 was approximately 5.6% compared to approximately 5.3% as of December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. The Company includes in its consolidated financial statements the results of operations and financial condition of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations, Bluegreen’s 51%-owned subsidiary. The non-controlling interest in Adjusted EBITDA of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations is the portion of Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations’ Adjusted EBITDA that is attributable to Big Cedar LLC, which holds the remaining 49% interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations. Adjusted EBITDA attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations was $13.4 million and $7.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA attributable to the non-controlling interest in Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily reflects the more significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 2020 results, as discussed above.
‎
Parent Company
The Parent Company Corporate in the Company’s segment information primarily includes the following:
BVH’s corporate general and administrative expenses;
Interest expense associated with Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and the note payable to BBX Capital; and
Interest income on interest-bearing cash accounts.
Corporate General and Administrative Expenses
The Parent Company’s corporate general and administrative expenses were $2.6 million and $59.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Parent Company’s corporate general and administrative expenses during periods subsequent to the September 2020 spin-off of BBX Capital consist primarily of costs associated with the Parent Company being a publicly traded company (including, but not limited to executive compensation, shareholder relations, and legal and auditing expenses). Further, the expenses for 2020 include the costs associated with the acceleration of the vesting of unvested restricted stock awards and payments to settle BVH’s long term incentive program for 2020, in each case, in connection with the spin-off of BBX Capital, which in the aggregate resulted in $32.6 million of compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, included in the BVH corporate general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.8 million of other costs associated with the spin-off.
Interest Expense
The Parent Company’s interest expense was $7.2 million and $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $4.5 million of interest expense on the $75.0 million note payable to BBX Capital, issued in connection with the spin-off of BBX Capital in September 2020, $25.0 million of which was repaid in December 31, 2021. This increase was partially offset by lower variable interest rates on Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and BVH’s repayment in full during August 2020 of its $80.0 million note payable to Bluegreen. The interest expense on the $80.0 million note to Bluegreen and the related interest income recognized by Bluegreen are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations in 2020.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes from continuing operations
The provision (benefit) for income taxes was $26.7 million and ($2.4) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company’s effective income tax rate was approximately 31% and 5% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective income tax rate differed than the expected federal income tax rate of 21% due to the impact of the Company’s nondeductible executive compensation and state income taxes.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations represent the activities of BBX Capital, the former wholly owned subsidiary of the Company which was spun off on September 30, 2020. BBX Capital’s businesses include all of the historical businesses and investments of the Company other than Bluegreen, including BBX Capital Real Estate, BBX Sweet Holdings, and Renin.
Loss from discontinued operations before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $41.6 million, which included $30.7 million of impairment losses primarily resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on BBX Capital’s businesses, including IT’SUGAR.
Net Income or Loss from Continuing Operations Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
The Company’s consolidated financial statements include the results of operations and financial position of partially owned subsidiaries in which it holds a controlling financial interest, including Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations (which is owned 51% by Bluegreen). In addition, prior to the May 5, 2021 statutory short-form merger pursuant to which
Bluegreen became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, the Company owned an approximate 93% interest in Bluegreen.
Net income from continuing operations attributable to noncontrolling interests during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $14.1 million and $8.2 million, respectively. The increase in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to an increase in the net income of Bluegreen and Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations as discussed above.
(1)
‎
Changes in Financial Condition
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The Company’s operating cash flow increased $47.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 primarily reflecting the following:
increased operating profit in 2021 reflecting the more significant adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on operations in 2020; and
the elimination of certain activities related to BBX Capital, the former wholly owned subsidiary of the Company which was spun off in September 2020;
partially offset by increased income tax payments in 2021, increased spending on the acquisition and development of inventory in 2021, and $13.0 million of 2022 payments in 2021 to Bass Pro, including the $4.0 million settlement payment to Bass Pro due in January 2022 pursuant to the settlement agreement described in Note 12 to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8.
Cash Flows in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $13.6 million and $14.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities included spending on purchases of property and equipment of $13.6 million in 2021 and $11.8 million in 2020. Cash used in investing activities in 2020 also included $8.3 million of proceeds from repayments of loans receivable and sales of real estate, and net investment spend of $9.3 million in unconsolidated real estate joint ventures related to BBX Capital the former wholly owned subsidiary of the Company which was spun off on September 30, 2020, with no such activity in the 2021 period.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $27.5 million lower during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the $96.8 million in cash transferred to BBX Capital in connection with the Company’s spin-off of BBX Capital on September 30, 2020. This decrease was partially offset by $60.1 million in lower net debt borrowings in 2021. In addition, the Company repurchased $27.3 million of shares of its common stock in 2021 compared to Bluegreen’s repurchase of $11.7 million of its common stock in 2020.
For additional information on the availability of cash from existing credit facilities, as well as repayment obligations, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Seasonality
The Company has historically, and expects to continue to experience, seasonal fluctuations in its revenues and results of operations. This seasonality has resulted, and may continue to result, in fluctuations in quarterly operating results. Due to consumer travel patterns, we typically experience more tours and higher VOI sales volume during the second and third quarters.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company, excluding Bluegreen
As of December 31, 2021, the Company, excluding its subsidiaries, had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of approximately $3.7 million. Its primary sources of liquidity for the foreseeable future are expected to be, its available cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments and distributions from Bluegreen. However, as described below, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and created uncertainty regarding these sources of liquidity.
In connection with our spin-off of BBX Capital, we issued a $75.0 million note payable to BBX Capital that accrues interest at a rate of 6% per annum and requires payments of interest on a quarterly basis. Under the terms of the note, we have the option in our discretion to defer interest payments under the note, with interest on the entire outstanding balance thereafter to accrue at a cumulative, compounded rate of 8% per annum until such time as all accrued payments under the note are brought current, including deferred interest. In December 2021, we repaid $25.0 million on the note payable to BBX Capital, leaving a remaining balance as of December 31, 2021 of $50.0 million. All outstanding amounts under the note will become due and payable in September 2025 or earlier upon certain events.
The Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, Woodbridge, had $65.3 million in junior subordinated debentures outstanding as of December 31, 2021. Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures accrue interest at a rate of 3-month LIBOR plus a spread ranging from 3.80% to 3.85%, mature between 2035 and 2036, and require interest payments on a quarterly basis.
The Company, at its parent company level, is a holding company with limited operations which currently expects to incur approximately $2.0 million to $2.2 million annually in executive compensation expenses and public company costs as well as annual interest expense of approximately $5.7 million to $6.0 million associated with Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and the note payable to BBX Capital. These amounts are based on current expectations and assumptions, currently available information and, with respect to interest expense on Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures, interest rates as of December 31, 2021. Such assumptions and expectations may not prove to be accurate, interest rates may increase and, accordingly or otherwise, actual expenses may exceed the amounts expected. BVH will rely primarily on cash on hand and cash equivalents, as well as distributions paid by Bluegreen in the future, to fund its operations and satisfy its debt service requirements and other liabilities, including its note payable to BBX Capital. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Bluegreen distributed $35.0 million to BVH, which was used by BVH to fund certain operations and expenses, including the acquisition of shares under the Company’s share repurchase program, as described below. BVH is dependent on the payment of distributions from Bluegreen to fund its operations and debt service requirements in future periods. There is no assurance that Bluegreen will pay distributions in the amounts required to fund its needs or at all.
Except as otherwise noted, the debts and obligations of Bluegreen are not direct obligations of BVH and generally are non-recourse to BVH. Similarly, the assets of Bluegreen are not available to BVH absent a distribution. Furthermore, certain of Bluegreen’s credit facilities contain terms which could limit the payment of distributions without the lender’s consent or waiver. BVH may also seek additional liquidity in the future from outside sources, including traditional bank financing, secured or unsecured indebtedness, or the issuance of equity and/or debt securities. However, these alternatives may not be available to BVH on attractive terms, or at all. The inability to raise funds through such sources when or to the extent needed would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, results of operations, and financial condition.
In August 2021, the Company’s board of directors approved a share repurchase program which authorizes the repurchase of the Company’s Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock at an aggregate cost of up to $40.0 million. The Company repurchased and retired 1,182,339 of Class A Common Stock and 18,996 shares of Class B Common Stock during the year ended December 31, 2021 for an aggregate purchase price of $27.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, $12.7 million remained available for the repurchase of shares under the Company’s share repurchase program. The share repurchase program approved in August 2021 replaced the Company’s previous share repurchase program which was adopted in June 2017. No shares were repurchased under the prior share repurchase program during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2021.
Bluegreen
Bluegreen believes that it has sufficient liquidity from the sources described below to fund its operations, including its anticipated working capital, capital expenditure, debt service requirements and impacts associated with the COVID-19 pandemic challenges for the foreseeable future, subject to the success of its ongoing mitigating measures to manage through current challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed in this report, including cost and capital expenditure reductions and the ongoing availability of credit.
Bluegreen’s primary sources of funds from internal operations are: (i) cash sales; (ii) down payments on VOI sales which are financed; (iii) proceeds from borrowings collateralized by notes receivable; (iv) cash from finance operations; and (v) net cash generated from sales and marketing fee-based services and other fee-based services, including resort management operations.
The ability to borrow against notes receivable from VOI buyers has been critical to Bluegreen’s continued liquidity. A financed VOI buyer is generally only required to pay a minimum of 10% of the purchase price in cash at the time of sale; however, selling, marketing and administrative expenses attributable to the sale are primarily cash expenses that generally exceed a buyer’s minimum required down payment. Accordingly, having financing facilities available to borrow against Bluegreen’s VOI notes receivable has been critical to its ability to meet its short and long-term cash needs. Bluegreen has attempted to maintain a number of diverse financing facilities. Historically, Bluegreen has relied on the term securitization market in order to generate liquidity and create capacity in its receivable facilities. In addition, maintaining adequate VOI inventory to sell and pursue growth into new markets requires Bluegreen to use cash on hand or incur debt for the acquisition, construction and development of new resorts. Development expenditures in 2022 are expected to range between $100.0 million to $115.0 million.
As described above, Bluegreen’s ability to borrow against its VOI notes receivable has historically been a critical factor in Bluegreen’s liquidity. If Bluegreen is unable to renew credit facilities or obtain new credit facilities, Bluegreen’s business, results of operations, liquidity, or financial condition would be materially, adversely impacted.
Bluegreen has entered into agreements with third-party developers that allow Bluegreen to buy VOI inventory, typically on a non-committed basis, prior to when it intends to sell such VOIs. Bluegreen also enters into secondary market arrangements with certain HOAs and others generally on a non-committed basis, which allows Bluegreen to acquire VOIs generally at a significant discount, as such VOIs are typically obtained by the HOAs through foreclosure in connection with maintenance fee defaults. Acquisition of JIT and secondary market inventory, both of which are considered Bluegreen-owned inventory, is expected to range between $10.0 million to $15.0 million in 2022.
Bluegreen has $14.8 million of required contractual obligations due to be paid within one year and two facilities with advance periods scheduled to expire within one year. While there is no assurance that Bluegreen will be successful, Bluegreen intends to seek to renew or extend its debt and extend its advance periods on certain facilities.
Bluegreen’s level of debt and debt service requirements have several important effects on its operations and in turn on the Company, including that: (i) significant debt service cash requirements reduce the funds available for operations and future business opportunities and increase Bluegreen’s vulnerability to adverse economic and industry conditions, as well as conditions in the credit markets, generally; (ii) Bluegreen’s leverage position increases its vulnerability to economic and competitive pressures; (iii) the financial covenants and other restrictions contained in indentures, credit agreements and other agreements relating to its indebtedness require Bluegreen to meet certain financial tests and may restrict Bluegreen’s ability to, among other things, pay dividends, borrow additional funds, dispose of assets or make investments; and (iv) Bluegreen’s leverage position may limit funds available for acquisitions, working capital, capital expenditures, dividends and other general corporate purposes. Certain of Bluegreen’s competitors may operate on a less leveraged basis and may have greater operating and financial flexibility than Bluegreen does.
Credit Facilities for Receivables with Future Availability
Bluegreen maintains various credit facilities with financial institutions which allow it to borrow against or sell its VOI notes receivable. As of December 31, 2021, Bluegreen had the following credit facilities with future availability, all of which are subject to terms and conditions during the advance period (dollars in thousands):
(1)As of December 31, 2021, recourse was limited to $5.0 million, subject to certain exceptions.
(2)Borrowings after September 25, 2020, accrue interest at one-month LIBOR plus 2.25% (with an interest rate floor of 3.00%). As of December 31, 2021, recourse to Bluegreen/Big Cedar Vacations was limited to $7.5 million, subject to certain exceptions.
(3)Prior to the July 2021 amendment to this facility, the borrowing rate was 30-day LIBOR + 2.75% to 3.00%. As of December 31, 2021, recourse was limited to $7.5 million, subject to certain exceptions.
(4)Borrowings accrue interest at a rate equal to either LIBOR, a “Cost of Funds” rate or commercial paper (“CP”) rates plus 2.25%. The interest rate will increase to the applicable rate plus 3.25% upon the expiration of the advance period.
(5)Of the amounts outstanding under the Quorum Purchase Facility at December 31, 2021, $10.7 million accrues interest at a rate per annum of 4.95%, and $8.8 million accrues interest at a fixed rate of 5.10%.
See Note 10 to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 for additional information with respect to Bluegreen’s receivable-backed notes payable facilities.
Other Credit Facilities
Fifth Third Syndicated Line-of-Credit and Fifth Third Syndicated Term Loan. Bluegreen’s has a $225.0 million corporate credit facility which includes a $100.0 million term loan (the “Fifth Third Syndicated Loan”) with quarterly amortization requirements and a $125.0 million revolving line of credit (the “Fifth Third Syndicated Line-of-Credit”). In February 2022, Bluegreen amended and increased the revolving line of credit by $75.0 million. Borrowings, including amounts outstanding prior to the amendment and restatement and future borrowings, generally bear interest at a rate of term SOFR plus 1.75-2.50% and a 0.05%-0.10% credit spread adjustment, depending on Bluegreen’s leverage ratio (as compared to LIBOR plus 2.00%-2.50% with a 0.25% LIBOR floor under the terms of the facility prior to the amendment and restatement). The amendment also extended the maturity date from October 2024 to February 2027. Fifth Third Bank acts as administrative agent, lead arranger, and participating lender. In addition, certain other banks participate as lenders. Borrowings are collateralized by certain VOI inventory, sales center buildings, management fees, short-term receivables and cash flows from residual interests relating to certain term securitizations. As of December 31, 2021, outstanding borrowings under the facility totaled $98.1 million, including $88.1 million under the Fifth Third Syndicated Term Loan with an interest rate of 2.25%, and $10.0 million under the Fifth Third Syndicated Line of Credit with an interest rate of 2.25%.
Bluegreen also has outstanding obligations under various securitizations that have no remaining future availability as the advance periods have expired.
Commitments
The following table summarizes the contractual minimum principal and interest payments required on all of the Company’s outstanding debt, and non-cancelable operating leases by period due date, as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Amounts do not include purchase accounting adjustments for junior subordinated debentures of $35.0 million.
(2)Amounts represent the cash payment for leases and includes interest of $10.8 million.
(3)Amounts represent the $4.0 million annual cash payment to Bass Pro during each of 2023 and 2024 pursuant to the June 2019 settlement agreement and include imputed interest of $0.7 million.
(4)Assumes that the scheduled minimum principal payments are made in accordance with the table above and the interest rate on variable rate debt remains the same as the rate at December 31, 2021.
The future commitments of the Company, excluding Bluegreen, relate to Woodbridge’s junior subordinated debentures and the note payable to BBX Capital, including interest thereon. The Company will rely primarily on cash on hand and cash equivalents, as well as distributions, if any, that may be paid by Bluegreen in the future, in order to satisfy the principal payments required on its contractual obligations. As discussed above, while the Company believes that it will have sufficient cash and cash equivalents to fund its operations for the foreseeable future, it will be dependent on the payment of distribution by Bluegreen to fund its operations in future periods. There is no assurance that Bluegreen will pay distributions in amounts required to fund BVH’s needs or at all.
In lieu of paying maintenance fees for unsold VOI inventory, Bluegreen may enter into subsidy agreements with certain HOAs. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Bluegreen made payments related to such subsidies of $24.9 million and $24.0 million, respectively, which are included within cost of other fee-based services in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income. As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.2 million accrued for such subsidies, which is included in accrued liabilities and other in the audited consolidated balance sheet as of such date. As of December 31, 2020, Bluegreen had no accrued liabilities for such subsidies.
Bluegreen intends to use cash on hand and cash flow from operations, including cash received from the sale or pledge of VOI notes receivable, and cash received from new borrowings under existing or future credit facilities in order to satisfy the principal and interest payments required on contractual obligations.
Bluegreen believes that its existing cash, anticipated cash generated from operations, anticipated future permitted borrowings under existing or future credit facilities, and anticipated future sales of notes receivable under existing, future or replacement purchase facilities will be sufficient to meet its anticipated working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirements, including the contractual payment of the Bluegreen obligations set forth above, for the foreseeable future subject to the success of its ongoing business strategies, the ongoing availability of credit and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and success of the actions Bluegreen has taken in response thereto. Bluegreen will continue its efforts to renew, extend or replace any credit and receivables purchase facilities that have expired or that will expire in the near term. Bluegreen may, in the future, also obtain additional credit facilities and may issue
corporate debt. Any debt incurred or issued may be secured or unsecured, bear interest at fixed or variable rates and may be subject to such terms as the lender may require and management believes acceptable. There can be no assurance that Bluegreen’s efforts to renew or replace credit facilities or receivables purchase facilities which have expired or which are scheduled to expire in the near term will be successful or that sufficient funds will be available from operations or under existing, proposed or future revolving credit or other borrowing arrangements or receivables purchase facilities to meet Bluegreen’s cash needs, including debt service obligations. To the extent Bluegreen is unable to sell notes receivable or borrow under such facilities, its ability to satisfy its obligations would be materially adversely affected.
Bluegreen’s receivables purchase facilities, credit facilities, indentures and other outstanding debt instruments include what Bluegreen believes to be customary conditions to funding, eligibility requirements for collateral, cross-default and other acceleration provisions and certain financial and other affirmative and negative covenants, including, among others, limits on the incurrence of indebtedness, payment of dividends, investments in joint ventures and other restricted payments, the incurrence of liens and transactions with affiliates, as well as covenants concerning net worth, fixed charge coverage requirements, debt-to-equity ratios, portfolio performance requirements and cash balances, and events of default or termination. In the future, Bluegreen may be required to seek waivers of such covenants, but may not be successful in obtaining waivers, and such covenants may limit its ability to raise funds, sell receivables or satisfy or refinance its obligations, or otherwise adversely affect its financial condition and results of operations, as well as its ability to pay distributions. Bluegreen’s future operating performance and ability to meet its financial obligations will be subject to future economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, many of which may be beyond its control.
As previously disclosed, Bluegreen entered into a settlement agreement and revised marketing arrangement with Bass Pro and its affiliates during June 2019. Pursuant to the agreement, Bluegreen agreed to make five annual payments to Bass Pro of $4.0 million, which commenced in January 2020. Additionally, in lieu of the previous commission arrangement, Bluegreen agreed to pay Bass Pro a fixed annual fee for each Bass Pro and Cabela’s retail store that Bluegreen accessed and an amount per net vacation package sold. As of December 31, 2021, Bluegreen had sales and marketing operations at a total of 128 Bass Pro Shops and Cabela’s Stores. In December 2021, Bluegreen paid Bass Pro $8.3 million for the 2022 fixed fee, which is included in prepaid expenses in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
Off-balance-sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any “off-balance sheet” arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires it to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of commitments and contingencies. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including those that relate to the estimated future sales value of inventory, the recognition of revenue and its allowance for loan losses. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates if different assumptions and conditions were utilized. If actual results differ significantly from its estimates, its results of operations and financial condition could be materially, adversely impacted.
Revenue Recognition for Sales of VOIs
The Company generally offers qualified purchasers financing for up to 90% of the purchase price of VOIs. The typical financing provides for a term of ten years and a fixed interest rate, is fully amortizing in equal installments and may be prepaid without penalty. For sales of VOIs for which the Company provides financing, it has reduced the transaction price for expected loan losses, which it considers to be variable consideration. To the extent the Company determines that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized may occur, it records an estimate of
variable consideration as a reduction to the transaction price of the sales of VOIs until the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. The Company’s estimate of variable consideration is based on the results of its static pool analysis, which relies on historical payment data for similar VOI notes receivable and tracks uncollectibles for each period’s sales over the entire life of the VOI notes receivable. The Company also considers whether historical economic conditions are comparable to then current economic conditions, as well as variations in underwriting standards. The Company’s policies regarding the estimation of variable consideration on its notes receivable are discussed in further detail under “Allowance for Loan Losses on VOI Notes Receivable” below.
Allowance for Loan Losses on VOI Notes Receivable
The allowance for loan losses is related to the notes receivable generated in connection with financing the Company’s VOI sales. The Company holds large amounts of homogeneous VOI notes receivable and assess uncollectibility based on pools of receivables as there are no significant concentrations of credit risk with any individual counterparty or groups of counterparties. In estimating future loan losses, the Company does not use a single primary indicator of credit quality but instead evaluates its VOI notes receivable based upon a static pool analysis that incorporates the age of the respective receivables, default trends and prepayment rates by origination year, as well as the FICO scores of the borrowers.
Inventory and Cost of Sales
The Company carries its completed inventory at the lower of:  (i) cost, including costs of improvements and amenities incurred subsequent to acquisition, capitalized interest, real estate taxes and other costs incurred during construction, or (ii) estimated fair market value, less costs to sell. The Company uses the relative sales value method for establishing the cost of its VOI sales and relieving inventory, which requires it to make estimates subject to significant uncertainty. Under the relative sales value method required by timeshare accounting rules, cost of sales is calculated as a percentage of net sales using a cost-of-sales percentage based on the ratio of total estimated development costs to total estimated VOI revenue, including the estimated incremental revenue from the resale of VOI inventory repossessed, generally as a result of the default of the related receivable. Also, pursuant to timeshare accounting rules, the Company does not relieve inventory for VOI cost of sales related to anticipated loan losses. Accordingly, no adjustment is made when inventory is reacquired upon default of the related receivable. The effect of changes in estimates under the relative sales value method, including estimates of projected sales, future defaults, upgrades and incremental revenue from the resale of repossessed VOI inventory, are reflected on a retrospective basis in the period the change occurs.