Item 7.	Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for factors that could cause or contribute to such differences.
Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company primarily focused on commercializing and developing innovative products for hospital and related acute care settings. We believe that we can bring valuable therapeutic options for patients, prescribers and payers to the hospital and related acute care markets.
In mid-2020, we launched our first commercial product, ANJESO, in the United States. ANJESO is the first and only 24-hour, intravenous, or IV, analgesia agent. ANJESO is a cyclooxygenase-2, or COX-2, preferential, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, or NSAID, for the management of moderate to severe pain, which can be administered alone or in combination with other non-NSAID analgesics. We have successfully completed three Phase III clinical trials, including two pivotal efficacy trials, a large double-blind Phase III safety trial and two Phase IIIb program evaluating ANJESO clinical safety and efficacy along with its health economic impacts in specific surgical settings. We continue to evaluate strategic partnerships to commercialize ANJESO outside of the United States.
We utilize our internal sales team and collaborate with contracted third parties, to market ANJESO to health care professionals at called-on institutions for the commercialization of ANJESO in the United States. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, or CMS, established a unique J-code for ANJESO in the fourth quarter of 2020. ANJESO has transitional pass-through status under traditional Medicare plans for a period of 3 years. We have also entered into agreements with leading group purchasing organizations in the U.S., including Vizient Inc., Premier Inc. and HealthTrust, as well as one of the top three integrated delivery networks that serves over twelve million patients nationwide, for availability of ANJESO to their member institutions. In September 2021, we signed an agreement for terms of availability with a leading operator of surgical facilities and ancillary services nationally, with over 150 locations nationwide, which became effective October 1, 2021. In addition, ANJESO is currently approved for use within the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Defense, Indian Health Service, 340B covered entities, and multiple state Medicaid programs.
We have seen continued growth of ANJESO through deepening usage at existing accounts, as well as through the addition of new accounts in the quarter, which contributed to the fourth quarter being our best quarter since launch. The number of vials sold to end-users has increased approximately 32% in the fourth quarter of 2021 versus the third quarter of 2021. The number of vials sold to ambulatory surgical centers increased approximately 45% during the same time period. The average quarterly orders per account increased over 23% in the fourth quarter of 2021 versus the third quarter of 2021 and the re-order rate grew to nearly 70% with a deepening usage pattern.
Our costs consist primarily of expenses incurred in conducting our manufacturing, commercialization of ANJESO, public company and personnel costs, clinical trials and preclinical studies, and regulatory activities. We expect to incur operating losses for at least the next few years. We expect substantially all of our operating losses to result from costs incurred in connection with our commercialization activities, including manufacturing costs, and development programs, including our clinical, non-clinical and formulation development activities. Our expenses over the next several years are expected to primarily relate to the commercialization of ANJESO and continuing to develop our other current and future product candidates. In addition, we may incur costs associated with the acquisition or in-license of products and successful commercialization of the acquired or in-licensed products.
Our pipeline also includes other early-stage product candidates, including two novel NMBs and a related proprietary chemical reversal agent and Dex-IN, a proprietary intranasal formulation of dexmedetomidine, or Dex, an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist that we are evaluating for possible partnering.
COVID-19 Impact
Our efforts to commercialize ANJESO have been impacted in 2021 on a variable basis depending on the timing, location and extent of the outbreaks. There may continue to be impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in light of the surge of new COVID-19 cases relating to new variants, such as the Delta and Omicron variants, and any new and potentially more virulent variants that may emerge. Intermittent impacts in the reduction of elective surgeries have occurred and this has had an impact in the current year, especially in July and August. Overall, many centers have yet returned to pre-COVID levels of surgeries even where COVID-19 and its variants have not been as impactful. In addition, COVID-19 has impacted revenue for many hospitals, caused a reduction in hospital staffing, lead to a diversion in resources from other normal activities to patients suffering from COVID-19 and caused a limitation in hospital access for nonpatients, including our sales professionals, which we believe is impacting our marketing and commercialization efforts. Further, hospitals may experience staffing shortages as a result of employee non-compliance with government or employer mandated vaccination requirements, which could reduce the number of elective surgeries that can be performed at hospitals with staffing shortages. We believe a reduction in elective surgeries during the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact demand for ANJESO.
We anticipate that many hospitals and health care providers will continue to suffer negative financial consequences due to an increase in unexpected costs, including for personal protective equipment, and ventilators, and this impact may result in ongoing decreased revenue. If fewer elective procedures are being performed, we believe this may negatively impact ANJESO growth rates. In addition, in some areas the absence of hospital formulary meetings where new drugs can be adopted has had ongoing variable impact on our efforts to commercialize ANJESO. Many hospital formularies recently resumed meetings after a 6-month, or longer, absence. Despite the existence of a backlog of products scheduled to be reviewed, we believe we will make progress with having ANJESO added to additional hospital formularies over the near term. Due to the rapidly evolving environment, continued uncertainties from the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic, and the recent regional outbreaks that are impacting the recovery, we cannot estimate the full extent to which our commercialization of ANJESO and financial results may be adversely impacted.
Financial Overview
Revenue
Subsequent to regulatory approval for ANJESO from the FDA, we began selling ANJESO in the U.S. through a single third-party logistics provider, or 3PL, which takes title to and control of the goods. We recognize revenue from ANJESO product sales at the point the title to the product is transferred to the customer and the customer obtains control of the product. The transaction price that is recognized as revenue for products includes an estimate of variable consideration for reserves, which result from discounts, returns, chargebacks, rebates and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our end-user customers, wholesalers, group purchasing organizations and other indirect customers.
Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of its anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available. These reserves reflect our best estimate of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contracts. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that is considered probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes product costs, manufacturing costs, transportation and freight, royalty expense, qualification costs for a secondary manufacturing suite for increased available capacity to meet anticipated demand and indirect overhead costs associated with the manufacturing and distribution of ANJESO including supply chain and quality personnel costs. Cost of sales may also include period costs related to certain manufacturing services and inventory adjustment charges. We expensed a significant portion of the cost of producing ANJESO that we are using in the commercialization as research and development expense prior to the regulatory approval of ANJESO. We expect that over time, product costs in cost of sales will increase as sales increase and inventory associated with the units manufactured prior to FDA approval are sold.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses currently consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the development of ANJESO and other pipeline activities. These expenses consist primarily of:
•expenses incurred under agreements with investigative sites, consultants and other service providers that conduct or support our clinical and pre-clinical trials;
•the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial drug supply and related manufacturing services and pre-commercial product validation and inventory manufacturing expenses;
•costs related to facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses;
•acquired in-process research and development;
•costs associated with regulatory activities and responses to the FDA; and
•salaries and related costs for personnel in research and development and pre-commercial regulatory functions.
The majority of our external research and development costs have related to clinical trials, manufacturing of drug supply for pre-commercial products, analysis and testing of product candidates and patent costs. We expense costs related to clinical inventory and pre-commercial inventory until we receive approval from the FDA to market a product, at which time we commence capitalization of costs relating to that product to inventory. Costs related to facilities, depreciation and support are not charged to specific programs. Subsequent to regulatory approval of ANJESO, we allocated or recategorized certain personnel and overhead expenses related to medical affairs, supply chain, quality and regulatory support functions that had previously been recorded within research and development to cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses in support of the commercialization of ANJESO. Pre-commercial activities directly utilizing personnel and overhead expenses from the medical affairs, supply chain, quality and regulatory support function continue to be recorded within research and development.
The development of our other product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to a number of risks, including, but not limited to:
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of a product candidate;
•the duration of clinical trials, which varies substantially according to the type, complexity and novelty of the product candidate;
•substantial requirements on the introduction of pharmaceutical products imposed by the FDA and comparable agencies in foreign countries, which require lengthy and detailed laboratory and clinical testing procedures, sampling activities and other costly and time-consuming procedures;
•the possibility that data obtained from pre-clinical and clinical activities at any step in the testing process may be adverse and lead to discontinuation or redirection of development activity or may be susceptible to varying interpretations, which could delay, limit or prevent regulatory approval;
•risk involved with development of manufacturing processes, FDA pre-approval inspection practices and successful completion of manufacturing batches for clinical development and other regulatory purposes;
•the emergence of competing technologies and products, including obtaining and maintaining patent protections, and other adverse market developments, which could impede our commercial efforts; and
•the other risks disclosed in the section titled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Development timelines, probability of success and development costs vary widely. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we will assess our product candidate’s commercial potential and our available capital resources. As a result of these uncertainties surrounding the timing and outcome of any approval, we are currently unable to estimate precisely when, if ever, any of our product candidates will generate revenues and cash flows.
We expect our research and development costs to relate to ANJESO, including required pediatric post-marketing studies, as well as development and commercialization scale-up of our other product candidates. We may elect to seek collaborative relationships in order to provide us with a diversified revenue stream and to help facilitate the development and commercialization of our product candidate pipeline.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of sales and marketing expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of compensation and benefits for our sales force and personnel that support our sales and marketing efforts as well as third party consulting costs for the promotion and sale of ANJESO. In addition, sales and marketing expenses include expenses related to communicating the clinical and economic benefits of ANJESO and educational programs for our indirect customers.
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, finance and information technology functions, as well as the commercial portion of the medical affairs and regulatory functions. General and administrative expenses also include public company costs, directors and officer’s insurance, professional fees for legal, including patent-related expenses, consulting, auditing, and tax services.
We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in the future as a result of our commercialization of ANJESO.
2022 Reduction in Force
Due to the current cash position, in March of 2022, we implemented a reduction in workforce by approximately 66 employees. We estimate that the reorganization will be substantially completed by the end of the second quarter and that we will incur approximately $4.0 million of charges for severance and other related costs, primarily during the first half of 2022.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
In connection with the Separation, we entered into an Assignment and a Partial Assignment, Assumption and Bifurcation Agreement, or the Alkermes Agreements, relating to the Purchase and Sale Agreement for the acquisition of certain assets, including the worldwide rights to injectable meloxicam and Recro’s development, formulation and manufacturing business from Alkermes, or the Alkermes Transaction, as amended in December 2018 and August 2020. Pursuant to the Alkermes Agreements, we are required to pay up to $140.0 million in milestone payments, including $10.0 million that was paid during 2019, another $3.6 million paid in 2020, $1.4 million paid on June 20, 2021, and $45.0 million over seven years beginning one year after approval, of which the first payment was made in the first quarter of 2021, as well as net sales milestones and a royalty percentage of future product net sales related to injectable meloxicam between 10% and 12% (subject to a 30% reduction when no longer covered by patent). The estimated fair value of the initial $54.6 million payment obligation was recorded as part of the purchase price for the Alkermes Transaction. We have continued to reevaluate the fair value each subsequent period and as of December 31, 2021 we have $23.9 million recorded as our payment obligation, representing the estimated probability-adjusted fair value of the liability. Each reporting period, we revalue this estimated obligation with changes in fair value recognized as a non-cash operating expense or gain. As of December 31, 2021, we have paid $21.4 million in milestone payments to Alkermes.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the periods presented primarily includes interest expense incurred on our Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender, the amortization of related financing costs, and interest expense on a promissory note (the “Loan”) with PNC Bank (the “Lender”)under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the CARES Act administered by the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”), which has been fully forgiven as of December 31, 2021.
Income Taxation
We maintained a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue, net. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net product revenue related to sales of ANJESO in the U.S. was $1.1 million. This compares to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which included certain initial stocking of ANJESO to wholesaler distribution centers in the early part of the COVID-19 launch year. While utilizing the title model of distribution, product revenue is recognized as shipments are made to our 3PL provider. The increase of $0.6 million was attributable to securing additional formulary approvals, which allowed for more trial usage of ANJESO that lead to early adoption of ANJESO. Ultimately throughout 2021, this adoption led to deepening usage and increased end-user demand and increased purchasing through both wholesalers and by direct customers.
Cost of sales. Our cost of sales was $2.4 million and $1.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and consists of product costs, royalty expense and certain fixed costs associated with the manufacturing of ANJESO, including supply chain and quality costs. Based on our policy, we expense costs associated with the manufacturing of our products as research and development prior to regulatory approval. Certain product costs of ANJESO units recognized as revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were expensed prior to FDA approval of ANJESO in February 2020, and therefore are not included in cost of sales during the related periods. We expect that over time, product costs will increase as sales increase and inventory associated with the units manufactured prior to FDA approval are sold. The increase of $0.7 million is primarily due to the increase in units sold in the period as well as an increase of $0.3 million related to a full year of our PDUFA Program fee in the current year compared to a partial year of the annual expense in 2020 due to FDA approval occurring in 2020.
Research and Development. Our research and development expenses were $3.1 million and $9.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $6.0 million was primarily due to a decrease in personnel costs of $4.0 million and a decrease of $1.5 million in pre-commercialization manufacturing costs for ANJESO and a decrease of $0.5 million in clinical costs.
Selling, General and Administrative. Our selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $45.3 million, of which $22.4 million was attributable to selling expense and $22.9 million was attributable to general and administrative expense. This compares to $43.3 million for the same prior year period, of which $22.8 million was attributable to selling expense and $20.5 million was attributable to general and administrative expense. Selling expenses remained flat over the comparable period while general and administrative expenses increased $2.4 million. The increase was primarily a result of the prior period of 2020 including $2.0 million in reimbursed general and administrative expenses related to the Transition Services Agreement with Recro, which ended on December 31, 2020.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization expense was $2.6 million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was related to the amortization of our intangible asset resulting from research and development activities over its estimated useful life beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Change in Warrant Valuation. There was not a material change in warrant valuation for the year ended December 31, 2021. The change in warrant valuation increase in value of $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the warrants sold as part of our March 26, 2020 underwritten public offering, including the impact of our warrant exchange transaction in October 2020.
Change in Contingent Consideration valuation. Our change in contingent consideration valuation consisted of a decrease of value of $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to an increase in value of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The non-cash charge for contingent consideration in each period relates to the revaluation of the probability-adjusted fair value of the Alkermes Transaction payment obligation. The decrease in the fair value of the liability of $33.3 million in 2021 was primarily due to updated forecasts for ANJESO as well as an increase in the discount rate used to calculate the fair value. The increase in the fair value of the liability of $2.2 million in 2020 was primarily due to the increase in probability of success of milestones tied to the FDA approval of ANJESO, partially offset by the adjusted timing of estimated milestone and royalty payments due to updated forecasts for ANJESO.
Other Expense, net. Other expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.8 million and $1.3 million, respectively. The change in other expense of $0.5 million was due to the gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan of $1.5 million upon the approval of our application for forgiveness in the current year, partially offset by an increase of $0.9 million in interest expense and debt issuance cost amortization related to our Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $15.9 million in cash and cash equivalents.
On March 1, 2022, we closed an underwritten public offering of 1,831,631 shares of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase 1,677,141 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share and warrants to purchase 3,508,772 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $3.25 per share, as well as up to 526,315 additional shares of common stock and/or additional warrants to purchase up to 526,315 shares of common stock which may be purchased pursuant to a 30-day option to purchase additional securities granted to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (the “Underwriter”) by us. The public offering price for each share of common stock and accompanying warrant to purchase one share of common stock was $2.85, and the public offering price for each pre-funded warrant and accompanying warrant was $2.84. As compensation to the Underwriter, we agreed to pay to the Underwriter a cash fee of 7.0% of the gross proceeds, plus a cash management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Underwriter warrants to purchase 210,526 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $3.5625 per share. On February 28, 2022, the Underwriter partially exercised its option to purchase an additional 113,896 warrants. Net proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, was $8.8 million.
On December 28, 2021, we closed a registered direct offering of 42,289.3 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share, or the Preferred Stock, and warrants to purchase 362,479 shares of common stock, or the December 2021 Warrants, for net proceeds of $3,656. The shares of Preferred Stock will have a stated value of $100.00 per share and are convertible, on the date after the issuance thereof, into an aggregate of 483,306 shares of common stock at a conversion price of $8.75 per share. As compensation to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, or the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay the Placement Agent a cash fee of 7.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the December 2021 Offering, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the December 2021 Offering and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase 28,996 shares of common stock, or the December 2021 Placement Agent Warrants. The December 2021 Warrants and the December 2021 Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $11.20 per share and will be exercisable upon the six-month anniversary of their issuance.
On May 31, 2021, we closed a registered direct offering of 400,815 shares of common stock, or the May Offering, at an offering price of $29.75 per share and warrants to purchase 400,812 shares of common stock, or the May Warrants, at an exercise price of $31.50 per share, for net proceeds of $10.9 million. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the May Offering, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the May Offering and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase 24,076 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $37.1875 per share. The May Warrants and May Placement Agent Warrants were exercisable on the six-month anniversary of the closing date of the May Offering.
On February 8, 2021, we entered into an agreement to issue and sell 314,286 shares of common stock, or the February Offering, at an offering price of $56.00 per share, for net proceeds of $16.2 million. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the February Offering, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the February Offering and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase up to 18,854 shares of common stock, or the February Placement Agent Warrants. The February Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $70.00 per share.
On January 21, 2021, we entered into an agreement to issue and sell warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 294,298 shares of common stock, or the January Warrants, at an offering price of $4.375 per warrant in exchange for the exercise of the institutional investor’s existing December Series A warrants that were issued to them on December 21, 2020, at an exercise price of $41.30 per warrant. The January Warrants have an exercise price of $56.00 per share. The January Warrants are immediately exercisable and will expire five years from the issuance date. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay a cash fee of 6.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised in the January Offering (including the proceeds relating to the exercise of the December Series A Warrants), plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the January Offering (including the proceeds relating to the exercise of the December Series A Warrants) and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued to designees of the Placement Agent warrants to purchase up to 17,654 shares of common stock, or the January Placement Agent Warrants. The January Placement Agent Warrants have substantially the same terms as the January Warrants, except that the January Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price equal to $70.00 per share.
On December 18, 2020, we closed a registered direct offering of 121,428 shares of common stock, warrants to purchase 294,298 shares of common stock, or the December Series A Warrants, at an exercise price of $41.30 per share, pre-funded warrants to purchase 172,869 shares of common stock, or the December Series B Warrants, at an exercise price of $0.35 per share, for net proceeds of $10.9 million. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay to the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued warrants to purchase 17,654 shares of common stock, or the December Placement Agent Warrants, at an exercise price of $50.96875 per share.
On November 24, 2020, we closed a registered direct offering of 81,429 shares of common stock, warrants to purchase 289,330 shares of common stock, or the November Series A Warrants, at an exercise price of $42.00 per share, pre-funded warrants to purchase 207,902 shares of common stock, or the November Series B Warrants, at an exercise price of $0.35 per share, for net proceeds of $10.8 million. As compensation to the Placement Agent, we agreed to pay to the Placement Agent a cash fee of 6.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds, plus a management fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds and reimbursement of certain expenses and legal fees. We also issued warrants to purchase 17,357 shares of common stock, or the November Placement Agent Warrants, at an exercise price of $51.84375 per share.
On May 29, 2020, we entered in a $50.0 million Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender, pursuant to which we have drawn $10.0 million as of the date of this Annual Report and may draw upon four additional tranches of term loans. The Tranche Two Loans in an amount not to exceed $5.0 million may be drawn upon on or before August 29, 2021 provided that we generate at least $5.0 million in net revenue in the three consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the date such Tranche Two Loans are funded. The Tranche Two Loans may also be drawn on a subsequent date with the satisfaction of the conditions for the Tranche Three Loans, Tranche Four Loans, or Tranche Five Loans, as applicable, provided that the Tranche Two Loans may not be drawn more than once. The Tranche Three Loans in an amount not to exceed $5.0 million may be drawn upon on or before November 29, 2021 provided that we generate at least $10.0 million in net revenue in the three consecutive calendar months immediately preceding such date such Tranche Three Loans are funded. The Tranche Three Loans may also be drawn on a subsequent date with the satisfaction of the conditions for the Tranche Four Loans or Tranche Five Loans, as applicable, provided that the Tranche Three Loans may not be drawn more than once. The Tranche Four Loans in an amount not to exceed $10.0 million may be drawn upon, subject to the consent of the Lenders, on or before August 29, 2022 provided that we generate at least $20.0 million in net revenue in the three consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the date such Tranche Four Loans are funded. The Tranche Four Loans may also be drawn on a subsequent date with the satisfaction of the conditions for the Tranche Five Loans provided that the Tranche Four Loans may not be drawn more than once. The Tranche Five Loans in an amount not to exceed $20.0 million may be drawn upon, subject to the consent of the Lenders, on or before March 1, 2023 provided that we generate at least $100.0 million in net revenue in the twelve consecutive calendar months immediately preceding the date such Tranche Five Loans are funded.
On May 8, 2020, we entered into a promissory note for $1.5 million under the PPP of the CARES Act administered by the SBA. We have used the loan proceeds for covered payroll costs in accordance with the relevant terms and conditions of the CARES Act. This Loan may be partially or fully forgiven if we comply with the provisions of the CARES Act including the use of Loan proceeds for payroll costs, rent, utilities and other expenses, and at least 60% of the loan proceeds must be used for payroll costs as defined by the CARES Act. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received a Notice of PPP Forgiveness Payment from the SBA regarding the approval of our application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $1.5 million and accrued interest. As a result, we recognized a gain on extinguishment of the PPP Loan of $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On February 13, 2020, we entered into a Sales Agreement with JMP Securities LLC, as sales agent, or the Agent, pursuant to which we may, from time to time, issue and sell shares of our common stock, in an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million through the Agent, or the ATM Facility. On May 27, 2021, we voluntarily terminated the ATM Facility with the Agent. During the term of the ATM Facility, we sold an aggregate of 12,628 shares of common stock under the ATM Facility for net proceeds of $3.6 million, none of which were sold in the year ended December 31, 2021. The Agent was paid a sales commission of 3% for such sales under the Sales Agreement. The ATM Facility was terminable at will by the Company with no penalty.
We anticipate that our principal uses of cash in the future will be primarily to commercialize ANJESO and to fund our operations, pipeline development activities, working capital needs, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes.
We expect to seek additional funding to sustain our future operations and while we have successfully raised capital in the past, the ability to raise capital in future periods is not assured. Based on our available cash as of December 31, 2021, we will need to raise additional capital in the next twelve months to continue as a going concern.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash used in operations was $49.3 million and $44.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which represents our operating losses less our non-cash items including: stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense, gain on extinguishment of debt in the current year, depreciation, amortization, changes in warrant valuations, and changes in fair value of contingent consideration, as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our capital expenditures were $0.2 million and $0.6 million, respectively.
There was $35.0 million of cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 consisting of net proceeds of $30.8 million from registered direct offerings and net proceeds of $12.2 million from warrant exercises, partially offset by a payment of contingent consideration of $7.9 million. There was $57.3 million of cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting of net proceeds of $23.1 million from the public offering of common stock and warrants, net proceeds of $21.9 million from registered direct offerings of common stock and warrants, net proceeds of $1.5 million from the issuance of the PPP
Loan, net proceeds of $8.5 million from the incurrence of long-term debt under the Credit Agreement with MAM Eagle Lender, net proceeds of $3.6 million from our ATM Program, and net proceeds of $2.7 million from warrant exercises, partially offset by a payment of contingent consideration of $3.6 million.
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
•our relationships with third parties, licensors, collaborators, and our employees;
•our ability to continue to operate as a standalone company and execute our strategic priorities;
•potential indemnification liabilities we may owe to Recro;
•the timing of the Alkermes Transaction milestone payments and other contingent consideration;
•the costs of continued manufacturing scale-up and commercialization activities, for ANJESO;
•the level of market acceptance of ANJESO;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of development for our other product candidates;
•the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our other product candidates;
•the cost of manufacturing scale-up, acquiring drug product and other capital equipment for our other product candidates;
•the extent to which we in-license, acquire or invest in products, businesses and technologies;
•our ability to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or sale of certain assets;
•our ability to achieve certain milestones to access and draw down additional tranches of debt under the Credit Agreement;
•the extent to which any holders of our warrants exercise their warrants resulting in the payment of cash proceeds to us;
•our ability to have sufficient authorized shares of our common stock available;
•the costs of preparing, submitting and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property claims; and
•the effect of any changes in our effective tax rate due to changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates, changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, tax impacts and net operating loss utilization related to the Separation and changes in tax laws.
We might use existing cash and cash equivalents on hand, debt, equity financing, sale of assets or out-licensing revenue or a combination thereof to fund our operations or product acquisitions. If we increase our debt levels, we might be restricted in our ability to raise additional capital and might be subject to financial and restrictive covenants. Our shareholders may experience dilution as a result of the issuance of additional equity or debt securities. This dilution may be significant depending upon the amount of equity or debt securities that we issue and the prices at which we issue any securities.
Contractual Commitments
The table below reflects our contractual commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Debt obligations consist of principal, an exit fee of 2.5% of that principal and interest on the $10.0 million outstanding term loan under our Credit Agreement. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)These obligations consist of cancelable and non-cancelable purchase commitments related to capital expenditures and other goods or services. The timing of certain purchase commitments cannot be estimated as it is dependent on the outcome of strategic evaluations and agreements. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3)We have become party to certain operating leases for the leased space in Malvern, Pennsylvania and Dublin, Ireland, as well as for office equipment, for which the minimum lease payments are presented. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(4)We are party to exclusive licenses with Orion for the development and commercialization of certain pipeline product candidates, under which we may be required to make certain milestone and royalty payments to Orion. See Note 12(a) to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The amount reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable that may arise based on meeting certain milestones. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of these payments because they are dependent on the type and complexity of the clinical studies and intended uses of the products, which have not been established. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(5)We license the NMBs from Cornell University pursuant to a license agreement under which we are obligated to make annual license maintenance fee payments, milestone payments and patent cost payments and to pay royalties on net sales of the NMBs. The amount reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable that may arise based on meeting certain milestones. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of certain of these payments because they are dependent on the type and complexity of the clinical studies and intended uses of the products, which have not been established. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, certain of these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See 12(a) to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(6)Pursuant to the purchase and sale agreement governing the Alkermes Transaction, we agreed to pay to Alkermes milestone and royalty payments. The amount reflects only payment obligations that are fixed and determinable and in some instances may only arise based on meeting certain commercial milestones. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of these payments because they are in some instances, events that are not in our control and dependent on the commercial success of the product. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, the fair value of these obligations is recorded as contingent consideration on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 12(b) to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(7)We have entered into employment agreements with our named executive officers. As of December 31, 2021, these employment agreements provided for, among other things, annual base salary in an aggregate amount of not less than this amount, from that date through June 2023. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, these obligations are not recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 12 (e) to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated and combined financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our combined financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition - Subsequent to regulatory approval for ANJESO from the FDA, we began selling ANJESO in the U.S. through a single 3PL which takes title to and control of the goods. We recognize revenue from ANJESO product sales at the point the title to the product is transferred to the customer and the customer obtains control of the product. The transaction price that is recognized as revenue for products includes an estimate of variable consideration for reserves which result from discounts, returns, chargebacks, rebates and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our end-user customers, wholesalers, group purchasing organizations and other indirect customers. Our payment terms are generally between thirty to ninety days.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets - We are required to review the carrying value of long-lived assets, including property and equipment and amortizable intangible assets, for recoverability whenever events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. The impairment test is a two-step test. Under step one we assess the recoverability of an asset (or asset group). The carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected from the use and eventual disposition of the asset (or asset group). The impairment loss is measured in step two as the difference between the carrying value of the asset (or asset group) and its fair value. Assumptions and estimates used in the evaluation of impairment are subjective and changes in these assumptions may negatively impact projected undiscounted cash flows, which could result in impairment charges in future periods. We performed a recoverability test as of November 30, 2021 on our amortizable intangible assets after identifying indicators of impairment and determined the undiscounted cash flows exceed the net carrying value. On an ongoing periodic basis, we evaluate the useful life of our long-lived assets and determine if any economic, governmental or regulatory event has modified their estimated useful lives.
Contingent Consideration - We revalue our contingent consideration on a quarterly basis using a discounted cash flow valuation model. The model uses significant unobservable inputs, including projected future revenue. We estimate ANJESO net
revenues based on estimated market share, pricing and customary trade discounts, taking into consideration variables such as, market acceptance of the product and the expected number of product competitors in the market.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.