ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on March 10, 2021 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our Initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our Initial Business Combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing or other sources.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021 we had $54,057 in cash, a working capital deficit of approximately $54,057 and deferred offering costs of $565,563. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our Initial Business Combination. We cannot assure our stockholders that our plans to complete an Initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those related to our intent to effectuate an Initial Business Combination We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our Initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on the cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. No material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. We expect to continue to incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an Initial Business Combination.
For the period from March 10, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $22,252, which consisted of formation costs, travel costs, and Delaware franchise tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $54,057. Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On January 24, 2022, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 24,150,000 Units, including the issuance of 3,150,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full. Each Unit sold consisted of one share of Class A common stock and one-half of one redeemable Warrant, with each whole Warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $241,500,000 which is further described in Note 3 of the financial statements accompanying this Annual Report. Simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Public Offering, we completed the private placement of 11,910,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, BTIG and I-Bankers, including 1,260,000 Private Placement Warrants as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating total proceeds to us of $11,910,000, which is further described in Note 4 of the financial statements accompanying this Annual Report.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $246,330,000 was placed in the Trust Account, comprised of $237,720,000 of the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering (which amount includes $9,660,000 of the deferred underwriting discount payable upon consummation of our Initial Business Combination) and $8,610,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable thereon and excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes, and we expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the Trust Account will be related to income and franchise taxes, which we expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that shares of our common stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Prior to the completion of our Initial Business Combination and following our Initial Public Offering, we had available to us $1,500,000 of proceeds held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use these funds primarily to
identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure and negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our Initial Business Combination, other than any funds available from loans from our Sponsor, its affiliates or members of our management team. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an Initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Initial Business Combination. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended Initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our Initial Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, such loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that our Initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Warrant at the option of the lender. The Warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our Initial Business Combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
Additionally, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we have not consummated our Initial Business Combination within the required time period because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, operational support and secretarial and administrative services. See “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions.” We began incurring these fees on January 19, 2022 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Initial Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $9,660,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an Initial Business Combination and certain other conditions are met.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply
with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we currently rely and are in the process of evaluating the benefits of continuing to rely on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to continue to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things: (1) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (2) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (3) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (4) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the principal executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies and estimates.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.