ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations together with our financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, whose actual outcomes involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those stated in or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the section entitled “Cautionary Statement regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. Please see the notes to our Financial Statements for information about our Critical Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.
The following discussion provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our past financial condition and plan of operations. The discussion below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report.
About Beyond Commerce
Beyond Commerce, Inc. was formed as a Nevada corporation on January 12, 2006.
We are focused on business combinations of “big data” companies in global B2B internet marketing analytics, technologies and services. The Company’s objective is to develop and deploy disruptive strategic software technology that will build on organic growth potential and to exploit cross-selling opportunities. We plan to offer a cohesive global digital product and services platform to provide clients with a single point of contact for their big data, marketing and related sales initiatives. We believe our business model will ensure that information will remain secure and private, as necessitated by the current market climate.
In addition, we plan to provide solutions which facilitate the exchange of information and data transactions between supply chain participants, such as manufacturers, retailers, distributors and financial institutions. The goal is to automate potential client internal processes thereby increasing productivity and lowering costs. We plan to develop proprietary algorithms which it will embed in the planned software to enable clients to access data and gain insight into their business, through that data, leading to improved internal decision making.
The Company currently owns and operates a data company and is actively seeking acquisition opportunities in high growth sectors such as psychedelics, cryptocurrency, ESports and Logistics among others. The Company’s strategy is to identify companies in the early stages of development or growth, acquire them and provide these companies capital in order to accelerate their development and growth with the intention to ultimately sell these companies
Impact of Virus Outbreak and Management’s Plans
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a respiratory disease caused by a new coronavirus as a “pandemic”. First identified in late 2019 and known now as COVID-19, the outbreak has impacted thousands of individuals worldwide. In response, many countries have implemented measures to combat the outbreak which have impacted global business operations.
The majority of the states within the United States have issued a stay at home order to its residents. Accordingly, the Company’s revenues associated with our business model has drastically declined through date of the financial statements and its results of operations, cash flows and financial condition have been negatively impacted by the pandemic.
The impact of the disease outbreak, as of the date of the financial statements, remains highly fluid and uncertain. The Company is unable to predict, with any sort of certainty the timing for the end of the restrictions. Accordingly, the financial impact on the results of operations, cash flows and financial condition cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. No impairments were recorded as of the balance sheet date; however, due to significant uncertainty surrounding the situation, management’s judgment regarding this could change in the future.
The Company continues to maintain the business working with customers to fit their needs - We are also offering COVID type services. We have clients in the medical field and are offering to do survey work for them regarding their response for the COVID outbreak so they can document how they are doing as a company. We are in touch with our customers daily, we have even discussed switching them from phone calls to web surveys until this has passed. Along with the above, the Company, Service 800, was approved on April 16, 2020 for $500,000 from the Paycheck Protection and approved on February 2, 2021 for $625,000 from the Paycheck Protection Round Two, which provided funds to assist in maintaining our employee base. Both loans have been forgiven by the SBA during 2021. Additionally, on March 30, 2021 the Company through its Service 800 Inc. subsidiary, received $150,000 in funding in conjunction with a promissory note under the SBA Loan Program.
Service 800 Agreement
On December 14, 2017, we entered into an agreement with Service 800 and the sole shareholder of Service 800 (the “Shareholder”), and on March 4, 2019 we purchased all of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of Service 800 from the Shareholder (the “Transaction”). Service 800 operates as a premium provider of Customer Feedback Management Platforms to their Fortune 500 and 1000 clients on a global basis. Service 800 provides survey authoring, response rates, feedback types and data analysis on their proprietary, cloud based, automated and centralized platform. Service 800 has currently 25 full time employees that provide services to 130 companies and 300 service organizations. Service 800’s current operations and strategic business plan is to further develop its marketing and Customer Experience platform to use within the framework of its current Fortune 500 and 1000 clients.
Upon the closing of the business combination, Jean Mork Bredeson, Founder and President of Service 800, Inc., received $2,100,000 in cash, and $2,100,000 in a three-year 5.5% promissory note. The $2,100,000 promissory note is personally guaranteed by the estate of George Pursglove whose executor is Geordan Pursglove Beyond Commerce’s President and CEO. On July 18, 2018 Jean Mork Bredeson received 2,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock. On July 18, 2018 Allen Bredeson, Vice President of Marketing and Client Relations, received 1,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock. On July 18, 2018 Derick White, Vice President of Sales received 1,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock, and Jeff Schwendinger, Vice President of Operations on July 18, 2018 received 1,000,000 shares of Beyond Commerce’s restricted common stock. The effective date of this business combination between Beyond Commerce and Service 800, is February 28, 2019, when Beyond Commerce received 100% of Service 800 stock, assets consisting of the company’s website, customer lists, current customer base, and customers in the company’s pipeline and proprietary software.
TCA Special Situations Credit Strategies ICAV
On December 31, 2019, Beyond Commerce, Inc., a Nevada corporation (the “Company”), entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with TCA Special Situations Credit Strategies ICAV, an Irish collective asset vehicle (the “Buyer” or “TCA ICAV”), and TCA Beyond Commerce, LLC, a Wyoming limited liability company (“TCA Beyond Commerce”), pursuant to which the Buyer purchased from the Company a senior secured redeemable debenture having an initial principal amount of $900,000 and an interest rate of 16% per annum (the “Initial Debenture”). Additional Debentures may be issued and funded, subject to and upon the approval of the Company and the Buyer, provided that the total value of the Initial Debenture and the Additional Debentures together shall not exceed $5,000,000.
In May 2020, the SEC appointed a Receiver to close down the TCA Global Master Fund, L.P. over allegations of accounting fraud. The amount recorded by the Company as being owed to TCA was based on TCA’s application of prior payments made by the Company. The Company believes that prior payments of principal and interest may have been applied to unenforceable investment banking and other fees and charges. It is the Company’s position that the amount owed to TCA is less than the amount set forth above.
The Securities Purchase Agreement was entered into as part of a larger financing transaction between the Company and the Buyer. As part of this financing transaction, the Company and the Buyer formed TCA Beyond Commerce as a special purpose vehicle to complete the Company’s acquisition of Customer Centered Strategies, L.L.C., a Minnesota limited liability company (“CCS”), while using the funds generated through the Company’s sale of the Initial Debenture. The Company owns 80% of the outstanding common membership interests of TCA Beyond Commerce (the “Common Units”) and the Buyer owns 2,000 Common Units, comprising the remaining 20% of the Common Units issued, as well as 100% of the 250,000 Series A Preferred Units issued and the sole Series B Preferred Unit issued (which is the sole class of equity with voting rights). The Common Units and the Series A Preferred Units are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a 10% discount to the lowest closing bid price during the preceding 20 trading days and such equity will be redeemed pursuant to the Company’s making of installment payments, in accordance with the Operating Agreement of TCA Beyond Commerce. The Company has pledged its interests in TCA Beyond Commerce to TCA ICAV as security for the repayment of the Initial Debenture.
TCA Beyond Commerce entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “Membership Interest Purchase Agreement”), whereby TCA Beyond Commerce acquired 100% of the authorized and issued membership interests of CCS from its sole member (the “CCS Seller”). TCA Beyond Commerce acquired the membership interests for a purchase price $525,000 (the “CCS Purchase Price”), with $175,000 to be paid in cash and the remaining $350,000 to be paid through TCA Beyond Commerce’s issuance of a convertible promissory note with an original principal of $350,000 and a conversion feature that provides the CCS Seller with the right to convert outstanding principal and accrued interest into shares of the Company’s common stock at a price based on the 10-day trailing average price of the Company’s stock (the “CCS Purchase Note”). On November 18,2021 the Company and the sole member of CCS reached a Settlement Agreement whereby the Company paid $100,000 to pay off, cancel and extinguish the convertible promissory note and any other remaining obligations. A $234,667 gain on extinguishment of debt was realized by the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate past judgments and our estimates, including those related to allowance for doubtful accounts, allowance for inventory write-downs and write offs, deferred income taxes, provision for contractual obligations and our ability to continue as a going concern. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, presented in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, describes the critical accounting estimates and policies used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. There were no significant changes in our critical accounting estimates during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Estimates are used in the determination of depreciation and amortization and the valuation for non-cash issuances of equity instruments, web site, income taxes, and contingencies, among others. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company classifies as cash and cash equivalents amounts on deposit in banks and cash temporarily in various instruments with original maturities of three months or less at the time of purchase. The Company’s cash management system is currently integrated within one banking institution.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of the current assets and liabilities approximate fair value due to their relatively short maturities.
Fair Value Measurements
Statement of financial accounting standard FASB Topic 820, Disclosures about Fair Value of Financial Instruments, requires that the Company disclose estimated fair values of financial instruments. The carrying amounts reported in the statements of financial position for assets and liabilities qualifying as financial instruments are a reasonable estimate of fair value.
The Company applies the fair value hierarchy as established by GAAP. Assets and liabilities recorded at fair value in the consolidated balance sheets are categorized based upon the level of judgment associated with the inputs used to measure the fair value as follows.
·
Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
·
Level 2 - other significant observable inputs for the assets or liabilities through corroboration with market data at the measurement date.
·
Level 3 - significant unobservable inputs that reflect management’s best estimate of what market participants would use to price the assets or liabilities at the measurement date.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and then is revalued at each reporting date, with changes in fair value reported in the consolidated statement of operations. For stock based derivative financial instruments, Fair value accounting requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments such as conversion features in convertible debt or equity instruments, and measurement of their fair value for accounting purposes. In determining the appropriate fair value, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. In assessing the convertible debt instruments, management determines if the convertible debt host instrument is conventional convertible debt and further if there is a beneficial conversion feature requiring measurement. If the instrument is not considered conventional convertible debt, the Company will continue its evaluation process of these instruments as derivative financial instruments.
Once determined, derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at the end of each reporting period. Any increase or decrease in the fair value from inception is made quarterly and appears in results of operations as a change in fair market value of derivative liabilities.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
The Company accounts for long-lived assets in accordance with the provisions of ASC 360-10-35-21, Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. This statement requires that long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Fair values are determined based on quoted market value, discounted cash flows or internal and external appraisals, as applicable. During the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company recognized an impairment in the CCS customer relationships of $273,284.
Leases
The Company accounts for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. The Company has an operating lease for the Company’s subsidiary Service 800 corporate office. Operating leases are included in operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities, current and noncurrent, on the consolidated balance sheet. Lease liabilities are initially recorded at the present value of the lease payments by discounting the lease payments by the IBR and then recording accretion over the lease term using the effective interest method. Operating lease classification results in a straight-line expense recognition pattern over the lease term and recognized lease expense as a single expense component, which results in amortization of the ROU asset that equals the difference between lease expense and interest expense. Operating lease expense is included in selling, general and administrative expense, based on the use of the leased asset, on the consolidated statement of income. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the balance sheet and are not material; the Company recognizes lease expense for these leases on a straight-line basis over the remaining lease term.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under ASC 740-10-30. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income of the consolidated statements of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets may not be realized.
The Company follows the guidance of ASC 740-10-25 in determining whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent (50%) likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company recognizes interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax expense. The Company had no material adjustments to its liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits.
Stock Based Compensation
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company did not issue any stock options. This Company’s existing stock plan expired on September 11, 2018.
Employee Benefits
The Company during 2021 mainly attributable to the Service 800, Inc acquisition had approximately twenty-five (25) full time employees within this organization and offers certain healthcare benefits to remain competitive within the market place.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company reviews all of the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s updates periodically to ensure the Company’s compliance of its accounting policies and disclosure requirements to the Codification Topics.
The FASB has issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The new guidance is intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles of ASC 740. The guidance also improves consistent application by clarifying and amending existing guidance from ASC 740. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein and is to be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective or prospective approach, depending on the specific amendment. Early adoption is permitted. The adoption of the new guidance did not change anything in the consolidated financial statements and therefore had no material impact.
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued a new standard (ASU 2020-06) to reduce the complexity of accounting for convertible debt and other equity-linked instruments. The ASU simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Consequently, more convertible debt instruments will be reported as a single liability instrument and more convertible preferred stock as a single equity instrument with no separate accounting for embedded conversion features. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, which will permit more equity contracts to qualify for it. The ASU also simplifies the diluted earnings per share (EPS) calculation in certain areas. As a result, the new standard may affect net income and EPS, and therefore performance measures, and increase debt levels which may impact debt covenant compliance.
ASU 2020-06 is effective for public business entities that meet the definition of a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filer, excluding entities eligible to be smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the standard will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption will be permitted.
The Company will continue to monitor these emerging issues to assess any potential future impact on its financial statements. The Company has taken the position that any future standards will not be disclosed to the extent they are not material to our operations.
The FASB has issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The new guidance is intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles of ASC 740. The guidance also improves consistent application by clarifying and amending existing guidance from ASC 740. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods therein and is to be applied on a retrospective, modified retrospective or prospective approach, depending on the specific amendment. Early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of adopting the new guidance on the consolidated financial statements, but it is not expected to have a material impact.
Financial Presentation
The following sets forth a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors” beginning on page 14 of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Through our Service 800 Inc subsidiary, many of our clients; GE Healthcare, Audiology System, Inc 3M Healthcare, Johnson & Johnson Vision Care, Albany Molecular Research Inc., Sakura Finetek, Abbott Diagnostics, Biosense Webster, a Johnson & Johnson Company and Medtronic to name a few took the time during pandemic to begin strategic planning with Service 800 to grow their business with the company by renewals, expansion, and better ways to grow our programs with each and every one of them for the future. This select market segment continues to be a major source of revenue for the Company as we expand our services within this business segment. We anticipate revenue getting back in line with exceeding our expectations as the economy recovers from the Covid-19 pandemic and we progress further into the year. All renewals that have taken place are on a minimum of a one to two-year term with an auto renewal taking place when the contract expires. During the pandemic, it made our customers realize the value that Service 800 brings to the clients in the form of providing valuable information to not only help their growth within their own companies, but it also helps them be better providers to their customers as well. We continue to look forward to growth into each division of these companies and expansion to exceed expectations that have been set. We value these customers and are looking for all of the positive growth we have set for the remainder of the year and moving onwards to future years to come.
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue generated for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4,243,053 and $4,188,782, respectively, an increase of approximately 1%. We recognized revenue during 2021 being created from both the Service 800 and Customer Centered Strategies subsidiaries.
Operating Expenses
For twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 operating expenses were $6,189,587 and $6,523,861, respectively. Cost of revenue decreased by $144,128 as did general and administrative expenses by $658,121 in 2021 versus 2020. Payroll expenses increased year over year by $237,976, professional fees increased during 2021 by $313,975 and depreciation and amortization decreased by $83,976 as aging of the assets would result in a lower depreciation and amortization expense.
Non-operating income (expense)
The Company reported non-operating expense of $7,234,520 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $1,233,968 compared to $8,468,487 during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 mainly attributable to the changes in the derivative liability and debt fees associated with our convertible notes, along with a decrease in interest expense of $1,210,262. The Company recognized an impairment expense of its intangible assets of $273,284 during the year ended December 31, 2021compared to no impairment expense in for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Consolidated Net Loss
For twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred a consolidated net loss of $9,181,054 as compared to a consolidated net loss of $10,452,866 for the twelve months ended December 31,2020, which was primarily due to lower non-operating expenses including lower interest expense of $1,210,262 incurred in 2021 compared to 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $67,808,598 and $58,645,834, respectively.
Purchase of Significant Equipment
We do not anticipate the purchase or sale of any plant or significant equipment during the next twelve (12) months.
Going Concern
There is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $67,808,598, and we incurred a net loss of $9,181,054 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $10,452,866 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The continuity of our future operations is dependent upon our ability to increase sales and brand awareness. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We intend to continue relying upon the issuance of debt and equity securities to finance our operations. In this regard, we are restricted by the number of shares available for issuance in an equity financing, and we will likely need to increase our authorized capital in order to take advantage of such financing. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining shareholder approval to increase our authorized capital, that we will be successful in raising the funds necessary to maintain operations, or that a self-supporting level of operations will ever be achieved. The likely outcome of these future events is indeterminable. Our financial statements do not include any adjustment to reflect the possible future effect on the recoverability and classification of the assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result should we cease to continue as a going concern.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to raise additional capital and implement our business plan. Since inception, we have been funded by related parties through capital investment and borrowing of funds.
We had total current assets of $1,607,347 and $1,276,871 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Current assets consist primarily of cash and accounts receivable. The Company had a $67,808,598 accumulated deficit on its balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
We had total current liabilities of $5,414,772 and $7,025,541 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Current liabilities consisted primarily of the derivative liability, accounts payable, accrued payroll and payroll taxes, related party debt, and accrued interest. The main decreases occurred in lower accounts payable of $401,904, lower accrued payroll related expenses of $1,292,550 and a decrease in the derivative liability of $473,323. Short term borrowings decreased by $1,198,555 due to PPP loan forgiveness of $500,000 and settlement of debt for equity of $713,554. Short term borrowings - related party increased by $1,446,000 due to the issuance of a convertible note to an officer in settlement for payroll liabilities. Accrued interest payable increased by $303,067 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same date of the prior year.
We had a working capital deficit of $3,807,425 and $5,748,670 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $1,941,245 for the period as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 was due in part to a decrease of $1,292,550 in accrued payroll liabilities, a decrease of $401,904 in accounts payable and a decrease in derivative liability of $473,323. Cash increased by $486,087 due mainly to the proceeds from the issuance of Preferred Series C stock; accrued interest payable increased by $303,067 and short term borrowings and short term borrowings - related party increased by $247,445.
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,847,597 and $888,650, respectively. This increase of cash used is attributable to increased cash requirements for the operations of the Company, which recorded a loss from operations of $1,946,534 for the year ending December 31, 2021.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in investing activities was $250,000 and $16,230 respectively, due to the investment in Cityfreighter of $250,000 in 2021.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $2,583,684 and $403,803, respectively, which represents $625,000 in cash from PPP loans and $150,000 in cash from the SBA loan received by the Company offset by the payment of certain notes. The Company received proceeds of $2,000,000 relating to the issuance of 20,000 shares of Preferred Stock Series C.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company,” we are not required to provide tabular disclosure of contractual obligations.
Inflation
Inflation and changing prices have not had a material effect on our business, but we do expect that inflation or changing prices may affect our business in the foreseeable future.
Seasonality
In the past, our operating results and operating cash flows historically have not been subject to seasonal variations. This pattern may change, however, in the event that we succeed in bringing our planned products to market.