ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of BuzzFeed and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Company Overview
BuzzFeed is a premier digital media company for the most diverse, most online, and most socially connected generations the world has ever seen. Across food, news, pop culture and commerce, our brands drive conversation and inspire what audiences watch, read, buy, and obsess over next. With a portfolio of iconic, globally-loved brands that includes BuzzFeed, Tasty, BuzzFeed News, HuffPost, and Complex Networks, the Company reaches more than 100 million viewers monthly. And, across our combined network of brands, we are the number one destination for Gen Z and Millennials amongst our competitive set.
BuzzFeed curates the Internet, and acts as an “inspiration engine,” driving both online and real-world action and transactions. Our strong audience signal and powerful content flywheel enabled us to create category-leading brands and a deep, two-way connection with our audiences, as well as high-quality content at massive scale and low cost. Working across platforms allows us to adapt content from one platform and innovate around new formats to drive engagement on other platforms. This means we can reach our audiences wherever they are - across our owned and operated properties and the major social platforms, including Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, YouTube and TikTok. In 2021, our audiences consumed nearly 800 million hours of content which drove approximately $600 million in attributable transactions.
As the digital media landscape has evolved, so has our business model. Our strength has always been to adapt as the world changes. Founded by Jonah Peretti in 2006, BuzzFeed started as a lab in New York City’s Chinatown, experimenting with how the Internet could change how content is consumed, distributed, interacted with, and shared. This pioneering work was followed by a period of significant growth, during which BuzzFeed became a household name. Over the last few years, we have prioritized investments to focus on revenue diversification and profitability. Our data-driven approach to content creation and our cross-platform distribution network have enabled us to monetize our content by delivering a comprehensive suite of digital advertising products and services and introducing new, complementary revenue streams. As a result, we have reached an inflection point, and have achieved profitability.
Above all, BuzzFeed’s mission is to spread truth, joy and creativity. We are committed to making the Internet better: providing trusted, quality, brand-safe entertainment and news; making content on the Internet more inclusive, empathetic and creative; and inspiring our audience to live better lives.
The HuffPost Acquisition and Verizon Investment
On February 16, 2021, we completed the acquisition of TheHuffingtonPost.com, Inc. (“HuffPost”) (excluding HuffPost’s business in Brazil and India) (the “HuffPost Acquisition”), a publisher of online news and media content, from entities controlled by Verizon Communications Inc. (“Verizon”). We issued 6,478,032 shares of non-voting BuzzFeed Class C common stock to an entity controlled by Verizon, of which 2,639,322 were in exchange for the acquisition of HuffPost and 3,838,710 were in exchange for a concurrent $35.0 million cash investment in BuzzFeed by an affiliate of Verizon, which was accounted for as a separate transaction. The share amounts presented in the preceding sentence give effect to the Reverse Recapitalization.
On March 9, 2021, we announced a restructuring of HuffPost, including employee terminations, in order to efficiently integrate the HuffPost Acquisition and establish an efficient cost structure. We incurred approximately $3.6 million in severance costs related to the restructuring, of which $3.2 million were included in cost of revenue, $0.3 million were included in sales and marketing, and $0.1 million were included in research and development.
The Business Combination
On June 24, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement by and among 890, Merger Sub I, Merger Sub II, and Legacy BuzzFeed. 890 was a special purpose acquisition company formed to acquire one or more operating businesses through a business combination. The Merger Agreement provided for, among other things, the following transactions at the closing: Merger Sub I merged with and into Legacy BuzzFeed, with Legacy BuzzFeed as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a wholly owned subsidiary of 890. Immediately following the Merger, Legacy BuzzFeed merged with and into Merger Sub II with Merger Sub II being the surviving company of the second merger. In connection with the business combination, 890 was renamed “BuzzFeed, Inc.”
Additionally, on March 27, 2021, we entered into the C Acquisition Purchase Agreement to acquire 100% of the outstanding membership interests of CM Partners, in exchange for $200.0 million of cash as adjusted for Closing Specified Liabilities (as defined in the C Acquisition Purchase Agreement) and 10,000,000 shares of BuzzFeed Class A common stock.
The Two-Step Merger, C Acquisition, and other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement are referred to as the Business Combination. The Business Combination closed on December 3, 2021. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, the new combined company was renamed BuzzFeed, Inc.
The Two-Step Merger was accounted for as a reverse capitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under the guidance in ASC 805, 890 was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. We were deemed the accounting predecessor of the combined business and will be the successor SEC registrant, meaning that our consolidated financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in the registrant’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC.
Additionally, the Two-Step Merger satisfied a liquidity condition for 2.7 million RSUs and the Company recognized approximately $16.0 million of incremental stock-based compensation expense as a cumulative catch-up adjustment based on the number of restricted stock units outstanding and the requisite service completed at December 3, 2021 (“Liquidity 2 RSUs”). There are a further 2.5 million restricted stock units with a liquidity condition that the Two-Step Merger did not satisfy (“Liquidity 1 RSUs”). There is $21.2 million of unrecognized compensation expense associated with the Liquidity 1 RSUs at December 31, 2021. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Additionally, pursuant to subscription agreements entered into in connection with the Merger Agreement, the Company issued, and certain investors purchased, $150.0 million aggregate principal of unsecured convertible notes due 2026 (the “Notes”) concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. Refer to Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the viral strain of COVID-19 a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. The spread of COVID-19 and the resulting economic contraction has resulted in increased business uncertainty and significantly impacted our business and results of operations.
We believe that the COVID-19 pandemic drove a shift in commerce from offline to online, including an increase in online shopping, which we believe contributed to the rapid growth we experienced in our commerce revenue for fiscal 2020. However, the growth of our commerce revenue has decelerated during 2021 as shelter-in-place orders were lifted, consumers returned to shopping in stores, and retailers struggled with supply chain disruptions and labor shortages.
The continued duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain, rapidly changing, and difficult to predict. The degree to which COVID-19-related disruptions impact the Company’s future results will depend on future developments, which are outside of the Company’s control, including, but not limited to, the duration of the pandemic, its severity, the success of actions taken to contain or prevent the virus or treat its impact, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Our growth rate may continue to be impacted by additional macroeconomic factors beyond our control, such as inflation, retail businesses reopening, increased consumer spending on travel and other discretionary items, and the absence of new U.S. and other government economic stimulus programs, among other things.
2019 Restructuring
In the first half of 2019, in order to streamline operations and better position us to execute on our strategy, we undertook involuntary terminations of more than 200 employees across various roles and levels. We incurred $9.6 million in costs related to this restructuring, of which $4.4 million were included in cost of revenue, $1.6 million were included in sales and marketing, $2.2 million were included in general and administrative, and $1.4 million were included in research and development.
Executive Overview
The following table sets forth our operational highlights for the periods presented (in thousands):
(1) See “Reconciliation from Net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable financial measure in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”).
(2) We define Time Spent as the estimated total number of hours spent by users on (i) our owned & operated US properties, (ii) our content on Apple News, and (iii) our content on YouTube in the US, as reported by Comscore, and (iv) our content on Facebook, as reported by Facebook. Time Spent does not reflect time spent with our content across all platforms, including some on which we generated a portion of our advertising revenue, and excludes time spent with our content on platforms for which we do not have advertising capabilities. There are inherent challenges in measuring the total actual number of hours spent with our content across all platforms; however, we consider the data reported by Comscore and Facebook to represent industry- standard estimates of the time actually spent on our largest distribution platforms with our most significant monetization opportunities. We use Time Spent to evaluate the level of engagement of our audience. Trends in Time Spent affect our revenue and financial results by influencing the number of ads we are able to show, the volume of purchases made through our affiliate links, and the overall value of our offerings to our customers. However, increases or decreases in Time Spent may not directly correspond to increases or decreases in our revenue. For example, the number of programmatic impressions served by third-party platforms can vary based on the advertising revenue optimization strategies of these platforms and, as a result, an increase or decrease in Time Spent does not necessarily correlate with a corresponding increase or decrease in the number of programmatic impressions served, but Time Spent can be a key indicator for our programmatic advertising revenue when the third-party platforms optimize revenue over programmatic impressions. Our definition of Time Spent is not based on any standardized industry methodology and is not necessarily defined in the same manner or comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. Time Spent for
the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 6% driven by the HuffPost Acquisition and the C Acquisition. Excluding the impact of the HuffPost Acquisition and the C Acquisition, Time Spent declined by 5% primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 during the comparable periods in 2020.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue: The majority of our revenue is generated through the following types of arrangements:
● Advertising: Consists of display, programmatic, and video advertising on our owned & operated sites and applications and social media platforms. Advertising revenue is recognized in the period that the related views, impressions, or actions by users on advertisements are delivered. The substantial majority of our advertising revenue is monetized on a per-impression basis; however, we also generate revenue from advertising products that are not monetized on a per-impression basis (for example, page takeovers that are monetized on a per-day basis). Programmatic impressions on third-party platforms, including Facebook and YouTube, are controlled by the individual platforms, and the respective advertising revenue optimization strategies of these platforms have an impact on the number of programmatic impressions that these platforms serve. These optimization strategies change from time to time and have varying impacts on the numbers of programmatic impressions served. We generate an immaterial portion of our advertising revenue on platforms excluded from our measurement of Time Spent.
● Content: Includes revenue generated from creating content, including promotional content, customer advertising and feature films. Content revenue is recognized when the content, or the related action (click or view), is delivered.
● Commerce: Includes affiliate marketplace revenue and licensing of intellectual property. We participate in multiple marketplace arrangements with third parties whereby we provide affiliate links which redirect the audience to purchase products and/or services from the third parties. When the participant purchases a product and/or service, we receive a commission fee for that sale from the third party. Affiliate marketplace revenue is recognized when a successful sale is made and the commission is earned.
Cost of revenue: Consists primarily of compensation-related expenses and costs incurred for the creation of editorial, promotional, and news content across all platforms, as well as amounts due to third-party websites and platforms to fulfill customers’ advertising campaigns. Web hosting and advertising serving platform costs are also included in cost of revenue.
Sales and marketing: Consists primarily of compensation-related expenses for sales employees. In addition, sales and marketing expenses include advertising costs and market research.
General and administrative: Consists of compensation-related expenses for corporate employees. Also, it consists of expenses for facilities, professional services fees, insurance costs, and other general overhead costs. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars due to the growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as legal, accounting, director and officer insurance premiums, investor relations and other costs associated with operating as a public company.
Research and development: Consists primarily of compensation-related expenses incurred for the development of, enhancements to, and maintenance of our website, technology platforms, data collection and infrastructure. Research and development expenses that do not meet the criteria for capitalization are expensed as incurred.
Depreciation and amortization: Represents depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of intangible assets and capitalized software costs.
Other (expense) income, net: Consists of foreign exchange gains and losses, gains and losses on investments, and other miscellaneous income and expenses.
Interest expense, net: Consists of interest expense incurred on our borrowings, net of interest income on highly liquid short-term investments.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities: Reflects the changes in warrant liabilities which is primarily based on the market price of our Public Warrants listed on Nasdaq under the symbol “BZFDW.”
Change in fair value of derivative liability: In December 2021, we issued $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of unsecured convertible notes due 2026 that contain redemption features which we determined were embedded derivatives to be recognized as liabilities and measured at fair value. At the end of each reporting period, changes in the estimated fair value during the period were recorded as a change in the fair value of derivative liability.
Loss on disposition of subsidiaries: Represents the net losses recognized during 2021 on dispositions of certain former HuffPost subsidiaries, and during 2020 on the disposition of our operations in Brazil.
Income tax (benefit) provision: Represents federal, state and local taxes based on income in multiple domestic and international jurisdictions.
Results of Operations:
Comparison of results for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The following tables set forth our consolidated statement of operations data for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue(1):
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Revenue
Total revenue as follows (in thousands):
2021 Compared to 2020
Advertising revenue increased $56.1 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by a $54.8 million, or 54%, increase in advertising on our owned and operated properties and a $1.3 million, or 3%, increase in advertising on third-party platforms. The increase in advertising revenues on our owned and operated properties reflects an 8% increase in the number of programmatic impressions delivered and a 20% increase in overall pricing. In addition, the acquisitions of HuffPost and Complex Networks contributed $24.7 million and $4.1 million of advertising revenue, respectively. The increase in advertising revenues from third-party platforms reflects a contribution of $2.0 million from the C Acquisition. Excluding the impact of Complex Networks, advertising revenue decreased reflecting a 16% decline in the number of programmatic impressions delivered, which was substantially offset by an 18% increase in overall pricing. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we experienced a decline in impressions delivered on third-party platforms primarily due to a decline in Facebook-related impressions which we expect will continue in 2022.
Content revenue increased $10.4 million, or 9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by the acquisition of Complex Networks in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Commerce and other revenue increased by $9.8 million, or 19%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily reflecting an increase in the number of purchases generated driven by the growth in online shopping. In the fourth quarter of 2021 we experienced
a decrease in the number of purchases primarily due to a decline in Facebook referred traffic. We expect these headwinds to continue in 2022 and for these factors to negatively impact our Commerce revenue next year.
2020 Compared to 2019
Advertising revenue increased by $21.3 million, or 17%, reflecting a 54% increase in the number of direct sold ad impressions and a 39% increase in programmatic impressions across our owned and operated properties, driven by the 7% increase in Time Spent on our owned and operated properties and a shift in customers’ spend from content to advertising and a 15% increase in overall pricing for programmatic advertising on Facebook, partially offset by an overall decrease in pricing for direct sold advertising of 10% and programmatic advertising of 24% across our owned and operated properties and YouTube reflecting downward pressure driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and a 12% decrease in programmatic impressions on Facebook and YouTube, reflecting changes in their respective optimization strategies of these platforms.
Content revenue decreased by $31.0 million, or 21%, reflecting our shift in strategy to focus on the production of lower-cost content, as well as a shift in customers’ spend from content to advertising, largely in response to disruption from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Commerce and other revenue increased $13.2 million, or 34%, reflecting an increase in the number of orders generated driven by the growth in online shopping.
Cost of revenue:
2021 Compared to 2020
Cost of revenue increased by $67.1 million, or 48%, primarily driven by increases in compensation costs of $30.0 million and increases in other cost of sales reflecting the growth in revenue. The increase in compensation costs was principally driven by $21.2 million related to the additional headcount associated with HuffPost, $3.2 million of severance costs incurred in Q1 2021 related to the restructuring of HuffPost, $2.7 million of stock-based compensation primarily associated with the cumulative catch-up adjustment recorded in Q4 2021 with respect to the Liquidity 2 RSUs, and $2.0 million related to the additional headcount associated with Complex Networks.
2020 Compared to 2019
Cost of revenue decreased by $10.1 million, or 7%, principally reflecting the change in mix of our revenues towards our higher margin Advertising and Commerce products, and a shift to the production of lower-cost content assets, as well as a $0.6 million net decrease in compensation costs related to the full-year impact of our 2019 restructuring and comparison against the $4.4 million restructuring charge in 2019. These decreases were partially offset by $8.7 million of additional costs related to a shift in our international headcount from sales and marketing to content production within cost of revenue as part of a shift in strategy to produce more localized content.
Sales and marketing:
2021 Compared to 2020
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $4.3 million, or 8%, principally reflecting a $4.0 million increase in compensation costs. The increase in compensation costs was primarily driven by $4.8 million of stock-based compensation primarily associated with the cumulative catch-up adjustment recorded in Q4 2021 with respect to the Liquidity 2 RSUs and $2.7 million related to the additional
headcount associated with Complex Networks, partially offset by $3.5 million decrease in compensation driven by the savings from a workforce reduction during 2020. There was an additional $0.5 million decrease in events, travel and entertainment costs as we continued to operate in a remote working environment in 2021 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
2020 Compared to 2019
Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $29.2 million, or 37%, principally reflecting a $9.7 million decrease in compensation costs primarily related to the unification of our sales organization and leadership team in 2020 and the full-year impact of our 2019 restructuring, and an $8.7 million reduction in costs related to a shift in our international headcount from sales and marketing to content production within cost of revenue as part of a shift in strategy to produce more localized content. The decrease also reflects a $4.3 million decrease in costs related to travel and entertainment and events as a result of COVID-19, a $2.5 million reduction in expenditures on consulting, and the comparison against the $1.6 million restructuring charge in 2019.
General and administrative:
2021 Compared to 2020
General and administrative expenses increased by $29.5 million, or 36%, principally reflecting a $19.8 million increase in compensation costs. The increase in compensation costs was primarily driven by $14.1 million of stock-based compensation primarily associated with the cumulative catch-up adjustment recorded in Q4 2021 with respect to the Liquidity 2 RSUs, $4.0 million attributable to additional headcount reflecting the growth of the business, including the acquisition of Complex Networks, and cross-departmental preparation for becoming a public company, and $1.8 million related to compensation increases for existing headcount. Additionally, there was a $14.3 million increase in expenses principally associated with the Business Combination which are non-recurring in nature, and $1.3 million of incremental fees associated with public company readiness to establish our public company structure and processes. This is partially offset by a $8.0 million decrease in rent expense reflecting the comparison against $3.5 million of costs incurred in Q3 2020 related to the early termination of a portion of our office space in Los Angeles and run-rate savings in rent expense as we reduced our real estate footprint. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars due to the growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as legal, accounting, director and officer insurance premiums, investor relations and other costs associated with operating as a public company.
2020 Compared to 2019
General and administrative expenses decreased by $4.4 million, or 5%, principally reflecting a $3.7 million decrease in compensation costs, including $1.5 million related to headcount reduction and the comparison against the $2.2 million restructuring charge in 2019, and a $3.2 million decrease in employee meals, travel and entertainment, largely as a result of COVID-19. These decreases were partially offset by a $2.6 million increase in legal fees, primarily related to the HuffPost Acquisition.
Research and development:
2021 Compared to 2020
Research and development expenses increased by $7.3 million, or 41%, principally reflecting a $4.5 million increase in compensation expenses driven by $3.4 million increase in compensation costs due to a lower proportion of compensation related to capitalizable projects and increase in headcount associated with the HuffPost Acquisition, $0.9 million of stock-based compensation primarily associated with the cumulative catch-up adjustment recorded in Q4 2021 with respect to the Liquidity 2 RSUs, as well as increases in consulting costs of $2.2 million related to the integration of HuffPost. We expect research and development expenses to increase in the future as we continue to invest in our technology.
2020 Compared to 2019
Research and development expenses decreased by $3.5 million, or 16%, principally reflecting a $1.5 million decrease in compensation expense driven by a higher proportion of compensation costs related to capitalizable projects in 2020, and the comparison against the $1.4 million restructuring charge in 2019.
Depreciation and amortization:
2021 Compared to 2020
Depreciation and amortization increased by $5.4 million, or 31%, as a result of $3.4 million of amortization of intangible assets associated with the HuffPost Acquisition and C Acquisition, as well as increased amortization of capitalized software costs.
2020 Compared to 2019
Depreciation and amortization decreased by $2.0 million, or 10%, principally reflecting lower expenditures on software development projects and fixed assets in the prior year.
Other (expense) income, net:
NM - not meaningful
2021 Compared to 2020
The change from other income, net of $1.6 million to other expense, net of $2.7 million principally reflects unrealized foreign exchange losses of $1.8 million in 2021 driven by unfavorable movements in exchange rates as opposed to unrealized foreign exchange gains of $1.2 million in 2020 as well as comparison against a non-recurring $0.5 million unrealized gain on remeasurement of our investment in a private company during 2020.
2020 Compared to 2019
Other income, net decreased by $nil, or 0%, primarily as a result of termination fees related to our secured borrowing facility in 2020, partially offset by an increase in foreign exchange gains.
Interest (expense) income, net:
NM - not meaningful
2021 Compared to 2020
The change is primarily related to increased interest expense associated with our $150.0 million convertible notes due 2026 as well as other borrowings which were outstanding for all of 2021 as opposed to seven months in 2020.
2020 Compared to 2019
The year ended December 31, 2019 experienced interest income due to the sale of highly liquid short-term investments whereas the year ended December 31, 2020 experienced interest expense associated with our financings.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a $4.7 million gain on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities.
Change in fair value of derivative liability:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain of $26.7 million due to a change in the estimated fair value of the derivative liability.
Loss on disposition of subsidiaries:
2021 Compared to 2020
The 2021 activity is primarily related to losses related to the dispositions of our former subsidiaries, HuffingtonPost Korea, Ltd. and HuffingtonPost Italia S.R.L., partially offset by a gain on disposition related to our former subsidiary, Le HuffingtonPost SAS.
2020 Compared to 2019
The 2020 activity is related to loss related to the disposition of our operations in Brazil.
Income tax provision (benefit) provision:
Income tax provision (benefit)
NM - not meaningful
2021 Compared to 2020
For the year ended December 31 2021, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $26.4 million related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The Company’s effective tax rate of 5,000.8% differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to (i) the partial release of the Company’s U.S. valuation allowance as certain business combinations consummated during 2021 created a source of future taxable income, offset by (ii) an income tax provision for foreign taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an income tax provision of $0.9 million related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The Company’s effective tax rate of 7.8% differed from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets that were not realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company continued to maintain a valuation allowance against its U.S. and certain foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
2020 Compared to 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an income tax provision of $0.9 million related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The Company’s effective tax rate of 7.8% differed from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets that were not realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $0.4 million related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The Company’s effective tax rate of 1.0% differed from the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets that were not realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis.
The change from an income tax benefit of $0.4 million in 2019 to an income tax provision of $0.9 million in 2020 was primarily driven by the generation of net income in 2020 as compared to net loss incurred in 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and represents a key metric used by management and our board of directors to measure the operational strength and performance of our business, to establish budgets, and to develop operational goals for managing our business. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), excluding the impact of net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests, income tax provision (benefit), interest expense, interest income, other income, net, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, change in fair value of warrant liabilities, change in fair value of derivative liability, restructuring costs, public company readiness costs, and other non-cash and non-recurring items that management believes are not indicative of ongoing operations.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is relevant and useful information for investors because it allows investors to view performance in a manner similar to the method used by our management. There are limitations to use of Adjusted EBITDA and our Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non- GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered a substitute for income (loss) from operations, net income (loss), or net income (loss) attributable to BuzzFeed, Inc. that we have reported in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation from Net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA
The following table reconciles consolidated net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2021, reflects costs associated with involuntary terminations of employees across various roles and levels as part of the integration of the HuffPost Acquisition. For 2019, reflects costs associated with involuntary terminations of employees across various roles and levels in an effort to better position us to execute on our strategy.
(2) Reflects $15.3 million of one-time legal, advisory, consulting and incremental compensation expenses associated with the Business Combination.
(3) Reflects $1.3 million of public company readiness costs associated with the establishment of our public company structure and processes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below), as well as cash generated from operations. Our cash and cash equivalents consist of demand deposits with financial institutions and investments in money market funds and totaled $79.7 million at December 31, 2021.
We believe that our operating cash flows, together with cash and cash equivalents on hand and amounts available for borrowing under our revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. To the extent existing cash, operating cash flows, and amounts available for borrowing are insufficient to fund future activities, we may need to raise additional funds. In the future, we may attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities or through equity-linked or debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we raise additional financing by the incurrence of additional indebtedness, we may be subject to increased fixed payment obligations and could also be subject to additional restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any future indebtedness we incur may result in terms that could be unfavorable to equity investors. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. The inability to raise capital could adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives.
Revolving Credit Facility
We have a $50.0 million revolving credit facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”), maturing in December 2023. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility are generally limited to 95% of qualifying investment grade accounts receivable and 90% of qualifying non-investment grade accounts receivable, subject to adjustment at the discretion of the lenders. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at LIBOR, subject to a floor rate of 0.75%, plus a margin of 3.75% to 4.25%, depending on the level of our utilization of the Revolving Credit Facility. The Revolving Credit Facility is subject to a monthly minimum utilization of $15.0 million and also includes an unused commitment fee of 0.375%. The Revolving Credit Facility was amended and restated in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, namely to, among other things, add the Company and certain other entities as guarantors.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, letters of credit totaling $15.5 million were issued under the Revolving Credit Facility which reduced the remaining borrowing capacity by the same amount. These letters of credit were issued in favor of our landlords, relieving us of the requirement to maintain $15.5 million of cash as collateral. As a result, the $15.5 million of restricted cash as of December 31, 2020 is no longer restricted.
The Revolving Credit Facility includes covenants that, among other things, require us to maintain at least $25.0 million of unrestricted cash at all times and limit our ability to incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, pay dividends, hold unpermitted investments, repurchase or redeem equity interests or make material changes to the business. We were in compliance with the financial covenant as of December 31, 2021.
The Revolving Credit Facility is secured by a first priority security interest on the Company’s and the other borrowers’ and guarantors’ cash, accounts receivable, books and records and related assets.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility of $28.5 million and remaining borrowing capacity of $5.4 million.
Convertible Notes
In connection with the Business Combination, we completed the issuance of $150.0 million of unsecured convertible notes, due 2026 (the “Notes”). The Notes bear interest at a rate of 8.50% per annum, payable semi-annually. The Notes are convertible into
approximately 12,000,000 shares of our Class A common stock at an initial conversion price of $12.50 and mature on December 3, 2026.
We may, at our election, force conversion of the Notes after the third anniversary of the issuance of the Notes, subject to a holder’s prior right to convert and certain other conditions, if the volume-weighted average trading price of our Class A common stock is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price for more than 20 trading days during a period of 30 consecutive trading days. In the event that a holder of the Notes elects to convert its Notes after the one year anniversary, and prior to the three-year anniversary, of the issuance of the Notes, we will be obligated to pay an amount equal to: (i) from the one year anniversary of the issuance of the Notes to the two year anniversary of the issuance of the Notes, an amount equal to 18 month’s interest declining ratably on a monthly basis to 12 month’s interest on the aggregate principal amount of the Notes so converted and (ii) from the two year anniversary of the issuance of the Notes to the three year anniversary of the issuance of the Notes, an amount equal to 12 month’s interest declining ratably on a monthly basis to zero month’s interest, in each case, on the aggregate principal amount of the Note so converted (the “Interest Make-Whole Payment”). The Interest Make-Whole Payment will be payable in cash. Without limiting a holder’s right to convert the Notes at its option, interest will cease to accrue on the Notes during any period in which the Company would otherwise be entitled to force conversion of the Notes, but is not permitted to do so solely due to the failure of a trading volume condition specified in the indenture governing the Notes.
Each holder of a Note will have the right to cause us to repurchase for cash all or a portion of the Notes held by such holder (i) at any time after the third anniversary of the closing date, at a price equal to par plus accrued and unpaid interest; or (ii) at any time upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the indenture governing the Notes), at a price equal to 101% of par plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The indenture governing the Notes includes restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur additional debt or liens, make restricted payments or investments, dispose of significant assets, transfer intellectual property, or enter into transactions with affiliates.
Cash flows provided by (used in) category were as follows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $26.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by the impact of expenditures of $12.4 million on capitalized production costs related to three feature films and $11.2 million of expenditures on costs associated with the C Acquisition and preparation to become a public company.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $27.6 million, an increase of $47.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was principally driven by net income adjusted for non-cash items of $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a net loss adjusted for non-cash items of $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $208.0 million, which consists of $189.9 million of cash spent for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, $11.0 million of expenditures on internal-use software and $5.0 million of capital expenditures.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $14.8 million, which principally consisted of expenditures on internal-use software of $9.8 million and fixed assets of $4.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by investing activities was $16.4 million which principally consisted of proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $25.0 million, partially offset by expenditures on internal-use software of $8.2 million. Prior to 2019, we invested excess cash from a prior issuance of preferred stock in U.S. Treasury Bills. However, we curtailed this practice and the last maturities of securities purchased under this program occurred during 2019.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $181.8 million, principally consisting of $143.8 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes, $35.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to the equity investment in us by an affiliate of Verizon, $7.7 million of borrowings in excess of repayments from our Revolving Credit Facility, and $7.0 million of proceeds from exercise of stock options, partially offset by $11.7 million of proceeds from the reverse recapitalization, net of costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $19.5 million, consisting of $19.9 million of borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, which was established during 2020, partially offset by the impact of a $0.6 million early termination fee paid in connection with the extinguishment of our previous secured borrowing facility.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was limited to proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations for office space under non-cancelable operating leases with various expiration dates through 2029 as well as repayment of borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and Notes. Refer to Note 17 - Commitments and Contingencies in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more details.
In September 2018, concurrent with an investment in a private company, we agreed to guarantee the lease of the investee’s premises in New York. In October 2020, the investee renewed its lease agreement, and our prior guarantee was replaced with a new guarantee of up to $5.4 million. The amount of the guarantee is reduced as the investee makes payments under the lease. As of December 31, 2021, the maximum amount under the guarantee was $2.7 million, and no liability was recognized with respect to the guarantee.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and related notes in accordance with GAAP. In doing so, we have to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosure. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or operating results would be affected.
We consider an accounting judgment, estimate or assumption to be critical when (1) the estimate or judgment is complex in nature or requires a high degree of judgment and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates or assumptions could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our critical accounting policies and estimates are discussed below.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in a manner that depicts the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
We generate advertising revenue from managing a customer’s internet advertising campaigns to target markets both via our proprietary sites as well as premium publishers. Our performance obligations typically consist of a promised number of ads delivered or a promised number of actions related to the ads (such as impressions or views). Advertising revenue is recognized in the period that the related views, impressions, or actions by users on advertisements are delivered. We derive a portion of our revenue from sales of advertising programmatically through third party platforms and intermediaries. Given the involvement of multiple parties in these
transactions, significant judgment is required in identifying our customer and determining the transaction price. In some cases, we are unable to determine the transaction price paid by the end customer. In these cases, we recognize as revenue the net amount remitted to us by the intermediary.
We generate revenue from creating content, including promotional content and customer advertising. Our performance obligations consist of BuzzFeed-created content for use by its customers or the delivery of a promised number of actions related to the content (impressions or views). The revenue is recognized when the content, or the related action, is delivered.
We participate in multiple marketplace arrangements with third parties whereby we provide affiliate links which redirect the audience to purchase products and/or services from the third parties. When the participant purchases a product and/or service, we receive a commission fee for that sale from the third parties. The revenue is recognized when a successful sale is made and the commission is earned.
Business Combinations
Upon acquisition of a company, we determine if the transaction is a business combination, which is accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, once control is obtained of a business, the assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributed to noncontrolling interests, are recorded at fair value. We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. One of the most significant estimates relates to the determination of the fair value of these assets and liabilities. The determination of the fair values is based on estimates and judgments made by management, including estimates of, among other things, future expected cash flows, discount rates, or expected costs to reproduce an asset. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Measurement period adjustments are reflected at the time identified, up through the conclusion of the measurement period, which is the time at which all information for determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is received, and is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date. We may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and multiple foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision (benefit) and evaluating our income tax positions. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which the temporary differences are expected to be reversed. We evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets and establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position.
The Company made a policy election to treat the income tax due on U.S. inclusion of the global intangible low taxed income (“GILTI”) provisions as a period expense when incurred.
Stock Based Compensation
Stock based awards granted are measured based on the grant-date fair value.
The fair value of stock options granted is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The risk-free rate for the expected term of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. Because our common stock was not publicly traded prior to the Business Combination, we have historically estimated the expected volatility of our awards from the historical volatility of selected public companies within similar industries with comparable characteristics to us. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar companies to estimate the expected volatility until sufficient historical information regarding the volatility of the share price of our common stock becomes available. The expected dividend rate is zero based on the fact that we currently have no history or expectation of paying cash dividends on our common stock. The expected term represents the period of time the stock options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the “simplified method.” Under the “simplified method,” the expected term of an option is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. We use the “simplified method” due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected term of the stock options.
Our restricted stock units granted prior to the Business Combination vest upon the satisfaction of both a service condition and a liquidity condition. The liquidity condition for 2.5 million restricted stock units is satisfied upon the occurrence of a sale transaction (“Acquisition”) or the completion of an initial public offering. The Two-Step Merger did not result in the satisfaction of this liquidity condition as it did not meet the definition of an Acquisition per the award agreements. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $21.2 million of unrecognized compensation costs related to these restricted stock units. The closing of the Two-Step Merger satisfied the liquidity condition in 2.7 million restricted stock units. As a result, $16.0 million of compensation cost associated with service rendered prior to the Two-Step Merger was recognized at upon the closing of the Two-Step Merger and compensation cost will be recognized over the remaining requisite service period.
Common Stock Valuations
Since our common stock was not publicly traded, the fair value of our common stock prior to the Business Combination was determined by our board of directors, with input from management, taking into account the value determined by a third-party valuation firm. Our board of directors intended all stock options granted to have an exercise price per share not less than the per share fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. The assumptions we used in the valuation models were based on future expectations combined with management judgment, and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of the date of each option grant, including the following:
● our financial performance, forecasted operating results, capital structure and stage of development;
● our management team and business strategy;
● external market factors affecting our industry;
● the liquidation preferences, rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock;
● the lack of an active public or private market for our common stock;
● the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as a sale transaction or an initial public offering; and
● market performance analyses of similar publicly-traded companies in our industry.
In valuing our common stock at various dates, our board of directors determined the equity value of our business using various valuation methods including combinations of income and market approaches with input from management.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. After consummation of the Business Combination, the fair value of our common stock is now determined based on its quoted market price.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is an operating segment, or one level below. We test goodwill for impairment annually on October 1, or more frequently if an event occurs or if circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying value. We have determined we have one reporting unit for the purposes of allocating and testing goodwill.
For the 2021 annual impairment test, we performed a qualitative assessment. The assessment included, but was not limited to, consideration of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, actual and expected financial performance, and the valuation ascribed to the company in the Business Combination. Based on the qualitative assessment, considering the aggregation of the relevant factors, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount and therefore performing a quantitative impairment test was unnecessary.
A quantitative goodwill impairment test, when performed, includes estimating the fair value of a reporting unit using an income approach based on a discounted cash flow analysis and/or a market-based approach. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make
various judgmental assumptions, including assumptions about the timing and amount of future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We review our property and equipment and capitalized software costs for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset group to be tested for possible impairment, we first compare undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset to its carrying value. If the carrying value of the long-lived asset is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent the carrying value exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques which may include discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary.
Valuation of derivative liability
We have recognized a derivative liability related to the Notes. To measure the fair value of the derivative liability, we compare the calculated value of the Notes with the indicated value of the host instrument, defined as the straight-debt component of the Notes. The difference between the value of the straight-debt host instrument and the fair value of the Notes results in the value of the derivative liability. The value of the straight-debt host instrument is estimated based on a binomial lattice model, excluding the conversion option and the make-whole payment upon conversion. Significant assumptions are used in the valuation of the derivative liability, including the expected volatility of our stock price, expected term of the debt, and expected risk-free interest rate. The assumptions used in computing the fair value of the derivative liability reflect our best estimates, but involve uncertainty relating to market and other conditions, many of which are outside of our control. Changes in these assumptions, including the price of our Class A common stock, may materially impact the fair value of the derivative liability.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Accounting Election
Section 102 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We are an emerging growth company and have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period. As a result, the consolidated financial statements of BuzzFeed, Inc. may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting standards as of public company effective dates.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an emerging growth company, we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things: (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002; (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (iii) comply with the requirement of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding the communication of critical audit matters in the auditor’s report on the financial statements; and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of 890’s initial public offering, (ii) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates, or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.