Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition & Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is provided to enhance the understanding of, and should be read together with, our consolidated financial statements and the Notes to those statements that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Unless otherwise specifically noted, all years refer to our fiscal year which ends on June 30.
Overview
We are a leading provider of Expertise and Technology to Enterprise and Mission customers, supporting national security missions and government modernization/transformation in the intelligence, defense, and federal civilian sectors, both domestically and internationally. The demand for our Expertise and Technology, in large measure, is created by the increasingly complex network, systems, and information environments in which governments and businesses operate, and by the need to stay current with emerging technology while increasing productivity, enhancing security, and, ultimately, improving performance.
Some of our key initiatives include the following:
•
Continue to grow organic revenues across our large, addressable market;
•
Deliver strong profitability and robust cash flows from operations;
•
Differentiate ourselves through our investments, including our strategic mergers and acquisition program, allowing us to enhance our current capabilities and create new customer access points;
•
Recruit and hire a world class workforce to execute on our growing backlog; and
•
Continue our unwavering commitment to our customers while supporting the communities in which we work and live.
Budgetary Environment
We carefully follow federal budget, legislative and contracting trends and activities and evolve our strategies to take these into consideration. On March 15, 2022, the President signed into law the omnibus appropriations bill that provides full-year funding for the government fiscal year ending September 30, 2022 (GFY22). Of the total approximately $1.5 trillion in discretionary funding, approximately $782 billion is for national defense and approximately $730 billion is for nondefense. These defense and nondefense funding levels represent increases of 5.6% and 6.7%, respectively, over GFY21 enacted levels. GFY22 defense spending in fact increased both over the President’s GFY22 budget request and the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) passed by Congress on December 27, 2021. Defense spending has generally increased over the last several years, and given the current global threat environment, including the conflict in Ukraine, this trend is likely to continue in GFY23. In fact, the President’s initial GFY23 budget proposal calls for an increase in aggregate defense spending of approximately 4% from GFY22 levels. In addition, funding for intelligence programs, including Military Intelligence Programs (MIP) and National Intelligence Programs (NIP), as well as cybersecurity-related programs, is also projected to increase in both GFY22 and GFY23.
While we view the budget environment as constructive and believe there is bipartisan support for continued investment in the areas of defense and national security, it is uncertain when in any particular GFY that appropriations bills will be passed. During those periods of time when appropriations bills have not been passed and signed into law, government agencies operate under a continuing resolution (CR). On September 30, 2021, the President signed a CR, a temporary measure allowing the government to continue operations through December 3, 2021 at prior year funding levels. A second CR was signed on December 3, 2021 that funded government operations through February 18, 2022, and a third CR was signed on February 18, 2022 to fund government operations until the final omnibus bill was passed and signed.
Depending on their scope, duration, and other factors, CRs can negatively impact our business due to delays in new program starts, delays in contract award decisions, and other factors. When a CR expires, unless appropriations bills have been passed by Congress and signed by the President, or a new CR is passed and signed into law, the government must cease operations, or shutdown, except in certain emergency situations or when the law authorizes continued activity. We continuously review our operations in an attempt to identify programs potentially at risk from CRs so that we can consider appropriate contingency plans.
Market Environment
Across our addressable market, we provide expertise and technology to government enterprise and mission customers. Based on the analysis of an independent market consultant retained by the Company, we believe that the total addressable market for our offerings is approximately $240 billion. Our addressable market is expected to continue to grow over the next several years. Approximately 70% of our revenue comes from defense-related customers, including those in the Intelligence Community (IC), with additional revenue coming from non-defense IC, homeland security, and other federal civilian customers.
We continue to align the Company’s capabilities with well-funded budget priorities and took steps to maintain a competitive cost structure in line with our expectations of future business opportunities. In light of these actions, as well as the budgetary environment discussed above, we believe we are well positioned to continue to win new business in our large addressable market. We believe that the following trends will influence the USG’s spending in our addressable market:
•
A stable-to-higher USG budget environment, particularly in defense and intelligence-related areas;
•
Increased focus on cyber, space, and the electromagnetic spectrum as key domains for National Security;
•
Increased spend on network and application modernization and enhancements to cyber security posture;
•
Increased investments in advanced technologies (e.g., Artificial Intelligence, 5G), particularly software-based technologies;
•
Increasing focus on near-peer competitors and other nation state threats;
•
Continued focus on counterterrorism, counterintelligence, and counter proliferation as key U.S. security concerns; and
•
Increased demand for innovation and speed of delivery.
We believe that our customers' use of lowest price/technically acceptable (LPTA) procurements, which contributed to pricing pressures in past years, has moderated, though price still remains an important factor in procurements. We also continue to see protests of major contract awards and delays in USG procurement activities. In addition, many of our federal government contracts require us to employ personnel with security clearances, specific levels of education and specific past work experience. Depending on the level of clearance, security clearances can be difficult and time-consuming to obtain and competition for skilled personnel in the information technology services industry is intense. Additional factors that could affect USG spending in our addressable market include changes in set-asides for small businesses, changes in budget priorities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and budgetary priorities limiting or delaying federal government spending in general.
Impact of COVID-19
We continue to take steps to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on our employees and our business. The impact of the continued spread of COVID-19 on our business will depend on future developments, which are uncertain and cannot be predicted, as well as other known factors outside our control. The surge of the Omicron variant of COVID-19, for example, resulted in increased positive cases broadly, including within the employee base of some of our government customers. As a result, some of our government customers have limited in-person meetings, reduced access to customer facilities, and have seen impacts to the normal operation of their business. We continue to work with our customers to implement appropriate risk mitigation efforts and alternative work arrangements, as necessary. The surge of Omicron and other COVID-19 variants, both in and outside the U.S., also continues to be one of many reasons for continued supply chain shortages.
Results of Operations
Our results of operations were as follows:
Revenues. The increase in revenues was primarily attributable to revenues from the four acquisitions completed in fiscal 2022.
Revenues by customer type with related percentages of revenues were as follows:
•
DoD revenues include expertise and technology provided to various Department of Defense customers.
•
Federal civilian agencies’ revenues primarily include expertise and technology provided to non-DoD agencies and departments of the U.S. federal government, including intelligence agencies and Departments of Justice, Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and State.
•
Commercial and other revenues primarily include expertise and technology provided to U.S. state and local governments, commercial customers, and certain foreign governments and agencies through our International reportable segment.
Direct Costs. The increase in direct costs was primarily attributable to the four acquisitions completed in fiscal 2022. As a percentage of revenues, total direct costs were 65.3% and 65.0% for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. Direct costs include direct labor, subcontractor costs, materials, and other direct costs.
Indirect Costs and Selling Expenses. The increase in indirect costs was primarily attributable to the four acquisitions completed in fiscal 2022 and to an increase in fringe benefit expenses. As a percentage of revenues, total indirect costs were 24.5% and 24.0% for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization. The increase in depreciation and amortization was primarily attributable to intangible amortization from the four acquisitions completed in fiscal 2022 and increased depreciation from higher property and equipment balances.
Interest Expense and Other, Net. The increase in interest expense and other, net was primarily attributable to higher average outstanding debt balances and the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs related to the December 13, 2021 Credit Facility Amendment.
Income Taxes. The income tax provisions represent effective tax rates of 19.3% and 8.4% for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The effective income tax rate increased primarily as a result of the tax benefit recognized from the method changes elected at the end of fiscal 2021. See “Note 16 - Income Taxes” in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Contract Backlog
The Company’s backlog represents value on existing contracts that has the potential to be recognized into revenues as work is performed. The Company includes unexercised option years in its backlog and excludes the value of task orders that may be awarded under multiple award indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity (“IDIQ”) vehicles until such task orders are issued.
The Company’s backlog as of period end is either funded or unfunded:
•
Funded backlog represents contract value for which funding has been appropriated less revenues previously recognized on these contracts.
•
Unfunded backlog represents estimated values that have the potential to be recognized into revenue from executed contracts for which funding has not been appropriated and unexercised contract options.
As of June 30, 2022, the Company had total backlog of $23.3 billion, compared with $24.2 billion a year ago, a decrease of 3.7%. Funded backlog as of June 30, 2022 was $3.2 billion. The total backlog consists of remaining performance obligations plus unexercised options. See “Note 5 - Revenues” in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to remaining performance obligations.
There is no assurance that all funded or potential contract value will result in revenues being recognized. The Company continues to monitor backlog as it is subject to change from execution of new contracts, contract modifications or extensions, government deobligations, early terminations, or other factors. Based on this analysis, an adjustment to the period end balance may be required.
Revenues by Contract Type
The Company generates revenues under three basic contract types:
•
Cost-plus-fee contracts: This contract type provides for reimbursement of allowable direct expenses and allocable indirect expenses plus an additional negotiated fee. The fee component of the contract may include fixed fees, award fees and incentive fees. Fixed fees are fees that are negotiated and fixed at the inception of the contract. In general, award fees are more subjective in performance criteria and are earned based on overall cost, schedule, and technical performance as measured against contractual requirements. Incentive fees have more objective cost or performance criteria and generally contain a formula based on the relationship of actual costs incurred to target costs.
•
Fixed-price contracts: This contract type provides for a fixed-price for specified expertise and technology and is often used when there is more certainty regarding the estimated costs to complete the contractual statement of work. Since the contractor bears the risk of cost overruns, there is higher risk and potential profit associated with this contract type.
•
Time-and-materials contracts: This contract type provides for a fixed hourly rate for defined contractual labor categories, with reimbursement of billable material and other direct costs. For this contract type, the contractor bears the risk that its labor costs and allocable indirect expenses are greater than the fixed hourly rate defined within the contract.
As discussed further within Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our earnings and margins may vary based on the mix of our contract types. We generated the following revenues by contract type for the periods presented:
Effects of Inflation
During fiscal 2022, 58.6% of our revenues was generated under cost-reimbursable contracts which automatically adjust revenues to cover costs that are affected by inflation. 12.0% of our revenues was generated under time-and-materials contracts where we adjust labor rates periodically, as permitted. The remaining portion of our business is fixed-price and may span multiple years. We generally have been able to price our time-and-materials and fixed-price contracts in a manner that accommodates the rates of inflation experienced in recent years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Existing cash and cash equivalents and cash generated by operations are our primary sources of liquidity, as well as sales of receivables under our Master Accounts Receivable Purchase Agreement and available borrowings under our Credit Facility. As of June 30, 2022, we had $114.8 million in cash and cash equivalents.
The Company has a $3,200.0 million Credit Facility, which consists of an $1,975.0 million Revolving Facility and a $1,225.0 million Term Loan. The Revolving Facility is a secured facility that permits continuously renewable borrowings and has subfacilities of $100.0 million for same-day swing line borrowings and $25.0 million for stand-by letters of credit. As of June 30, 2022, $1,209.7 million was outstanding under the Term Loan, $533.0 million was outstanding under the Revolving Facility and no borrowings on the swing line.
The Term Loan is a five-year secured facility under which principal payments are due in quarterly installments of $7.7 million through December 31, 2023 and $15.3 million thereafter until the balance is due in full on December 13, 2026. The Credit Facility contains customary financial and restrictive covenants which we have been in compliance with since inception.
Interest rates applicable to loans under the Credit Facility are floating interest rates that, at our option, equal a base rate or a Eurodollar rate calculated based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus, in each case, an applicable margin based upon our consolidated total net leverage ratio. On July 27, 2017, the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority announced that LIBOR would be discontinued or become unavailable as a reference rate by the end of 2021 and LIBOR will be fully discontinued or become unavailable as a benchmark rate by June 2023. Although our Credit Facility includes provisions to facilitate the adoption by us and our lenders of an alternative benchmark in place of LIBOR no assurance can be made that such alternative benchmark rate will perform in a manger similar to LIBOR or result in interest rates that are at lease as favorable to us as those that would have resulted had LIBOR remained in effect, which could result in an increase in our interest expense.
See “Note 6 - Sales of Receivables” and “Note 12 - Debt” in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
On January 1, 2022, a provision of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 went into effect which eliminates the option to deduct domestic research and development costs in the year incurred and instead requires taxpayers to amortize such costs over five years. Congress may defer, modify, or repeal the provision, but the ultimate outcome is uncertain. If no new legislation is passed, the provision would go into effect for the Company’s fiscal year ending June 30, 2023 and is expected to decrease cash flows from operations by approximately $95.0 million and increase net deferred tax assets by a similar amount.
A summary of cash flow information is presented below:
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $153.3 million primarily as a result of a $264.2 million reduction in cash paid for income taxes, partially offset by a $52.5 million benefit in the prior year from deferrals of employer related social security taxes under the CARES Act compared to a payment of $46.5 million in the current year.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $262.5 million primarily as a result of a $259.2 million increase in cash used in acquisitions of businesses.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $169.4 million primarily as a result of a $499.3 million reduction in repurchases of common stock, partially offset by a $329.0 million decrease in net borrowings under our Credit Facility.
We believe that the combination of internally generated funds, available bank borrowings, and cash and cash equivalents on hand will provide the required liquidity and capital resources necessary to fund on-going operations, customary capital expenditures, debt service obligations, and other working capital requirements over the next twelve months. We may in the future seek to borrow additional amounts under a long-term debt security. Over the longer term, our ability to generate sufficient cash flows from operations necessary to fulfill the obligations under the Credit Facility and any other indebtedness we may incur will depend on our future financial performance which will be affected by many factors outside of our control, including current worldwide economic conditions and financial market conditions.
Contractual Obligations
For a description of the Company’s contractual obligations related to debt, leases, and retirement plans refer to “Note 10 - Leases”, “Note 12 - Debt”, and “Note 17 - Retirement Plans” in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, as of June 30, 2022 the Company had $46.6 million of deferred payments of the employer portion of social security taxes as permitted under the CARES Act which will be paid in December 2022.
Commitments and Contingencies
We are subject to a number of reviews, investigations, claims, lawsuits, other uncertainties and future obligations related to our business. For a discussion of these items, see “Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies” in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and accompanying notes. We consider the accounting policies and estimates addressed below to be the most important to our financial position and results of operations, either because of the significance of the financial statement item or because they require the exercise of significant judgment and/or use of significant estimates. Although we believe that the estimates are reasonable based on reasonably available facts, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods may differ.
We believe the following accounting policies require significant judgment due to the complex nature of the underlying transactions:
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates almost all of our revenues from three different types of contractual arrangements with the U.S. government: cost-plus-fee, fixed-price, and time-and-materials contracts. Our contracts with the U.S. government are generally subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and are competitively priced based on estimated costs of providing the contractual goods or services.
We account for a contract when the parties have approved the contract and are committed to perform on it, the rights of each party and the payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability is probable. At contract inception, the Company determines whether the goods or services to be provided are to be accounted for as a single performance obligation or as multiple performance obligations. This evaluation requires professional judgment as it may impact the timing and pattern of revenue recognition. If multiple performance obligations are identified, we generally use the cost plus a margin approach to determine the relative standalone selling price of each performance obligation.
When determining the total transaction price, the Company identifies both fixed and variable consideration elements within the contract. Variable consideration includes any amount within the transaction price that is not fixed, such as: award or incentive fees; performance penalties; unfunded contract value; or other similar items. For our contracts with award or incentive fees, the Company estimates the total amount of award or incentive fee expected to be recognized into revenue. Throughout the performance period, we recognize as revenue a constrained amount of variable consideration only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the cumulative amount recognized to date will not be required in a subsequent period. Our estimate of variable consideration is periodically adjusted based on significant changes in relevant facts and circumstances. In the period in which we can calculate the final amount of award or incentive fee earned - based on the receipt of the customer’s final performance score or determining that more objective, contractually-defined criteria have been fully satisfied - the Company will adjust our cumulative revenue recognized to date on the contract.
We generally recognize revenues over time throughout the performance period as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided on our services-type revenue arrangements. This continuous transfer of control for our U.S. government contracts is supported by the unilateral right of our customer to terminate the contract for a variety of reasons without having to provide justification for its decision. For our services-type revenue arrangements in which there are a repetitive amount of services that are substantially the same from one month to the next, the Company applies the series guidance. We use a variety of input and output methods that approximate the progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, including: costs incurred, labor hours expended, and time-elapsed measures for our fixed-price stand ready obligations. For certain contracts, primarily our cost-plus and time-and-materials services-type revenue arrangements, we apply the right-to-invoice practical expedient in which revenues are recognized in direct proportion to our present right to consideration for progress towards the complete satisfaction of the performance obligation.
When a performance obligation has a significant degree of interrelation or interdependence between one month’s deliverables and the next, when there is an award or incentive fee, or when there is a significant degree of customization or modification, the Company generally records revenue using a percentage of completion method. For these revenue arrangements, substantially all revenues are recognized over time using a cost-to-cost input method based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to total estimated costs at completion. When estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract exceed total revenues, a provision for the entire loss on the contract is recorded in the period in which the loss is determined.
Contract modifications are reviewed to determine whether they should be accounted for as part of the original performance obligation or as a separate contract. When contract modifications add distinct goods or services and increase the contract value by an amount that reflects the standalone selling price, those modifications are accounted for as separate contracts. When contract modifications include goods or services that are not distinct from those already provided, the Company records a cumulative adjustment to revenues based on a remeasurement of progress towards the complete satisfaction of the not yet fully delivered performance obligation.
Based on the critical nature of our contractual performance obligations, the Company may proceed with work based on customer direction prior to the completion and signing of formal contract documents. The Company has a formal review process for approving any such work that considers previous experiences with the customer, communications with the customer regarding funding status, and our knowledge of available funding for the contract or program.
Business Combinations
We record all tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination at fair value as of the acquisition date, with any excess purchase consideration recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities assumed, including intangible assets, requires management to make significant judgments about expected future cash flows, weighted-average cost of capital, discount rates, and expected long-term growth rates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may adjust provisional amounts recorded to reflect new information subsequently obtained regarding facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of consideration paid for an acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. We recognize purchased intangible assets in connection with our business acquisitions at fair value on the acquisition date. Goodwill and intangible assets, net represent 70.0% and 66.6% of our total assets as of June 30, 2022, and June 30, 2021, respectively.
We evaluate goodwill for both of our reporting units for impairment at least annually on the first day of the fiscal fourth quarter, or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The evaluation includes comparing the fair value of the relevant reporting unit to its respective carrying value, including goodwill, and utilizes both income and market approaches. The analysis relies on significant judgements and assumptions about expected future cash flows, weighted-average cost of capital, discount rates, expected long-term growth rates, and financial measures derived from observable market data of comparable public companies. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we completed our annual goodwill assessment and determined that each reporting unit’s fair value significantly exceeded its carrying value.
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized using the method that best reflects how their economic benefits are utilized or, if a pattern of economic benefits cannot be reliably determined, on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which is generally over periods ranging from one to twenty years. Intangible assets with finite lives are assessed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 3 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.