ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”), which contains forward-looking statements, should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes in Part IV, Item 15 of this report, the “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this report and the cautionary statements included throughout this report. The inclusion of supplementary analytical and related information herein may require us to make estimates and assumptions to enable us to fairly present, in all material respects, our analysis of trends and expectations with respect to our results of operations and financial position.
The following MD&A includes a discussion comparing our results in fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2020. For a discussion comparing our results from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 29, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Beginning in March 2020, COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread led to significant disruptions to our business as suggested and mandated social distancing and shelter-in-place orders led to the temporary closure of a number of restaurants across our portfolio while our remaining locations shifted to an off-premise only operating model on an interim basis. Reopening of restaurant dining rooms resumed, generally at reduced capacity, at various points since May 2020. While restrictions on the type of permitted operating model and occupancy capacity may continue to change, currently nearly all of our restaurants are operating with no capacity restrictions on indoor dining. The ongoing effects of COVID-19 and its variants, including, but not limited to, consumer behavior, capacity restrictions, mask and vaccination mandates, wage inflation, our ability to continue to staff our restaurants and disruptions in the supply chain, will determine the impact to our operating results and financial position. The impact to our operations has been most notable during the periods of greatest accelerating COVID-19 case counts. We have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs to address government regulations and the safety of our staff members and customers.
During fiscal 2020, we implemented the following measures to preserve liquidity and enhance financial flexibility in response to the impacts of COVID-19 on our business:
● Eliminated non-essential capital expenditures and expenses, suspended new unit development and reduced board, executive and corporate support staff compensation for approximately two quarters;
● Furloughed approximately 41,000 hourly staff members, a majority of whom we called back to work in the third quarter of fiscal 2020;
● Engaged in discussions with our landlords regarding ongoing rent obligations, including the potential deferral, abatement and/or restructuring of rent otherwise payable during the period of the COVID-19 pandemic related closure;
● Increased borrowings under our credit facility, which were repaid during fiscal 2020;
● Issued convertible preferred stock, which was either repurchased or converted into common stock during fiscal 2021; and
● Suspended the dividend on our common stock and share repurchases with such suspensions continuing through fiscal 2021.
We may take additional mitigation actions in the future such as raising additional financing, not declaring future dividends, further suspending capital spending, implementing additional furloughs or modifying our operating strategies. Some of these measures may have an adverse impact on our business.
See Item 1A - Risk Factors - Risks Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
General
The Cheesecake Factory Incorporated is a leader in experiential dining. We are culinary forward and relentlessly focused on hospitality. We currently own and operate 306 restaurants throughout the United States and Canada under brands including 208 The Cheesecake Factory®, 29 North Italia® and a collection within our Fox Restaurant Concepts business. Internationally, 29 The Cheesecake Factory® restaurants operate under licensing agreements. Our bakery division operates two facilities that produce quality cheesecakes and other baked products for our restaurants, international licensees and third-party bakery customers.
Overview
Our strategy is driven by our commitment to customer satisfaction and is focused primarily on menu innovation, service and operational execution to continue to differentiate ourselves from other restaurant concepts, as well as to drive competitively strong performance that is sustainable. Financially, we are focused on prudently managing expenses at our restaurants, bakery facilities and corporate support center, and leveraging our size to make the best use of our purchasing power.
Investing in new Company-owned restaurant development is our top long-term capital allocation priority, with a focus on opening our concepts in premier locations within both new and existing markets. We expect our acquisition of North Italia and FRC to further accelerate and diversify our growth opportunities. For The Cheesecake Factory concept, we target an average cash-on-cash return on investment of approximately 20% to 25% at the unit level. We target an average cash-on-cash return on investment of approximately 35% for the North Italia concept and 25% to 30% for the FRC concepts. Returns are affected by the cost to build restaurants, the level of revenues that each restaurant can deliver and our ability to maximize the profitability of restaurants. Investing in new restaurant development that meets our return on investment criteria is expected to support achieving mid-teens Company-level return on invested capital.
Our overall revenue growth is primarily driven by revenues from new restaurant openings and increases in comparable restaurant sales. Changes in comparable restaurant sales come from variations in customer traffic as well as in average check.
For The Cheesecake Factory concept, our strategy is to increase comparable restaurant sales by growing average check and stabilizing customer traffic through (1) continuing to offer innovative, high quality menu items that offer customers a wide range of options in terms of flavor, price and value, (2) focusing on service and hospitality with the goal of delivering an exceptional customer experience and (3) continuing to provide our customers with convenient options for off-premise dining, as we believe there is opportunity for a longer-term elevation of our off-premise mix compared to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels. We are continuing our efforts on a number of initiatives, including a greater focus on increasing customer throughput in our restaurants, leveraging our gift card program, working with a third party to provide delivery services for our restaurants, increasing customer awareness of our online ordering capabilities, augmenting our marketing programs, enhancing our training programs and leveraging our customer satisfaction measurement platform.
Average check is driven by menu price increases and/or changes in menu mix. We generally update The Cheesecake Factory menus twice each year, and our philosophy is to use price increases to help offset key operating cost increases in a manner that balances protecting both our margins and customer traffic levels. We have historically targeted menu price increases of approximately 2% to 3% annually, utilizing a market-based strategy to help mitigate cost pressure in higher-wage geographies. Due to the cost pressures we are currently experiencing, particularly in commodities, in the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we implemented price increases above our historical levels to protect margins. We will continue to consider the cost environment when evaluating future menu price increases. In addition, on a regular basis, we carefully consider opportunities to adjust our menu offerings or ingredients to help manage product availability and cost.
On October 2, 2019, we completed the acquisition of North Italia and FRC, including Flower Child (the “Acquisition”), which we expect will further accelerate and diversify our revenue following the COVID-19 pandemic. The results of operations, financial position and cash flows of the acquired businesses are included in our consolidated financial statements as of the closing date of the Acquisition.
Margins are subject to fluctuations in commodity costs, labor, restaurant-level occupancy expenses, general and administrative (“G&A”) expenses and preopening expenses. Our objective is to recapture our pre-COVID-19 pandemic margins and longer-term to drive margin expansion, by leveraging incremental sales to increase restaurant-level margins at The Cheesecake Factory concept, leveraging our bakery operations, international and consumer packaged goods royalty revenue streams and G&A expense over time, and optimizing our restaurant portfolio.
We plan to employ a balanced capital allocation strategy, comprised of: investing in new restaurants that are expected to meet our targeted returns, repaying borrowings under our Revolving Facility and reinstating our dividend and share repurchase programs, the latter of which offsets dilution from our equity compensation program and supports our earnings per share growth. Our Board is actively evaluating capital distribution strategies for fiscal 2022.
Longer-term, we believe our domestic revenue growth (comprised of our targeted annual unit growth of 7%, in aggregate across concepts, and comparable sales growth), combined with margin expansion, planned debt repayments and an anticipated capital return program will support our long-term financial objective of 13% to 14% total return to shareholders, on average. We define our total return as earnings per share growth plus our dividend yield. (See Item 1A - Risk Factors - “Our stock price could be adversely affected if our performance falls short of our financial guidance and/or market expectations.”)
Results of Operations
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, information from our consolidated statements of income/(loss) expressed as percentages of revenues.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Revenues
Revenues increased 47.6% to $2,927.5 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $1,983.2 million for fiscal 2020, primarily due to a increase in comparable restaurant sales, reflecting the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal 2020, as well as additional revenue related to the acquired restaurants and new restaurant openings.
The Cheesecake Factory comparable sales increased by 44.0%, or $686.6 million, from fiscal 2020 and increased 3.3% from fiscal 2019. The increase from fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by increased customer traffic of 41.4% primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, and an increase in average check of 2.6 % (based on an increase of 3.0% in menu pricing, partially offset by a 0.4% negative change in mix). We implemented effective menu price increases of approximately 1.5% in both the first and third quarters of fiscal 2021. Sales through the off-premise channel comprised approximately 32% of our restaurant sales during fiscal 2021 as compared to 43% in fiscal 2020 as many customers have returned to on-premise dining, whereas consumer behavior had shifted towards the off-premise channel during the prior year period due to the pandemic. However, off-premise sales mix remains higher than the pre-pandemic level of 16% during fiscal 2019. We account for each off-premise order as one customer for traffic measurement purposes. Therefore, average check is generally higher for off-premise orders as most of these orders are for more than one customer. In turn, the lower mix of sales in the off-premise channel in fiscal 2021 was the primary driver of the negative change in mix and also contributed to the increase in traffic, along with the broader impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Cheesecake Factory average sales per restaurant operating week increased 43.1% to $213,165 in fiscal 2021 from $148,939 in fiscal 2020. Total operating weeks at The Cheesecake Factory restaurants increased 1.1% to 10,758 in fiscal 2021 compared to 10,642 in the prior year.
North Italia comparable sales increased approximately 48% from fiscal 2020 and increased approximately 7% compared to fiscal 2019. The increase from fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by increased customer traffic of 45% primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, and an increase in average check of 3.0% (based on an increase of 3.5% in menu pricing, partially offset by a 0.5% negative change in mix). North Italia average sales per restaurant operating week increased 42.0% to $127,146 in fiscal 2021 from $89,515 in fiscal 2020. Total operating weeks at North Italia increased 18.0% to 1,352 in fiscal 2021 compared to 1,146 in the prior year. Revenues for North Italia, Flower Child and the other FRC brands totaled $444.0 million in fiscal 2021.
Restaurants become eligible to enter the comparable sales base in their 19th month of operation. At December 28, 2021, there were three The Cheesecake Factory restaurants and six North Italia restaurants not yet in the comparable sales base. International licensed locations and restaurants that are no longer in operation, including those which we have relocated, are excluded from comparable sales calculations.
External bakery sales were $66.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $66.6 million in the comparable prior year period.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists of food, beverage and bakery production supply costs incurred in conjunction with our restaurant and bakery revenues, and excludes depreciation, which is captured separately in depreciation and amortization expenses. As a percentage of revenues, cost of sales was 22.3% for fiscal 2021 compared to 23.1% for fiscal 2020, primarily reflecting a shift in sales mix within the restaurants and a lower proportion of third-party bakery revenues (0.4%) and pricing leverage (0.7%). These factors were partially offset by increased costs related to buying in the spot market to meet volume needs that exceeded our contracted levels (0.2%).
The Cheesecake Factory restaurant menus are among the most diversified in the foodservice industry and, accordingly, are not overly dependent on a few select commodities. Changes in costs for one commodity sometimes can be offset by cost changes in other commodity categories. The principal commodity categories for our restaurants include general grocery items, dairy, produce, seafood, poultry, meat and bread. (See the discussion of our contracting activities in Part II,