Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
This discussion and analysis generally covers our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, including year-over-year comparisons versus the year ended December 31, 2020. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 16, 2021, and available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and at our investor relations website www.calithera.com, includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements are identified by words such as “believe,” “will,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “should,” “plan,” “expect,” “predict,” “could,” “potentially” or the negative of these terms or similar expressions. You should read these statements carefully because they discuss future expectations, contain projections of future results of operations or financial condition, or state other “forward-looking” information. These statements relate to our future plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and financial performance and the assumptions that underlie these statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in this report in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this report. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information currently available to our management. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. We caution investors that our business and financial performance are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. In addition, statements that “we believe” and similar statements reflect our beliefs and opinions on the relevant subject. These statements are based on information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. While we believe that information provides a reasonable basis for these statements, that information may be limited or incomplete. Our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into or review of, all relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely on these statements.
Overview
We are a fully-integrated, clinical stage precision oncology biopharmaceutical company. Driven by a commitment to rigorous science and a passion for improving the lives of people impacted by cancer and other life-threatening diseases, we are advancing a pipeline of investigational, small molecule oncology compounds with a biomarker-driven approach. While we are primarily focused on oncology, we are opportunistically developing therapeutics outside of oncology where we can leverage our existing expertise in immune cell metabolism to treat diseases with unmet needs, as is the case in cystic fibrosis.
Targeted, Biomarker-Defined Small Molecules
Our core expertise is in oncology, discovering and developing novel small molecule enzyme inhibitors. We are well-versed and nimble in conducting biomarker-driven early and late stage clinical trials, and are leveraging this expertise by developing the mid-stage clinical assets we have recently added to our precision oncology pipeline. We acquired mivavotinib, a spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) inhibitor, and sapanisertib, a dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor, and wholly own development and commercial rights to these programs. Our expertise has allowed us to develop biomarker-driven strategies, and design potential paths for rapid approval for mivavotinib and sapanisertib in genetically-defined patient populations.
Mivavotinib is a SYK inhibitor that targets the constitutively activated B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway in DLBCL and other non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) and has durable single agent responses in unselected relapsed/refractory DLBCL. Mivavotinib is differentiated from other SYK inhibitors, as demonstrated by higher clinical response rates than other SYK inhibitors evaluated in relapsed/refractory DLBCL patients in separate studies and this may be due to higher tissue penetration and duration of target engagement of mivavotinib as compared to others. The overall safety profile appears favorable and should allow for development as a single agent or in combination.
SYK is known to activate multiple cell-signaling pathways in activated B-cell like (ABC) DLBCL: NF-kB and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways, compared to germinal center B-cell like (GCB) DLBCL, where it primarily activates the PI3K pathway. We conducted a retrospective analysis and found a substantially higher response rate in ABC (53%) compared to GCB (22%) DLBCL. In addition, recent preclinical studies have shown enhanced SYK activity, and sensitivity to SYK inhibition in DLBCL with
mutations in MyD88 and/or CD79, and this subset of ABC patients are known to have poorer outcomes to standard of care therapies. The compelling single agent ORR in ABC DLBCL, and potential for further enrichment of in a genetically-defined subset of ABC DLBCL with MyD88/CD79 mutations provide a well-defined, efficient development path.
Sapanisertib is a potent and selective, dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor that targets a key survival mechanism in KEAP1/NRF2-mutated tumor cells. Activating mutations in NRF2 or inactivating mutations in KEAP1 lead to constitutive activation of the oxidative stress pathway, enhancing tumor growth and survival. NRF2 activation has been shown to upregulate the mTOR pathway. Squamous non-small cell lung cancer (sqNSCLC) is 25-30% of all non-small cell lung cancer, and 15% of those patients have tumors with a NRF2-mutation. NRF2/KEAP1 mutations confer a poorer prognosis for NSCLC, and sapanisertib has the potential to benefit this underserved patient population. Sapanisertib has demonstrated promising single-agent clinical activity in patients with relapsed/refractory (R/R) NRF2-mutated sqNSCLC and exhibits differential antitumor activity compared to rapalog inhibitors of TORC1 in NRF2-mutant sqNSCLC xenograft models. Sapanisertib has a well-characterized clinical safety profile and was well tolerated in R/R NSCLC patients. The responses seen in a recent phase 2 trial (27% [3/11]) were durable, with a median PFS of 8.9 months. In comparison, historic standard of care treatment with salvage chemotherapy has a median PFS of 3-4.5 months. These promising data and high unmet need led us to design a two-part phase 2 study of relapsed/refractory sqNSCLC patients with or without NRF2-mutations as detected by next generation sequencing (NGS).
Our near-term clinical development plans are to initiate phase 2 trials in the first half of 2022 for mivavotinib monotherapy in relapsed/refractory activated B-cell (ABC) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with and without MyD88/CD79b mutations and for sapanisertib monotherapy in relapsed/refractory NRF2 (NFE2L2)-mutated squamous non-small cell lung cancer. By focusing on well-characterized genetic vulnerabilities with molecules that have already shown durable single agent activity, we will be able to generate phase 2 data with these efficient study designs. We plan to share data from these studies by the first quarter of 2023.
Synthetic Lethality Preclinical Pipeline
Calithera continues to leverage its discovery engine to build a preclinical pipeline of synthetic lethality targets with a focus on paralog genes. We will present data describing novel VPS4A inhibitors discovered by Calithera at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) 2022 Annual Meeting. The accepted poster will detail Calithera’s discovery of a novel series of VPS4A inhibitors that are currently advancing through lead optimization.
Additional Small Molecule Programs
Our product candidate, CB-280, which is solely owned by Calithera, is a novel oral inhibitor of arginase being developed for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, or CF. In 2020, we were awarded up to $2.4 million from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation to support development of CB-280 and in 2021 we presented interim data from the Phase 1b trial at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference (NACFC). CB-280 was well tolerated, demonstrated linear pharmacokinetics (PK), and showed complete and continuous target inhibition in plasma at doses at or above 100mg. CB-280 also demonstrated robust pharmacodynamic (PD) effects, with rapid and significant dose-proportional increases in plasma arginine, the key driver of NO production. Enrollment and analysis of all four cohorts is now complete and evaluation of next steps is ongoing.
Partnered Programs
Arginase Inhibitor INCB001158
An additional arginase inhibitor, INCB001158, was discovered by Calithera and is being developed by Incyte Corporation, or Incyte, for oncology and hematology indications, and is currently being evaluated in Phase 1/2 trials in combination with other anti-cancer agents.
CD73 Inhibitor CB-708 (ATG037) for Oncology
A highly potent, selective, orally-bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of CD73, CB-708 (now ATG037) was discovered by Calithera. Preclinical data were presented at the 2019 American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) annual meeting and the 2019 SITC meeting demonstrating that CB-708 has immune-mediated, single agent activity in syngeneic mouse tumor models. In May 2021, we entered into a license agreement with Antengene Investment Limited, or Antengene, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Antengene Corporation, where we granted Antengene an exclusive, worldwide license to develop and commercialize CB-708 (now ATG-037). In February 2022, Antengene announced the approval of a first-in-human study of ATG-037 in patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), or ASC 606. Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We have a collaboration and license agreement with Incyte, the Incyte Collaboration Agreement, and a license agreement with Antengene, the Antengene License Agreement, that are within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license certain rights to our product candidates. The terms of these arrangements include payment to the Company of non-refundable, upfront license fees, and potential development, regulatory and sales milestones, and sales royalties. Each of these payments results in collaboration or license revenue, except for revenues from royalties on net sales of licensed products, which would be classified as royalty revenues.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under our agreement, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract.
Licenses of Intellectual Property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promised goods or services, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensees’ control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received or the underlying activity has been completed. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if
necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaboration revenue in the period of adjustment.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Contract Balances
Upfront payments and fees are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts payable to us are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional.
Upfront payments and fees from Incyte are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our right to consideration is unconditional. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensees and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensees will be one year or less.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We record accrued liabilities for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies, and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the balance sheets and within research and development expense in the statements of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service providers under the service agreements.
We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed, number of patients enrolled, and the rate of patient enrollments may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations.
Financial Overview
Our Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
We had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $59.5 million as of December 31, 2021. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 205-40, Going Concern, we evaluated whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued on March 31, 2022. This evaluation initially does not take into consideration the potential mitigating effect of our plans that have not been fully implemented as of the date the financial statements are issued. When substantial doubt exists under this methodology, we evaluate whether the mitigating effect of our plans sufficiently alleviate substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The mitigating effect of our plans, however, is only considered if both (1) it is probable that the plans will be effectively implemented within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued, and (2) it is probable that the plans, when implemented, will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. In performing this analysis, we excluded certain elements of our operating plan that cannot be considered probable. Under ASC 205-40, the future receipt of potential funding from future sales of shares of our capital stock, if received, including proceeds from our $10.0 million public offering which priced on March 29, 2022 and is expected to close on April 1, 2022, cannot be considered probable at this time because none of the plans are entirely within our control and, with the exception of our recent offering, have not been approved by our board of directors as of the date of the financial statements. Therefore, our expectation to generate operating losses and negative operating cash flows in the future and our need for additional funding to support our planned operations raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date that these financial statements are issued.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating
to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of the uncertainties described above.
License Revenue
License revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 represents the milestone payment received in September 2021 from the Incyte Collaboration Agreement and the recognition of the upfront payment received in May 2021 from our Antengene License Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Costs associated with co-development activities performed under our collaboration agreements and award are included in research and development expenses, with any reimbursement of costs reflected as a reduction of such expenses.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of the following:
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•expenses incurred under agreements with clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•contract manufacturing expenses, primarily for the production of clinical supplies;
•facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation expense and other supplies;
•license fees and milestone payments related to our licensing agreements; and
•the asset acquisition of sapanisertib and mivavotinib.
The largest component of our total operating expenses has historically been our investment in research and development activities including the clinical development of our product candidates. We allocate to research and development expenses the salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation expense, and indirect costs of our clinical and preclinical programs on a program-specific basis, and we include these costs in the program-specific expenses.
The following table shows our research and development expenses for 2021 and 2020:
Excluding the in-process research and development charge associated with our acquisition of sapanisertib and mivavotinib, we expect our research and development expenses will increase during the next few years as we advance our product candidates into and
through clinical trials, and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for our product candidates. The probability of success of our product candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, allocated expenses and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, insurance, investor relations and other expenses associated with being a public company. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Allocated expenses consist of facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation expense and other supplies. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC and other governing bodies and, potentially, the costs related to increases in our administrative functions to support the growth of our business as we advance our product candidates.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
NM: Not Meaningful
License Revenue. License revenue increased from $0 for 2020 to $9.8 million for 2021, and is comprised of the $6.75 million milestone payment received in September 2021 under our Incyte Collaboration Agreement and the recognition of the $3.0 million upfront payment received in May 2021 from our Antengene License Agreement.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses decreased $17.6 million, or 25%, from $71.0 million for 2020 to $53.4 million for 2021. The decrease was due to an $18.5 million decrease in the telaglenastat program and a $4.1 million decrease in the INCB001158 program, partially offset by a $1.5 million increase due to the sapanisertib program, a $1.1 million increase due to the mivavotinib program, a $1.6 million increase in our early stage research and a $0.8 million increase in the CB-280 program.
Research and Development Related to Asset Acquisition. The increase of $50.9 million in research and development related to our asset acquisition of sapanisertib and mivavotinib in the fourth quarter of 2021, and comprised of an upfront payment of $10.0 million in cash and $40.9 million attributed to the value of the Series A convertible preferred stock on the date issued, estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased $0.5 million, or 2%, from $20.4 million for 2020 to $20.9 million for 2021. The increase was due to a $1.0 million increase in personnel-related costs, primarily from increases in
stock-based compensation expense, and a $0.7 million increase in professional services, primarily in legal expenses related to our Settlement Agreement and Release with Incyte and our Asset Purchase Agreement with Takeda, and higher directors and officers liability insurance, partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in rent expense related to the amendment of our facility lease in March 2021.
Interest and Other Income, net. Interest and other income, net decreased $0.9 million, from $1.2 million for 2020 to $0.3 million for 2021. The decrease of $0.9 million was primarily due to lower interest income generated from lower returns and lower balances on our investments, partially offset by a $0.4 million gain related to the remeasurement of our lease liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $59.5 million. Our operations have been financed by net proceeds from the sale of shares of our capital stock and payments from our collaboration and licensing agreements.
March 2022 Public Offering
On March 29, 2022, we priced an underwritten public offering of 18,518,519 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $0.54 per share. Each share of common stock is accompanied by a warrant to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $0.54 per share, which is immediately exercisable and will expire 18 months from the date of issuance, or a short-term warrant, and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $0.54 per share, which is immediately exercisable and will expire 5 years from the date of issuance, or a long-term warrant. The gross proceeds to us from the offering are expected to be approximately $10.0 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. The offering is expected to close on April 1, 2022, subject to customary closing conditions.
Millennium Asset Purchase Agreement
On October 18, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement, or APA, with Millennium. In accordance with the APA, we entered into a Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we agreed to issue to Millennium 1,000,000 shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock, or the Series A preferred stock. The Series A preferred stock is initially convertible at the option of the holder into approximately 17.2 shares of common stock, based on our $2.04 per share closing stock price from October 15, 2021. The conversion rate of the Series A preferred stock is subject to anti-dilution adjustments that if triggered would result in the issuance of additional shares of common stock upon conversion. We intend to seek stockholder approval at our next regular stockholder meeting for the issuance of the shares of common stock above 20% in accordance with the rules of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC, including additional shares that may become issuable as a result of any price-based anti-dilution adjustments. The Series A preferred stock has the preferences, rights and limitations set forth in the Certificate of Designations, as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware. If we are unable to obtain stockholder approval in accordance with the rules of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC for the conversion of all of the shares of Series A preferred stock to common stock, and as a result Millennium is unable to convert any portion of the Series A preferred stock to common stock, then we and Millennium will negotiate in good faith the timing and amount per share to be paid to compensate Millennium for such inability to convert. If we are able to obtain stockholder approval in accordance with the rules of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC for the conversion of all of the shares of Series A preferred stock to common stock but Millennium is unable to convert as a result of the Accounting Cap (defined as 19.99% of the outstanding common stock of the Company on any date) any portion of the Series A preferred stock to common stock by the five year anniversary of the issue date, then on each yearly anniversary thereafter, any shares of Series A preferred stock that remain outstanding shall automatically be converted into common stock at the applicable conversion ratio, in each case subject to the Accounting Cap, until such point in time as all shares of Series A preferred stock have been converted.
Shelf Registration Statement
In August 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, which permits the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $250 million of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, $238.6 million of our common stock remained available for sale, of which $63.6 million may be issued and sold pursuant to an "at-the-market" offering program, or ATM program, for sales of our common stock under a sales agreement with Jefferies LLC, subject to certain conditions as specified in the sales agreement. From January 1, 2022 through March 31, 2022, we sold an additional 1,233,875 shares of common stock under the ATM program, at an average price of $0.57 per share, for gross and net proceeds of $0.7 million, after deducting commissions and other offering expenses payable by us. As of March 31, 2022, we had $62.9 million of common stock remaining and available to be sold under the ATM program, subject to certain conditions as specified in the agreement. Our ability to sell securities under the shelf registration statement and the ATM program will be limited until we are no longer subject to the SEC's "baby shelf" limitations.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, primarily research and development expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Our expectation to generate operating losses and negative operating cash flows in the future and the need for additional funding to support our planned operations raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date that these consolidated financial statements are issued on March 31, 2022. However, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, together with proceeds from our $10.0 million public offering expected to close on April 1, 2022, will be sufficient for us to meet our current operating plan through the second quarter of 2023. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially based on a number of factors including the extent and magnitude of the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular the challenges associated with opening new and enrolling existing clinical studies. Based on current planning assumptions, we intend to announce data from our sapanisertib and mivavotinib Phase 2 studies by the first quarter of 2023. If data from these trials are not available until after the end of the second quarter of 2023, we will require additional capital to release these data. In addition, in order to complete the process of obtaining regulatory approval for our product candidates and to build the sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize our product candidates, if approved, we will require substantial additional funding.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the timing and costs of our planned clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the timing and costs of our planned preclinical studies of our product candidates;
•our success in establishing and scaling commercial manufacturing capabilities;
•the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•subject to receipt of regulatory approval, revenue received from commercial sales of our product candidates;
•the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may establish;
•the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of any patents or patent applications or other intellectual property rights; and
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies.
We plan to continue to fund our operations and capital funding needs through equity and/or debt financing. We may also consider further collaborations or selectively partnering for clinical development and commercialization. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding we may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. The continued spread of COVID-19 and uncertain market conditions may limit our ability to access capital. Any of these actions could harm our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into arrangements that contractually obligate us to make payments that will affect our liquidity and cash flows in future periods. Our contractual obligations primarily consist of our obligation under our non-cancellable operating lease. The aggregate amount of future operating lease payments over the term of our lease is $3.3 million as of December 31, 2021. For additional information on our lease and timing of future payments, see Note 5 on Operating Leases in Notes to Financial Statements of this annual report on Form 10-K.
In the normal course of business, we enter into agreements with clinical research organizations for clinical trials and clinical manufacturing organizations for clinical supply manufacturing and with other vendors for preclinical research studies, investigator-led trials and other services and products for operating purposes. We have not considered these payments to be contractual obligations since the contracts are generally cancelable at any time by us upon less than 180 days’ prior written notice. We also have certain
in-license agreements that require us to pay milestones to such third parties upon achievement of certain development, regulatory or commercial milestones. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain development, regulatory approval and commercial milestones, which may not be achieved.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash used in operations was $66.3 million for 2021, compared to $84.3 million for 2020. The decrease of $18.0 million in cash used in operating activities was primarily associated with a decrease in research and development costs related to our telaglenastat and INCB001158 programs, partially offset by an increase of $10 million in cash paid as an upfront payment for our asset acquisition of sapanisertib and mivavotinib in October 2021.
Cash provided by investing activities was $7.9 million and $89.0 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and was related to proceeds from the sale and maturity of investments of $8.0 million and $146.1 million, respectively, partially offset by purchases of investments of $57.1 million in 2020. For each of 2021 and 2020, the Company also purchased $0.1 million in property and equipment.
Cash provided by financing activities was $10.7 million and $42.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. For 2021, we received $10.7 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of common stock related to our at-the-market offering program and $0.2 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan purchases, partially offset by preferred stock issuance costs of $0.2 million. For 2020, we received $33.5 million in net proceeds from the sale and issuance of common stock related to our public offering, $7.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our at-the-market offering program, and $1.2 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and from employee stock plan purchases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing under Part II, Item 8 for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.