ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
CalAmp Corp. (including its subsidiaries unless the context otherwise requires, “CalAmp”, “the Company”, “we”, “our”, or “us”), incorporated in 1981 and re-incorporated in Delaware in 1987, is a connected intelligence company that leverages a data-driven solutions ecosystem to help people and organizations improve operational performance. We solve complex problems for customers within the market verticals of transportation and logistics, commercial and government fleets, industrial equipment, government and consumer vehicles by providing solutions that track, monitor and recover their vital assets. The data and insights enabled by CalAmp solutions provide real-time visibility into a user’s vehicles, assets, drivers, and cargo, giving organizations greater understanding and control of their operations. Ultimately, these insights drive operational visibility, safety, efficiency, maintenance, and sustainability for organizations around the world. Headquartered in Irvine, California, we have an installed base of approximately 10 million devices reporting to our cloud-based platform and approximately 1.1 million software and subscription services subscribers worldwide.
Reportable Segments
We operate under two reportable segments: Software & Subscription Services and Telematics Products.
Software & Subscription Services
Our Software & Subscription Services segment offers cloud-based application enablement and telematics service platforms that facilitate integration of our own applications, as well as those of third parties, through open APIs to deliver full-featured mobile IoT solutions to a wide range of customers and markets. Our scalable proprietary applications and other subscription services enable rapid and cost-effective development of high-value solutions for customers all around the globe. Services include tracking and monitoring services within Fleet Management as well as Supply Chain Integrity and International Vehicle Location.
Telematics Products
Our Telematics Products segment offers a series of advanced telematics products for the broader connected vehicle and emerging industrial IoT marketplace, which enable customers to optimize their operations by collecting, monitoring and effectively reporting business-critical information and desired intelligence from high-value remote and mobile assets. Our telematics products include asset tracking units, mobile telematics devices, fixed and mobile wireless gateways, and routers. These wireless networking devices underpin a wide range of solutions, and are ideal for applications demanding secure, reliable and business-critical communications. Products and sales channels include OEM and MRM products.
Recent Developments
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a public health pandemic of international concern, which has resulted in travel restrictions and in some cases, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of businesses and greater uncertainty in global financial markets.
Since March 2020, our revenues have been negatively impacted by COVID-19 as various small-to-medium sized customers postponed their capital expenditures due to the pandemic and related macro-economic uncertainties. More recently we have experienced supply shortages as a result of global supply imbalances driven by the global pandemic. These global supply imbalances have negatively impacted all parts of our business during fiscal 2022, both in the form of reduced availability of components and devices as well as increased costs to procure available
components and devices. It is difficult to predict the extent to which these factors will continue to impact our future business or operating results, which is highly dependent on uncertain future developments, including the severity of the continuing pandemic, the actions taken or to be taken by governments and private businesses in relation to its containment and resolution of supply chain issues and supply shortages. Because our business and operating results depend on telematics product sales, device installations and related subscription-based services, the ultimate effect of the pandemic and the current supply shortages may not be fully reflected in our operating results until future periods.
We have considered all known and reasonably available information that existed throughout the fiscal year ended February 28, 2022, in making accounting judgements, estimates and disclosures. We are monitoring the potential effects of the health care related and economic conditions of COVID-19 in assessing certain matters including (but not limited to) supply chain disruptions and inflationary impacts, decreases in customer demand for our products and services, potential longer-term effects on our customer and distribution channels particularly in the U.S. and relevant end markets as well as other developments. If the impact results in longer term closures of businesses and economic recessionary conditions, we may recognize material asset impairments and charges for uncollectible accounts receivable in future periods.
Transition of MRM Telematics Customers to Subscription Arrangements
In the latter half of fiscal 2022, we prompted a strategic shift with customers who have historically purchased MRM telematics devices from us. These customers are being transitioned to new arrangements by way of bundling subscription services with telematics devices under multi-year (generally three years) subscription contracts. Our plan is to transitition the entire base of MRM business to multi-year subscription contracts over the course of the next year. As a result, our financial results associated with such subscription arrangements will be reported within our Software & Subscription Services reporting segment prospectively from the effective date of such underlying contracts. In the short term, we expect that this will lead to significant growth in our Software & Subscription Services business with a corresponding decline in our Telematics Products business. Long term we believe this shift will allow us to drive revenue growth as we generate incremental revenue from our existing customer base as well as new customers through current and anticipated broader future subscription service offerings.
Sale of LoJack North America Operations
Effective March 15, 2021, we sold certain assets and transferred certain liabilities of the LoJack North America business. Accordingly, the LoJack North America operations are presented as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the years ended February 28/29, 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Unless otherwise indicated, the financial disclosures and related information provided herein relate to our continuing operations and we have recast prior period amounts to reflect discontinued operations.
Acquisitions
In March 2019, we acquired Car Track, S.A. de C.V. (“LoJack Mexico”) for a purchase price, net of cash on hand, of approximately $12.7 million, which leverages our full stack of telematics and SaaS solutions to expand product offerings to our substantial subscriber base in Mexico. LoJack Mexico was a customer in our Telematics Products segment prior to the acquisition.
In April 2019, we acquired Synovia Solutions (“Synovia”), a North American market leader in fleet safety and management for K-through-12 school bus and state and local government fleets for a purchase price, net of cash on hand, of approximately $49.8 million. The Synovia acquisition expanded our fleet management and vehicle safety services portfolio while accelerating our transformation to high-value subscription-based services.
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Revenues
Revenues associated with our reportable segments are as follows:
Software & Subscription Services (“S&SS”). Our SaaS-based solutions provide our customers with the ability to wirelessly communicate with monitoring devices installed in vehicles and other mobile or remote assets via our cloud-based telematics platform and software applications. S&SS customer arrangements generally include a bundling of subscription services combined with the sale or lease of telematics devices necessary to provide the associated services. Depending upon the elements of a given contractual arrangement, it may contain one or multiple performance obligations that are individually recognized as revenue over a subscription period or at a point in time based upon how the performance obligation is fulfilled.
Telematics Products. Our products revenues consist primarily of sales of our telematics products or wireless networking devices to large global companies as well as small and medium-sized enterprises. Revenues from our products are reported net of sales returns and allowances, and incentives. The prices charged for telematics products are determined through negotiation with our customers as well as prevailing market conditions and are fixed and determinable upon shipment.
From time to time, we provide various professional services to customers including project management, engineering services, and installation services. Revenues for professional services are typically distinct from other performance obligations and are recognized as the related services are performed.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues for application subscriptions and other services includes personnel costs and related benefits, consultants, software development activities, cellular network access costs, infrastructure costs for use of private networking services, and other costs that are required to deliver these services to our customers. Our cost of revenues for application subscriptions and other services also includes the cost of devices that are sold on an integrated basis with applicable subscriptions. If the subscription services and associated telematics devices are determined to represent a single combined performance obligation, the device costs are capitalized and are recognized ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the estimated average in-service lives of these devices.
Our cost of revenues for telematics products represent the cost of finished goods sold to our customers and are recognized at the point in time control passes to the customer. These costs include raw materials, manufacturing overhead and labor costs, as well as customs and duties, license royalties, recycling fees, insurance and other costs that are included in the price that we negotiate and pay to our contract manufacturers and component suppliers for the products. The cost of revenues also includes charges related to excess and obsolete inventories and the cost of fulfilling product warranties.
We continually negotiate to reduce the cost we pay to our suppliers in order to maintain consistent low prices for our customers. We accomplish this by working with our suppliers to find alternative, less expensive sources of raw materials and components as well as eliminating excess costs throughout our supply chain.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit and gross profit as a percentage of revenues, or gross margin, is influenced by several factors including sales volume, product and service mix, and excess and obsolescence (“E&O”) charges and other product costs. We expect gross margin to fluctuate over time based on how we control the mix of product and services and manage our inventory. Additionally, although we primarily procure and sell our products in U.S. dollars, we are susceptible to exchange rate fluctuations with other currencies. To the extent that exchange rates move unfavorably this may have an impact on our future selling prices and unit costs. Gross profit and gross margin may fluctuate over time based on the factors described above.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist principally of personnel related costs, including salaries and bonuses, fringe benefits and stock-based compensation as well as the cost of professional services, information technology, facilities and other administrative expenses. We classify our operating expenses into the following six categories:
•
Research and development expense consists of personnel related costs, professional services, certification fees and software licenses incurred to support our existing installed base of telematics devices through our field application engineers, software developers, program and product managers, as well as our effort to develop new products and technologies.
•
Selling and marketing expense consists of personnel related costs including our incentive programs to support our global sales organization as well as advertising and marketing promotions of our brands and products, including media advertisement costs, merchandising and display costs, trade show and event costs, and sponsorship costs.
•
General and administrative expense consists of personnel related costs to support our global enterprise as well as outside services for legal, accounting, insurance, information technology, investor relations and other costs associated with being a public company.
•
Intangible asset amortization is attributable to our acquired identifiable intangible assets from business combinations. Our acquired intangible assets with definite lives are amortized from the date of acquisition over periods ranging from four to fifteen years.
•
Restructuring expense consists of personnel and facility related costs resulting from our various cost savings initiatives. Personnel costs represent severance and employee related costs, and facility charges represent expenses for vacant office and manufacturing facility space under Corporate Expenses.
•
Impairment loss consists of write-offs of intangible assets for tradenames and dealer relationships associated with LoJack products and right-of-use assets for ceased use leases.
We expect our operating costs will increase in absolute dollars due to the anticipated growth of our business and related infrastructure as well as expansion into new geographic regions. Operating expense may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue throughout the year due to discrete quarterly events and seasonal trends.
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
Non-operating income (expense) consists of (i) investment and interest income earned on our cash balances and investments, (ii) interest expense on our convertible senior unsecured notes including the amortization of note discount and debt issuance costs, (iii) the loss from extinguishment of debt and (iv) other income (expense) that includes but is not limited to transaction gains and losses and foreign currency gains and losses. Loss from extinguishment of debt is further explained in Note 11, Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and related states as well as foreign jurisdictions in which we do business. These foreign jurisdictions have statutory tax rates different than the U.S. statutory tax rate. Accordingly, our effective tax rate will vary from the U.S. statutory income tax rate due to the amount of income allocable to each tax jurisdiction, tax credits, and changes in valuation allowances which are provided against net deferred tax assets when it is determined that it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized.
Equity in Net Loss of Affiliate and related Impairment Loss
We had an investment in a technology and insurance startup company called Smart Driver Club Limited, which represented a minority ownership interest that was accounted for under the equity method of accounting. As a result, we recorded our portion of the losses incurred by this entity and impairment charges related to this investment as equity in net loss of affiliate.
Income (loss) from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Effective March 15, 2021, the Company and Spireon entered into an agreement pursuant to which we sold certain assets and transferred certain liabilities of the LoJack North America business to Spireon and we received net proceeds from Spireon of $6.6 million. On November 9, 2021, the purchase price was reduced by $0.9 million, which was paid to Spireon, due to final working capital adjustments. We recognized a gain on the sale of the LoJack North America business of $4.1 million during the fiscal year ended February 28, 2022.
Operations for LoJack North America are presented as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended February 28/29, 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively. For the fiscal year ended February 28, 2022, we have reported the operating results and cash flows related to the LoJack North America operations through March 14, 2021. See Note 2, Discontinued Operations, for additional information.
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to our U.S. GAAP results, we present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental non-GAAP measure of our performance. Our CEO, the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”), uses Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate and monitor segment performance. A non-GAAP financial measure is defined as a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance that excludes or includes amounts to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the statements of comprehensive income (loss), balance sheets or statements of cash flows. We define Adjusted EBITDA as Earnings Before Investment Income, Interest Expenses, Taxes, Depreciation, Amortization, net income (loss) from discontinued operations, stock-based compensation, acquisition and integration expenses, non-cash costs and expenses arising from purchase accounting adjustments, litigation provision, gain from legal settlement, impairment loss and certain other adjustments. We believe this non-GAAP financial information provides additional insight into our ongoing performance and have therefore chosen to provide this information to investors for a more consistent basis of comparison to help investors evaluate our results of ongoing operations and enable more meaningful period-to-period comparisons. Pursuant to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission regarding the use of non-GAAP financial measures, we have provided a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure. See Note 20 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information related to Adjusted EBITDA by reportable segments and reconciliation to net income (loss).
OPERATING RESULTS
The following table sets forth the percentage of revenues represented by items included in our consolidated statements of income for the three most recent fiscal years:
Unless otherwise indicated, the discussion on our results of operations provided below relates to our continuing operations and we have recast prior period amounts for purposes of historical comparisons. See Note 2, Discontinued Operations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Fiscal year ended February 28, 2022 (“Fiscal 2022”) compared to fiscal year ended February 28, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”):
Revenue by Segment
Our Software & Subscription Services enable customers to gather and analyze critical data used to track, monitor and recover vital mobile assets with real-time visibility and insights. Our services focus on three principal end markets: (i) transportation and logistics, (ii) government and municipalities, and (iii) connected car services. As described above, in Fiscal 2022 we began entering into subscription-based arrangements with customers that historically have purchased MRM telematics hardware from us, a shift that favorably impacted revenues in our Software & Subscription Services segment and unfavorably impacted revenues in our Telematics Products segment. This is a transition that we expect will continue in Fiscal 2023 as we work toward transitioning the entire MRM telematics customer base onto subscription arrangements. Our business has also been negatively impacted by COVID-19. Although our business was initially impacted by COVID-19 in the first half of Fiscal 2021, we resumed device installations and activation
services soon thereafter. As also described above, in Fiscal 2022 we have experienced supply shortages driven by the global pandemic, which have impacted all parts of our business in Fiscal 2022, including particularly our Telematics Product revenues. We expect these supply shortages to continue for the foreseeable future as suppliers strive to create additional production capacity.
As of February 28, 2022, our remaining contractual performance obligations for software & subscription services were $202.0 million as compared to $145.1 million as of February 28, 2021. As mentioned above, the majority of the growth in contractual performance obligations was driven by new customer acquisitions within the government and municipality markets and connected car markets as well as the conversion of several significant telematics products customers to multi-year subscription contracts.
In Fiscal 2022, Software & Subscription Services revenue increased by $24.4 million or 18.8% compared to Fiscal 2021. The increase in revenue was primarily due to $20.9 million increase in transportation and logistics revenues and a $2.0 million increase in our government and municipalities revenues, both driven primarily by 3G to 4G equipment upgrades, especially with our larger customers, as well as a $5.4 million increase in connected car revenues, primarily as a result of increased revenues in the EMEA and LATAM regions. $13.4 million of the growth in Software & Subscription Services revenues was attributable to the transition of certain Telematics Products customers onto subscription arrangements. Recurring application subscription revenue was $93.7 million and $97.3 million for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively, and active subscribers increased by 11% in Fiscal 2022 when compared to Fiscal 2021.
Telematics Products revenue, comprised primarily of MRM telematics and OEM/network products, decreased by $37.1 million or 20.8% in Fiscal year 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021. This decrease was largely attributable to the global supply imbalances described above, thereby limiting our ability to fulfill customer orders in Fiscal 2022. Additionally, $13.4 million of this decrease was driven by the conversion of certain MRM telematics customers onto multi-year subscription contracts, and thus Fiscal 2022 revenues generated after the contract effective dates for these customers are classified within Software & Subscription Services revenues to the extent they are associated with a subscription arrangement. We expect the conversion of the rest of our MRM customer base to continue over the next six to twelve months as we continue to implement our strategy to engage with our customers under subscription arrangements, which will lead to further decreases in Telematics Products segment revenues with an associated increase in Software & Subscription Services revenues.
Gross Profit by Segment
Consolidated gross profit for Fiscal 2022 decreased by $0.5 million or 0.4% versus Fiscal 2021 due to decreased revenues in our Telematics Products business, in addition to increased cost of procuring goods. Consolidated gross margin increased by 150 basis points compared to the same period in last year primarily due to the increased proportion of overall revenues attributable to Software & Subscription Services.
Software & Subscription Services: Gross profit increased by $11.5 million or 17.6% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021, primarily as a result of the $24.4 million increase in revenues described above, while gross margin decreased by 40 basis points primarily due to subscription mix.
Telematics Products: Gross profit decreased by $12.1 million or 21.1% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the $37.1 million decrease in revenues described above.
Cost of revenues excludes restructuring related costs, which are shown separately within operating expenses in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss).
Operating Expenses
Consolidated research and development expense increased by $2.6 million or 10.2% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 due almost entirely to increased compensation costs associated with increased development efforts around expanding our telematics service offerings both domestically and internationally. Consolidated research and development expense as a percentage of revenues increased to 9.6% in Fiscal 2022 compared to 8.4% in Fiscal 2021. We plan to continue to invest in research and development of new solutions and technologies.
Consolidated selling and marketing expense increased by $2.4 million or 5.1% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to a $1.2 million increase in compensation costs related to additions to our sales force to drive sales of our telematics subscription services, as well as a $0.5 million increase in outside professional services costs related to our global marketing and branding efforts.
Consolidated general and administrative expense increased by $3.3 million or 6.6% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 largely driven by increased compensation costs as a result of the hiring of operations management personnel to support our global operations as we expand our business, as well as cost containment measures undertaken in the prior year in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in general and administrative expenses also includes the impact of $0.8 million of additional litigation reserves recorded in Fiscal 2022.
Amortization of intangibles increased by $0.6 million or 13.3% in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021.
As described in Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we commenced a plan to capture certain synergies and cost savings related to streamlining our global operations and sales organization as well as rationalizing certain leased properties that were vacant. In Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, we incurred restructuring charges of $0.6 million and $2.5 million, respectively, which were comprised of severance and employee related costs.
In Fiscal 2021, we vacated certain office facilities in Richardson, Texas and Indianapolis, Indiana, which resulted in an impairment of the corresponding right-of-use assets and related fixed assets of $0.8 million.
Non-operating Income (Expense), Net
Investment income decreased by $0.9 million to $1.2 million in Fiscal 2022 from $2.1 million in Fiscal 2021. The decrease was primarily driven by lower investment returns on invested funds.
Interest expense decreased $0.2 million to $15.3 million in Fiscal 2022 from $15.5 million in Fiscal 2021 due to a lower level of borrowings in the current year period.
Other non-operating expense was $2.4 million in Fiscal 2022, compared to $0.4 million in Fiscal 2021 primarily due to costs incurred related to the wind-down, sale and transition of the LoJack North America business on March 15, 2021. In connection with the sale of the LoJack North America business, we entered into a transition services agreement under which we have been providing certain services to Spireon, a portion of the cost of which is being reimbursed to us by Spireon. This transition services agreement is expected to end in the first quarter of Fiscal 2023.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
An income tax expense of $1.1 million was recorded in Fiscal 2022, compared to $0.6 million in Fiscal 2021. The current year income tax expense is attributable to foreign operations. The increase in the income tax expense compared to the prior year was primarily driven by recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits in the amount of $0.4 million in Fiscal 2021. See Note 14, Income Taxes, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Net Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Net income from discontinued operations, net of tax, for Fiscal 2022 was $3.2 million compared to net loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, in Fiscal 2021 of $35.2 million. There was no tax expense or benefit recorded in either year due to valuation allowances recorded against deferred tax assets. The net income from discontinued operations for the year ended February 28, 2022 was primarily driven by the $4.1 million gain on sale of discontinued operations, which was completed on March 15, 2021. The net loss from discontinued operations for the year ended February 28, 2021 included impairment losses of $23.8 million.
See Note 2, Discontinued Operations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Overall Profitability Measures
Net Loss from Continuing Operations:
Our net loss from continuing operations in Fiscal 2022 was $31.1 million as compared to net loss of $21.2 million in Fiscal 2021. The increase in the net loss was primarily driven by decreased revenues as a result of global supply shortages of certain components, as described above, and increased operating expenses largely driven by investments in the areas of research and development, and sales and marketing to support the transition of our business toward Software & Subscription Services, partially offset by higher gross margins.
Adjusted EBITDA:
Adjusted EBITDA for Software & Subscription Services increased $0.8 million in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher revenues offset by increased operating expenses as a result of investments we are making to develop, market and sell our telematics solutions. Adjusted EBITDA for Telematics Products decreased $8.8 million in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to lower revenues as described above. Corporate Expenses decreased slightly year-over-year.
See Note 20, Segment and Geographic Data, for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA by reportable segments and a reconciliation to GAAP-basis net loss.
Fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal year ended February 29, 2020 (“Fiscal 2020”)
For a discussion of our results of operations comparison for the Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for Fiscal 2021, filed with the SEC on April 22, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In Fiscal 2022, our primary cash needs have been for working capital purposes, and to a lesser extent, capital expenditures. We have historically funded our principal business activities through cash flows generated from operations and cash on hand. As we grow and transition our customer base to a subscription model while increasing our revenues, there will be a need for working capital in the future. Our immediate sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents and our revolving credit facility. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, funds anticipated to be generated from our operations, and available borrowing on our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements may vary from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our rate of sales growth, the timing and extent of spending on various business initiatives, our international expansion, the timing of new product introductions, market acceptance of our solutions, and overall economic conditions including the potential impact of global supply imbalances and COVID-19 on the global financial markets. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of February 28, 2022, we have $79.2 million of cash and cash equivalents.
Available Borrowing Resources
Our revolving credit facility with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. provides for borrowings of up to $50 million and was set to expire on March 30, 2022. We have entered into an amendment to extend the term of this credit facility to June 30, 2022 with the intention of entering into a new revolving credit facility. Borrowings under our existing credit facility bear interest at either a Prime or LIBOR-based variable rate as selected by us on a periodic basis. As of February 28, 2022, there were no borrowings outstanding on this revolving credit facility. Although we intend to enter into a replacement credit facility, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain a credit facility with similar terms or at all.
Sale of LoJack North America Operations
On March 14, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Spireon pursuant to which we sold certain assets and transferred certain liabilities of the LoJack North America business for a purchase price of $8.0 million. The transaction was completed effective March 15, 2021 and we received net proceeds of approximately $6.6 million. Subsequently, on November 9, 2021, the purchase price was reduced by $0.9 million, which was paid to Spireon, due to final working capital adjustments. No further adjustments to the purchase price are expected. We also entered into a Transition Service Agreement with Spireon on March 15, 2021 (“TSA”) to support Spireon in the transition of LoJack North America customers and we will continue to provide recovery services to the existing installed base of LoJack North America customers as an agent of Spireon until the termination of the TSA, which is expected to occur in the first quarter of Fiscal 2023. During this period, we have invoiced Spireon for certain costs incurred in operating this business. In connection with the transition services provided to Spireon during Fiscal 2022, we incurred a total cost of $4.4 million of which $2.3 million was billed to Spireon for the services under the TSA and the remaining $2.1 million is included as a component of other expense, net in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss as these costs represent non-operating expenses.
We also entered into a post-TSA Services Agreement with Spireon on March 15, 2021 (“SA”), under which we will continue to provide certain services related to the LoJack North America radio frequency tower infrastructure upon termination of the TSA for a period of no longer than fifty-four months after the termination of the TSA, as needed. As consideration for these services, Spireon will pay us a monthly service fee over the stipulated contract term.
PPP Loan
On April 16, 2020, we received proceeds from a loan in the amount of $10 million (the “PPP Loan”) from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as lender, pursuant to the Small Business Association (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. At the time we applied for the PPP loan, we believed that we qualified to receive the funds pursuant to the PPP. On April 23, 2020, the SBA, in consultation with the Department of Treasury, issued new guidance that created uncertainty regarding the qualification requirements for a PPP loan. Out of an abundance of caution and in light of the new guidance, we repaid in full the
principal and interest on the PPP Loan on April 27, 2020.
Acquisitions
As described in Note 3, Acquisitions, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, in March 2019 we completed the acquisition of LoJack Mexico for a purchase price, net of cash acquired, of $12.7 million, and in April 2019 we acquired Synovia for a purchase price, net of cash acquired, of $48.9 million. We funded these acquisitions utilizing cash on hand. As part of the Synovia acquisition, we assumed the rights and obligations from the Synovia revenue assignments (“Due to Factors”) as described in Note 11, Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. The revenues recognized from this arrangement of $4.6 million, $6.3 million and $6.8 million were considered a non-cash financing activity for Fiscal 2022, Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
Material Cash Requirements
Following is a summary of our contractual cash obligations as of February 28, 2022 (in thousands):
Purchase obligations consist primarily of inventory purchase commitments.
Other
We are a defendant in various legal proceedings involving intellectual property claims and contract disputes matters whereby the final settlement has not been determined at this time. In connection with these matters, we may have to enter into license agreements or other settlement arrangements that could require us to make significant payments in the future. Based on current information available, we do not believe that there are any claims that would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity. See Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information on legal proceedings.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of net income (loss) adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, intangible asset amortization, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of debt issuance costs and discount, deferred income taxes, amortization of certain revenue assignment arrangements and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
Our cash flows from operating activities are attributable to our net loss as well as how well we manage our working capital, which is dictated by the volume of devices we purchase from our manufacturers or suppliers and then sell to our customers, the cadence at which we transition our customers to subscription arrangements as well as the payment and collection terms that we negotiate with customers and suppliers. We purchase a majority of our devices from significant suppliers located in Asia and Mexico that generally provide us 60-day payment terms for products purchased.
Our significant customers are located in the U.S. as well as certain foreign countries. We believe that our relationships with our key customers are good and that these customers are in good financial condition. We generally grant credit to our customers based on their financial viability and our historical collection experience with them. We typically require payment from our customers within 30 to 45 days of our invoice date with a few exceptions that extend the credit terms up to 90 days. Historically, since we paid our suppliers at or within 60 days of inventory purchase and our payment terms on our accounts receivable are generally within 45 days, we generated positive cash flows from operating activities. In Fiscal 2022, we began entering into subscription arrangements with key customers who previously purchased telematics devices from us. While these subscription arrangements create recurring multi-year revenue, they elongate the cash conversion cycle as we must outlay cash for the associated device but recover
this cash outlay over a subscription period. Thus in Fiscal 2022 the conversion of certain significant customers onto subscription arrangements had an unfavorable impact on cash flows. We anticipate that this trend will continue in the coming year as we continue our efforts to transition our entire MRM telematics customer base onto similar multi-year subscription arrangements.
For Fiscal 2022, net cash used in operating activities was $4.2 million with a net loss of $28.0 million. Our non-cash income and expenses from continuing operations totaled $48.7 million, comprised principally of depreciation, intangible assets amortization, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of debt issuance costs and discounts, noncash operating lease costs and changes in deferred income tax assets . These non-cash expenses were partially offset by non-cash revenues of $4.6 million related to acquired revenue assignment arrangements. Changes in operating assets and liabilities from continuing operations used was $17.4 million of cash, largely as a result of a $14.2 million decrease in deferred revenue, which was primarily attributable to the wind-down of the auto vehicle finance business that we decided to exit in Fiscal 2021. The wind-down of the auto vehicle finance business was largely complete as of the end of Fiscal 2022. Operating cash flows were also impacted by a $5.6 million decrease in operating lease liabilities. Net cash used in discontinued operations was $0.4 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
In Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, our net cash used in investing activities was $7.6 million and $13.7 million, respectively. In both of these periods, our primary investing activities consisted of capital expenditures. We expect that we will make additional capital expenditures in the future, including devices that we lease to customers under subscription agreements in order to support the future growth of our business.
Net cash provided by investing activities of discontinued operations was $5.7 million in Fiscal 2022, which was comprised of cash proceeds received from the sale of the LoJack North America business. Net cash used in investing activities of discontinued operations was $2.3 million in Fiscal 2021.
Cash flows from financing activities
In Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, our net cash used in financing activities was $2.6 million and $27.3 million, respectively. In both of these periods, we incurred payments for taxes related to the net share settlement of vested equity awards and the proceeds for the exercise of stock options. In Fiscal 2021, we repaid the remaining outstanding portion of our 2020 Convertible Notes of $27.6 million, as well as borrowed and repaid $20.0 million from our revolving credit facility.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for Fiscal 2022 describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
The inputs into certain of our judgments, assumptions, and estimates considered the economic implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our critical and significant accounting estimates. These estimates are listed in our Consolidated Financial Statements for Fiscal 2022, and include: revenue recognition, patent litigation and loss contingencies, goodwill and long-lived assets and income taxes, among other items. The actual results that we experience may differ materially from our estimates. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to develop, many of our estimates could require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. As events continue to evolve our estimates may change materially in future periods.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into contracts with customers that can include various combinations of products and services. As a result, our contracts may contain multiple performance obligations. In many customer arrangements subscription services are bundled with the sale or lease of telematics devices within the same contractual arrangement. To determine the performance obligations under these arrangements, we assess the contractual elements and, in particular, whether the telematics products within the arrangement are distinct. This is an area of judgment that includes the consideration of all elements of the arrangement. Significant factors in determining whether telematics devices are distinct are whether such devices are sold separately, as well as the degree of integration and interdependency between the subscription elements of the arrangement and the associated telematics devices. If we conclude that the telematics devices within a customer arrangement are distinct and therefore represent a separate performance obligation, the total expected consideration associated with the contract is allocated between the performance obligations based upon the relative stand-alone selling price associated with each performance obligation. We base stand-alone selling prices on pricing tables for the same or similar items.
For some customer arrangements, we have concluded that the subscription services and associated telematics devices are not distinct performance obligations and thus represent a single combined performance obligation. In these circumstances, we generally recognize the total expected consideration as revenue over the term of the subscription.
Patent Litigation and Other Contingencies
We are subject to the possibility of various losses arising in the ordinary course of business. We consider the likelihood of impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss, in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be made or adjusted and whether new accruals are required.
Third parties, including customers, have in the past and may in the future assert claims or initiate litigation related to exclusive patent, copyright, trademark, and other intellectual property rights to technologies and related standards that are relevant to us. These assertions may increase over time as a result of our growth and the general increase in the pace of patent claims assertions, particularly in the United States. If any infringement or other intellectual property claim made against us by any third party is successful, or if we fail to develop non-infringing technology or license the proprietary rights on commercially reasonable terms and conditions, our business, operating results, and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
We accrue for these intellectual property claims whenever we determine that an unfavorable outcome is probable and the liability is reasonably estimable. The amount of the accrual is estimated based on our review of each individual claim, including the type and facts of the claim and our assessment of the merits of the claim. Since these legal matters can be very complex and require significant judgment, we often utilize external legal counsel and other subject matter experts to assist us in defending against such claims. These accruals are reviewed at least on a quarterly basis and are adjusted to reflect the impact of recent negotiations, settlements, court rulings, advice from legal counsel and other events pertaining to the case. Although we believe that we take reasonable and considerable measures to mitigate our exposure in these matters, the outcome of litigation is inherently unpredictable. Nonetheless, we believe that we have valid defenses with respect to pending legal matters against us as well as adequate provisions for probable and estimable losses. All costs for legal services are expensed as incurred.
Two open patent infringement lawsuits filed against us by Omega Patents, LLC (“Omega”) and Koninklijke Philips N.V. (“Philips”) are discussed in more detail below.
Omega
A mediation was held with the Company and Omega on April 12, 2022 to work towards a settlement. No settlement was reached during the mediation. In connection with this claim, we have accrued our best estimate of the probable liability of $3.0 million as a litigation reserve related to this matter based on reasonable royalty rates for similar technologies. It is reasonably possible that the court in a new trial may award Omega damages and pre-judgment interest in excess of the amounts we have accrued. Additionally, it is possible that the case may be settled
and that the amount required to be paid by us in such settlement may be different from the litigation reserve we have recorded.
Philips
On April 1, 2022, the administrative law judge (“ALJ”) at the International Trade Commission (“ITC”) issued a Final Initial Determination on the question of the violation of section 337 (19 U.S.C. § 1337). The administrative law judge determined that a violation of section 337 has not occurred with respect to any of the asserted patents. On April 13, 2022, Philips filed a Petition for Commission Review of the ALJ's Final Initial Determination, and Respondents responded to Philips’ Petition on April 21, 2022. The district court cases related to Philips in Delaware have been stayed pending the final outcome of the ITC matter. We believe that we have strong non-infringement and invalidity defenses should the Delaware district court cases proceed. Also, we believe we have strong indemnification claims against our communication module suppliers, and are entitled to have our defense costs and any losses resulting from these proceedings paid by those suppliers, who are co-defendants in these proceedings. Currently, it is not feasible to predict with certainty the outcome of these four legal proceedings, and no specific amount of damages has been identified.
See Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, to the accompanying consolidation financial statements for additional information.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. We test goodwill for impairment in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, (“ASC 350”). Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. ASC 350 provides that an entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, an entity determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. However, if an entity concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform an impairment test. The impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value exceeds book value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than book value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the amount that the book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The estimates of fair value of the reporting units are computed using either an income approach, a market approach, or a combination of both. Under the income approach, we utilize the discounted cash flow method to estimate the fair value of the reporting units. Significant assumptions inherent in estimating the fair values include the estimated future cash flows, growth assumptions for future revenues (including future gross margin rates, expense rates, capital expenditures and other estimates), and a rate used to discount estimated future cash flow projections to their present value (or estimated fair value) based on estimated weighted average cost of capital (i.e., the selected discount rate). We select assumptions used in the financial forecasts by using historical data, supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions, estimated growth rates, and management’s plans. Under the market approach, fair value is derived from metrics of publicly traded companies or historically completed transactions of comparable businesses (i.e. guideline companies). The selection of comparable businesses is based on the markets in which the reporting units operate giving consideration to risk profiles, size, geography, and diversity of products and services.
Long-lived assets to be held and used, including identifiable intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. These events or changes in circumstances may include a significant deterioration of operating results, changes in business plans or changes in anticipated future cash flows. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets or asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the lowest level of asset group. If the assets or asset group are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined by estimates of discounted cash flows. The discount rate used in any estimate of discounted cash flows would be the rate required for similar investment of like risk.
The recoverability assessment with respect to each of the tradenames used in our operations requires us to estimate the fair value of the asset as of the assessment date. Such determination is made using discounted cash flow
techniques (Level 3 determination of fair value). Significant inputs to the valuation model include future revenue and profitability projections associated with the tradename through a relief from royalty approach; estimated market royalty rates that could be derived from the licensing of our tradenames to third parties in order to establish the cash flows accruing to the benefit of the Company as a result of our ownership of our tradenames; and rates used to discount the estimated royalty cash flow projections to their present value (or estimated fair value).
As further described above, we have begun entering into subscription arrangements with customers who have historically purchased MRM telematics products from us, which is expected to result in growth in Software & Subscription Services revenues and a corresponding decline in Telematics Products revenues as we transition the MRM telematics business to long-term subscription contracts. This transition is expected to be completed over the course of Fiscal 2023. As a result of this transition, the fair value of the Telematics Products reporting unit exceeds its carrying value by approximately 22%.
At February 28, 2022, we had $94.4 million in goodwill and $32.0 million in other net intangible assets, recorded on our consolidated balance sheet. Additionally, we had three reporting units, one reporting unit under our Telematics Products segment and two reporting units under our Software and Subscription Services segment. Our Telematics Products segment includes $39.2 million of goodwill and our Software & Subscription Service segment includes $55.2 million.
See Note 8, Property and Equipment, and Note 9, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate, primarily due to the tax impact of state taxes, foreign operations, R&D tax credits, global intangible low-taxed income, nondeductible officer compensation, and transfer pricing adjustments. Our tax provision for income taxes is inherently difficult to estimate and record. This is due to the complex nature of the U.S. and International tax codes; earnings being different than anticipated in countries with different tax rates; changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities; changes in tax laws and regulations, treaties, or interpretations thereof, including changes to the taxation of earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, the deductibility of expenses attributable to foreign income, and the foreign tax credit rules.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. We believe our reserves are reasonable and that our historical income tax provisions and accruals for these uncertain positions are sufficient. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets in a particular jurisdiction. Currently we maintain a valuation allowance in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
At February 28, 2022, our federal income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $75.3 million, our state income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $68.3 million, and our foreign income tax loss carryforwards were approximately $60.7 million. Since these losses have varying degrees of carryforward periods, it requires us to estimate the amount of carryforward losses that we can reasonably expect to realize. Future changes in anticipated earnings could change the amount of carry forward losses that we expect to realize and the amount of valuation allowances we have recorded (see Note 14, Income Taxes, for additional information).
Forward Looking Statements
Forward looking statements in this Form 10-K which include, without limitation, statements relating to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations, intentions, projections and other information regarding future performance, are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words “may”, “will”, “could”, “plans”, “intends”, “seeks”, “believes”, “anticipates”, “expects”, “estimates”, “judgment”, “goal”, and variations of these words and similar expressions, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance and are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict, including, without limitation, the impact of adverse and uncertain economic conditions in the U.S. and international markets, the sufficiency of our cash and cash equivalents to meet our liquidity needs and service our indebtedness, product demand, competitive pressures and pricing declines in our markets, the timing of customer approvals of new product designs, intellectual property infringement claims, interruption or failure of our Internet-based systems used to wirelessly configure and communicate with the tracking and monitoring devices that we sell, global component supply shortages due to ongoing supply chain constraints, the phased implementation of our ERP system, the effect of tariffs on exports from China and other countries, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic (including its effect on the supply of labor), and other risks and uncertainties that are set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (Risk Factors). Such risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from historical or anticipated results. Although we believe the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions, we can give no assurance that our expectations will be attained. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.