Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - December 31, 2021
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references in this section to "the Company," "Cano Health,” “we,” “us,” “our,” and other similar terms refer, for periods prior to the completion of the Business Combination, to PCIH and its subsidiaries, and for periods upon or after the completion of the Business Combination, to the consolidated operations of Cano Health, Inc. and its subsidiaries, including PCIH and its subsidiaries. The following discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes presented here in Part II, Item 8 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Note 20 Restatement and Note 21 Revision in connection with the restatement described in the “Explanatory Note,” as well as Part I, “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as PCIH's audited financial statements and the accompanying notes as well as “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Cano Health” included in our Form S-4/A filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 15, 2021.
The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the sections entitled "Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Restatement and Revision of Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Information
In this Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” we have restated our previously issued unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2021, for the three and six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2021; and condensed consolidated statements of cash flows for the three months ended March 30, 2021, for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 (the “Prior Quarterly Financial Statements”), to reflect the restatement more fully described in Note 20 Restatement to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, in connection with the restatement, we corrected, through a revision, our previously issued audited financial statements as of and for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 in Note 21 Revision. Within this Item 7, we revised our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements as of and for the three months ended March 31, 2020, the three and six months ended June 30, 2020, and the three and nine months ended September 30, 2020.
The financial information that has been previously filed or otherwise reported for the Prior Quarterly Financial Statements is superseded by the information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Note 20 Restatement in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the restatement and the related financial statement impact.
Description of Cano Health
We are a primary care-centric, technology-powered healthcare delivery and population health management platform designed with a focus on clinical excellence. Our mission is simple: to improve patient health by delivering superior primary care medical services, while forging life-long bonds with our members. Our vision is clear: to become the national leader in primary care by improving the health, wellness and quality of life of the communities we serve, while reducing healthcare costs.
From December 31, 2017 to December 31, 2021, we have expanded our services beyond Florida to an additional seven new states and Puerto Rico, while growing membership from 13,685 members to 227,005 members. See “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Key Performance Metrics” for how we define our members and medical centers. Today, we are one of the largest and most sophisticated independent primary care platforms in the U.S., but still maintain significant growth runway. We have sought to address the fundamental problems with traditional healthcare payment models by leveraging our technology solutions and proven business model to align incentives among patients, payors and providers:
•Patients: Our members are offered services in modern, clean, and contemporary medical centers, with same or next day appointments, integrated virtual care, wellness services, ancillary services (such as physiotherapy), home services, transportation, telemedicine and a 24/7 urgency line, all without additional cost to them. This broad-based care model is critical to our success in delivering care to members of low-income communities, including large minority and immigrant populations, with complex care needs, many of whom previously had very limited or no access to quality healthcare. We are proud of the impact we have made in these underserved communities.
•Providers: We believe that providers want to be clinicians. Our employed physicians enjoy a collegial, near-academic environment and the tools and multi-disciplinary support they need to focus on medicine, their patients and their families rather than administrative matters like pre-authorizations, referrals, billing and coding. Our physicians receive ongoing training through regular clinical meetings to review the latest findings in primary care medicine. Furthermore, we offer above-average pay and no hospital call requirements. In addition, our physicians are eligible to receive a bonus based upon patient results, including reductions in patient emergency room visits and hospital admissions, among other metrics.
•Payors: Payors want three things: high-quality care, membership growth and effective medical cost management. We have a multi-year and multi-geography track record of delivering on all three. Our proven track record of high-quality ratings increases the premiums paid by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid ("CMS") to health plans, increases our quality primary-care-driven membership growth, and increases our scaled, highly professional value-based provider group that delivers quality care.
CanoPanorama, our proprietary population health management technology-powered platform, powers our efforts to deliver superior clinical care. Our platform provides the healthcare providers at our medical centers with a 360-degree view of their members, along with actionable insights to empower better care decisions and drive high member engagement. We leverage our technology to risk-stratify members and apply a highly personalized approach to primary care, chronic care, preventive care and members’ broader healthcare needs. We believe our model is well-positioned to capitalize on the large and growing opportunity being driven by the marketplace’s shift to value-based care, demographic tailwinds in the market and the increased focus on improving health outcomes, care quality and the patient experience.
We predominantly enter into capitated contracts with the nation’s largest health plans to provide holistic, comprehensive healthcare. We predominantly recognize recurring per-member-per-month ("PMPM") capitated revenue, which, in the case of health plans, is a pre-negotiated percentage of the premium that the health plan receives from the CMS. We also provide practice management and administrative support services to independent physicians and group practices that we do not own through our managed services organization relationships, which we refer to as our affiliate relationships. Our contracted recurring revenue model offers us highly predictable revenue and rewards us for providing high-quality care rather than driving a high volume of services. In this capitated arrangement, our goals are well-aligned with payors and patients alike - the more we improve health outcomes, the more profitable we will be over time.
Our capitated revenue is generally a function of the pre-negotiated percentage of the premium that the health plan receives from CMS as well as our ability to accurately and appropriately document member acuity and achieve quality metrics. Under this capitated contract structure, we are responsible for all members’ medical costs inside and outside of our medical centers. Keeping members healthy is our primary objective. When they need medical care, delivery of the right care in the right setting can greatly impact outcomes. Through members’ engagement with our entire suite of services, including high-frequency primary care and access to ancillary services like our wellness programs, Cano Life and Cano@Home, we aim to reduce the number of occasions that members need to seek specialty care in higher-cost environments. When care outside of our medical centers is needed, our primary care physicians control referrals to specialists and other third-party care, which are typically paid by us on a fee-for-service basis. This allows us to proactively manage members’ health within our medical centers first, prior to resorting to more costly care settings.
As of December 31, 2021, we employed approximately 400 providers (physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants) across our 130 owned medical centers, maintained affiliate relationships with over 1,000 physicians and approximately 750 clinical support employees focused on supporting physicians in enabling patient care and experience. For the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, our total revenue was $361.4 million, $831.6 million and $1.6 billion, respectively. Our net loss for the same periods was $19.8 million, $71.1 million and $116.7 million, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Build Long-Term Relationships with our Existing Members
We focus on member satisfaction in order to build long-term relationships. Our members enjoy highly personalized value-based care and their visits to our medical centers cover primary care and ancillary programs such as pharmacy and dental services, in addition to wellness and social services, which lead to healthier and happier members. By integrating member engagement and the Cano Life wellness program within the CanoPanorama platform, we also help foster long-term relationships with members. Resulting word-of-mouth referrals contribute to our high organic growth rates. Patient satisfaction can also be measured by a provider’s Net Promoter Score ("NPS"), which measures the loyalty of customers to a company. We believe our high NPS speaks to our ability to deliver high-quality care with superior member satisfaction.
Add New Members in Existing Centers
Our ability to add new members organically is a key driver of our growth. We have a large embedded growth opportunity within our existing medical center base. In medical centers that are approaching full capacity, we are able to augment our footprint by expanding our existing medical centers, opening de novo centers or acquiring centers that are more convenient for our members. We also believe that even after COVID-19 subsides, we will continue to conduct some visits by telemedicine based on member preference and clinical need, which in turn could increase the average capacity of our medical centers. Additionally, as we add members to our existing medical centers, we expect these members to contribute significant incremental economics as we leverage our fixed cost base at each medical center.
Our payor partners also direct members to our medical centers by either assigning patients who have not yet selected a primary care provider or through insurance agents who inform their clients about our services. We believe this often results in the patient selecting us as their primary care provider when they select a Medicare Advantage plan. Due to our care delivery model’s patient-centric focus, we have been able to consistently help payors manage their costs while raising the quality of their plans, affording them quality bonuses that increase their revenue. We believe that we represent an attractive opportunity for payors to meaningfully improve their overall membership growth in a given market without assuming any financial downside.
Expand our Medical Center Base within Existing and New Geographies
We have successfully entered seven new states and Puerto Rico since 2017 and were operating in Florida, Texas, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, New Mexico, Illinois, California and Puerto Rico as of December 31, 2021. When entering a new market, we tailor our entry strategy to the characteristics of the specific market and provide a customized solution to meet that market’s needs. When choosing a market to enter, we look at various factors including (i) Medicare population density, (ii) underserved demographics, (iii) existing payor relationships and (iv) specialist and hospital access/capacity. We typically choose a location that is highly visible and accessible and work to enhance brand development pre-entry. Our flexible medical center design allows us to adjust to local market needs by building medical centers that range from approximately 5,000 to 20,000 square feet that may include ancillary services such as pharmacies and dental services. We seek to grow member engagement through targeted multi-channel marketing, community outreach and use of mobile clinics to expand our reach. When entering a new market, based on its characteristics and economics, we decide whether to buy existing medical centers, build de novo medical centers or to help manage members’ health care via affiliate relationships. This highly flexible model enables us to choose the right solution for each market.
When building or buying a medical center is the right solution, we lease the medical center and employ physicians. In
our medical centers, we receive per-member-per-month capitated revenue, which, in the case of health plans, is a pre-negotiated percentage of the premium that the health plan receives from CMS.
Alternatively, our affiliate relationships allow us to partner with independent physicians and group practices that we do not own and to provide them access to components of our population health management platform. As of December 31, 2021, we provided services to over 1,000 providers. As in the case of our owned medical centers, we receive per-member-per-month capitated revenue and a pre-negotiated percentage of the premium that the health plan receives from CMS. We pay the affiliate a primary care fee and a portion of the surplus of premium in excess of third-party medical costs. The surplus portion paid to affiliates is recorded as direct patient expense. This approach is extremely capital efficient as the costs of managing affiliates are minimal. Further, the affiliate model is an important growth avenue as it serves as a feeder into our acquisition pipeline, enabling us to evaluate and target affiliated practices for acquisition based on our operational experience with them.
Contracts with Payors
Our economic model relies on our capitated partnerships with payors, which manage Medicare members across the United States. We have established ourselves as a top quality provider across multiple Medicare and Medicaid health plans, including Humana, Anthem and UnitedHealthcare (or their respective affiliates). Our relationships with our payor partners go back as many as ten years and are generally evergreen in nature. We are viewed as a critical distributor of effective healthcare with market-leading clinical outcomes (led by primary care), and as such we believe our payor relationships will continue to be long-lasting and enduring. These plans and others are seeking further opportunities to expand their relationship with us beyond our current markets. Having payor relationships in place reduces the risk of entering into new markets. Maintaining, supporting and growing these relationships, particularly as we enter new geographies, is critical to our long-term success. Health plans look to achieve three goals when partnering with a provider: membership growth, clinical quality and medical cost management. We are capable of delivering all three based on our care coordination strategy, differentiated quality metrics and strong relationships with members. We believe this alignment of interests and our highly effective care model will ensure continued success with our payor partners.
Effectively Manage the Cost of Care for Our Members
The capitated nature of our contracting with payors requires us to invest in maintaining our members’ health while prudently managing the medical costs of our members. Our care model focuses on maintaining health and leveraging the primary care setting as a means of avoiding costly downstream healthcare costs. Our members, however, retain the freedom to seek care at emergency rooms or hospitals without the need for referrals; we do not restrict their access to care. Therefore, we are liable for potentially large medical claims should we not effectively manage our members’ health. To mitigate this exposure, we utilize stop-loss insurance for our members, protecting us from medical claims per episode in excess of certain levels.
Significant Acquisitions
We seek to supplement our organic growth through our highly accretive acquisition strategy. We have a successful acquisition and integration track record. We have established a rigorous data-driven approach and the necessary infrastructure to identify, acquire and quickly integrate targets.
The acquisitions have all been accounted for in accordance with ASC 805, "Business Combinations", and the operations of the acquired entities are included in our historical results for the periods following the closing of the acquisition. See Note 3, “Business Acquisitions” in our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The most significant of these acquisitions impacting the comparability of our operating results were:
•Primary Care Physicians and related entities. On January 2, 2020, we acquired Primary Care Physicians and related entities (collectively, "Primary Care Physicians") for total consideration of $60.2 million, consisting of $53.6 million in cash, $4.0 million of Class A-4 Units of PCIH and $2.6 million in other closing payments. Primary Care Physicians is comprised of eleven primary care centers and a managed services organization serving populations in the Broward County region of South Florida.
•HP Enterprises II, LLC and related entities. On June 1, 2020, we acquired HP Enterprises II, LLC and related entities (collectively, "HP" or "Healthy Partners") for total consideration of $195.4 million, consisting of $149.3 million in
cash, $30.0 million of Class A-4 Units of PCIH and $16.1 million in deferred payments. Healthy Partners is comprised of sixteen primary care centers and a management services organization serving populations across Florida, including the Miami-Dade, Broward, Palm Beach, Treasure Coast and Central Florida areas.
•University Health Care and its affiliates. On June 11, 2021, we acquired University Health Care and its affiliates (collectively, "University") for total consideration of $607.9 million, consisting of $538.3 million in cash, $60.0 million of Class A common stock and $9.6 million in contingent consideration from acquisition add-ons based on additional acquired entities. University is comprised of thirteen primary care centers, a managed services organization and a pharmacy serving populations throughout various locations in South Florida.
•Doctor’s Medical Center, LLC and its affiliates. On July 2, 2021, the Company acquired Doctor's Medical Center, LLC and its affiliates ("DMC"). The purchase price totaled $300.7 million, which was paid in cash. DMC is comprised of fourteen primary care centers serving populations across Florida. In conjunction with the primary care centers, DMC also provides Management Services Organization ("MSO") services to affiliated medical centers, and operates a pharmacy.
Member Acuity and Quality Metrics
Medicare pays capitation using a risk-adjusted model, which compensates payors based on the health status, or acuity, of each individual member. Payors with higher acuity members receive a higher payment and those with lower acuity members receive a lower payment. Moreover, some of our capitated revenues also include adjustments for performance incentives or penalties based on the achievement of certain clinical quality metrics as contracted with payors. Our capitated revenues are recognized based on member acuity and quality metrics and may be adjusted to reflect actual member acuity and quality metrics.
Seasonality to Our Business
Our operational and financial results experience some variability depending upon the time of year in which they are measured. This variability is most notable in the following areas:
Capitated Revenue Per Member
Excluding the impact of large scale shifts in membership demographics or acuity, our Medicare Advantage capitated revenue per member per month ("PMPM”) will generally decline over the course of the year. As the year progresses, Medicare Advantage PMPM typically declines as new members join us with less complete or accurate documentation in the previous year (and therefore lower current year MRA).
Medical Costs
Medical costs vary seasonally depending on a number of factors. Typically, we experience higher utilization levels during the first quarter of the year due to influenza and other seasonal illnesses. Medical costs also depend upon the number of business days in a period. Shorter periods will typically have lesser medical costs due to fewer business days. Business days can also create year-over-year comparability issues if one year has a different number of business days compared to another. Additionally, we generally accrue stop loss reimbursements from September through December (as patients reach stop loss thresholds) which can result in reduced medical expenses during the third and fourth quarter due to recoveries.
Organic Member Growth
We experience organic member growth throughout the year as existing Medicare Advantage plan members choose our providers and during special enrollment periods when certain eligible individuals can enroll in Medicare Advantage plans midyear. We experience some seasonality with respect to organic enrollment, which is generally higher during the fourth and first quarter, driven by Medicare Advantage plan advertising and marketing campaigns and plan enrollment selections made during the annual open enrollment period. We also grow through serving new and existing traditional Medicare, Affordable Care Act (ACA), Medicaid, and Commercial patients.
Key Performance Metrics
In addition to our GAAP and non-GAAP financial information, we review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Members
Members represent those Medicare, Medicaid, and Affordable Care Act ("ACA"), and commercially insured patients for whom we receive a fixed per-member-per-month fee under capitation arrangements as of the end of a particular period.
Owned Medical Centers
We define our medical centers as those primary care medical centers open for business and attending to members at the end of a particular period in which we own the medical operations and the physicians are our employees.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. The outbreak of COVID-19 caused severe disruptions in the global economy. These disruptions have adversely impacted businesses including in the states in which we operate. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved the use of two COVID-19 vaccines and has issued emergency use authorizations for additional vaccines for the prevention of COVID-19. The availability of these vaccines has resulted in a significant portion of the U.S. population being vaccinated and prompted many state and local governments in the U.S. to lift most COVID-19 restrictions. However, certain restrictions have been reimposed in recent months as a result of the recent resurgence in COVID-19 due to multiple variants of the virus. This resurgence, as well as any future variants of the coronavirus entering the U.S., could prompt a return to tighter restrictions in certain areas of the country. While we continue to navigate the crisis and monitor the impact of the pandemic on our business, the fluidity of the situation precludes us at this time from making any predictions as to the ultimate impact COVID-19 may have on our future financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our centers remained open for urgent visits and necessary procedures and we augmented our Cano@Home program, 24/7 urgency line and pharmacy home delivery to enable members to access needed care and support in the home. We successfully pivoted to a telemedicine offering for routine care in order to protect and better serve our patients, staff and community. As COVID-19 cases grew nationally, we took immediate action and deployed a specific COVID-19 focused module under CanoPanorama that allowed our staff to screen patients for COVID-19 and related complications, as well as refer them to a specialized team that is dedicated to helping COVID-19 patients. The pandemic did not have a material impact on our results of operations, cash flows and financial position as of, and for the year ended December 31, 2021. This is primarily attributable to the relatively fixed nature of our capitated revenue arrangements. Over 95% of our total gross revenues are recurring, consisting of fixed monthly per-member-per-month capitation payments we receive from healthcare providers. Additionally, during this time, we completed and integrated several acquisitions and expanded to new locations which had a positive impact on our revenues. Due to our recurring contracted revenue model, we experienced minimal impact to our revenue during 2020 and 2021.
We experienced both cost increases and cost savings due to COVID-19. Increases in operating expenses were primarily attributable to higher-than-budgeted payroll expenses, pharmacy prescription expenses, provider payments, rent, and marketing expenses. Deeply committed to our employees, we made a conscious decision not to furlough any of our employees, even if their function was disrupted by COVID-19. These higher costs were partially offset by lower referral fees, vehicle expenses, IT costs, professional fees, office and facility (ER) costs, and travel costs. We experienced a decrease in utilization of services during March through June of 2020. Medical centers were open for emergency visits, but we also expanded our at-home care services, resulting in lower emergency transportation costs, and facility service costs (including costs related to various wellness and activity services offered at clinics). Even as utilization increased month to month through the second half of 2020 and through
2021, we expect certain costs savings to remain permanent as some members continue to take advantage of telemedicine and Cano@Home care services.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, future results of operations and financial condition will depend on future factors that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. These factors include, but are not limited to, new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the scope and duration of business closures and restrictions, government-imposed or recommended suspensions of elective procedures, and expenses required for supplies and personal protective equipment. Additionally, the impact of any new COVID-19 variants cannot be predicted at this time, and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination and booster rates among the population, the effectiveness of the COVID-19 vaccines against the variants, and the response by the governmental bodies and regulators. Due to these and other uncertainties, we cannot estimate the length or severity of the impact of the pandemic on our business. Additionally, because of our business model, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial condition until future periods. We will continue to closely evaluate and monitor the nature and extent of these potential impacts to our business, results of operations and liquidity. However, based on our experience, we expect the overall negative impact from COVID-19 on our business will be immaterial. In addition, we expect to offer more telemedicine and mobile solutions which will create additional touchpoints to timely capture member medical data, which in turn provide actionable insights to empower better care decisions via our CanoPanorama system.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please see the section entitled "Risk Factors" included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Our capitated revenue is derived from medical services provided at our medical centers or affiliated practices under capitation arrangements made directly with various health plans or CMS. Capitated revenue consists of a per member per month ("PMPM") amount paid for the delivery of healthcare services, and our rates are determined as a percent of the premium that the health plans receive from the CMS for our at-risk members. Those premiums are based upon the cost of care in a local market and the average utilization of services by the members enrolled. Medicare pays capitation using a “risk adjustment model,” which compensates providers based on the health status (acuity) of each individual patient. Groups with higher acuity patients receive more, and those with lower acuity patients receive less. Under the risk adjustment model, capitated premium is paid based on the acuity of members enrolled for the preceding year and subsequently adjusted once current year data is compiled. The amount of capitated revenue may be affected by certain factors outlined in the agreements with the health plans, such as administrative fees paid to the health plans and risk adjustments to premiums.
Generally, we enter into three types of capitation arrangements: non-risk arrangements, limited risk arrangements, and full risk arrangements. Under our non-risk arrangements, we receive monthly capitated payments without regard to the actual amount of services provided. Under our limited risk arrangements, we assume partial financial risk for covered members. Under our full risk arrangements, we assume full financial risk for covered members.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. We generate fee-for-service revenue from providing primary care services to patients in our medical centers and affiliates when we bill the member or their insurance plan on a fee-for-service basis as medical services are rendered. While substantially all of our patients are members, we occasionally also provide care to non-members. Fee-for-service amounts are recorded based on agreed-upon fee schedules determined within each contract.
Other revenue includes pharmacy and ancillary fees earned under contracts with certain care organizations for the provision of care coordination and other services. With respect to our pharmacies, we contract with an administrative services organization to collect and remit payments on our behalf from the sale of prescriptions and medications. We have pharmacies at some of our medical centers, where patients may fill prescriptions and retrieve their medications. Patients also have the option to fill their prescriptions with a third-party pharmacy of their choice.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs primarily consist of all medical expenses incurred by the health plans or CMS (contractually on behalf of Cano Health) including costs for inpatient and hospital care, specialists, and certain
pharmacy purchases, net of rebates and other recoveries. Provider costs are accrued based on the date of service to members, based in part on estimates, including an accrual for medical services incurred but not reported (“IBNR”). Liabilities for IBNR are estimated and adjusted for current experience. These estimates are continually reviewed and updated, and we retain the services of an independent actuary to review IBNR on a quarterly basis. We expect our third-party medical costs to increase given the healthcare spending trends within the Medicare population, which is also consistent with what we receive under our payor contracts.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense primarily consists of costs incurred in the treatment of our patients, at our medical centers and affiliated practices, including the compensation related to medical service providers and clinical support staff, medical supplies, purchased medical services, drug costs for pharmacy sales, and payments to affiliated providers.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses include employee-related expenses, including salaries and benefits, technology infrastructure, operations, clinical and quality support, finance, legal, human resources, and corporate development departments. In addition, selling, general, and administrative expenses include all corporate technology and occupancy costs. Our selling, general, and administrative expenses increased in 2021 following the closing of the Business Combination, and we expect our selling, general, and administrative expenses to continue to increase over time due to the additional legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other costs that we incur as a public company, as well as other costs associated with continuing to grow our business. However, we anticipate that these expenses will decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term, although they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and amount of these expenses. For purposes of determining center-level economics, we allocate a portion of our selling, general, and administrative expenses to our medical centers and affiliated practices. The relative allocation of these expenses to each center depends upon a number of metrics, including (i) the number of centers open during a given period of time; (ii) the number of clinicians at each center at a given period of time; or (iii) if determinable, the center where the expense was incurred.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily attributable to our capital investment and consist of fixed asset depreciation and amortization of intangibles considered to have finite lives.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other primarily consist of deal costs (including due diligence, integration, legal, internal staff, and other professional fees, incurred from acquisition activity), bonuses due to sellers, fair value adjustments in contingent consideration due to sellers, and management fees for financial and management consulting services from our advisory services agreement.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred on our outstanding borrowings under our notes payable related to our equipment loans and credit facility. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources”. Costs incurred to obtain debt financing are amortized and shown as a component of interest expense.
Interest income. Interest income primarily consists of interest earned through a loan agreement with an affiliated company.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt primarily consists of unamortized debt issuance costs related to Term Loan 2 in connection with our financing arrangements.
Change in fair value of embedded derivative. Change in fair value of embedded derivative consists primarily of changes to an embedded derivative identified in our previously existing debt agreement. The embedded derivative was revalued at each reporting period.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Change in fair value of warrant liabilities consists primarily of changes to the public warrants and private placement warrants assumed upon the consummation of the Business Combination. The liabilities are revalued at each reporting period.
Other expenses. Other expenses consist of legal settlement fees.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s disaggregated revenue for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s member and member month figures for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Capitated revenue was $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $732.7 million, or 92.0%, compared to $796.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 98.7% increase in the total member months offset by a 3.4% decrease in total revenue per member per month. The increase in member months was due to an increase in the total number of members served at new and existing centers and our acquisitions, primarily Healthy Partners in June 2020, University in June 2021, and DMC in July 2021 which resulted in the addition of new members and new markets in Florida.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. Fee-for-service and other revenue was $80.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $45.0 million, or 128.0%, compared to $35.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in fee-for-service revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in patients served across existing centers. We experienced a decrease in utilization of services due to the impact of COVID-19 in 2020, which contributed to lower fee-for service revenue in 2020. Further, other revenue increased in the fourth quarter of 2021 due to an August 2021 acquisition that generated ancillary fees earned under contracts with certain care organization for the provision of care coordination and other services. The increase in pharmacy revenue was driven by organic growth as we continued to increase the number of members served in our established pharmacies as well as the addition of a new pharmacy from our acquisition of University in June of 2021.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs were $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $666.1 million, or 117.9%, compared to $565.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by a 98.7% increase in total member months, the addition of Direct Contracting Entity ("DCE") members with higher medical costs, and higher utilization of third-party medical services as utilization normalized in 2021 from lower levels in 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense was $179.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $78.0 million, or 77.0%, compared to $101.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by increases in payroll and benefits of $35.9 million, pharmacy drugs of $10.3 million, medical supplies of $4.3 million and provider payments of $27.5 million.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $252.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $148.2 million, or 142.5%, compared to $104.0 million for the year ended
December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by higher salaries and benefits of $55.9 million, stock-based compensation of $27.1 million, occupancy costs of $18.9 million, marketing expenses of $11.3 million, legal and professional services of $12.2 million, and other costs (which included information technology and insurance costs) of $22.4 million. These increases were incurred to support the continued growth of our business and expansion into other states.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $49.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $30.9 million, or 167.3%, compared to $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by purchases of new property and equipment to support the growth of our business during the period as well as the addition of several brand names, non-compete agreements, and payor relationships from our 2020 and 2021 acquisitions.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other were $44.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.3 million, or 3.1%, compared to $42.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to slightly higher integration, legal, internal staff, and other professional fees incurred in 2021 compared to 2020.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration: We experienced a gain of $11.7 million related to the change in fair value of contingent consideration due to sellers in connection with our acquisitions for the year ended December 31, 2021, a change of $11.8 million, compared to a loss of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense was $51.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $17.3 million, or 50.8%, compared to $34.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by interest incurred on our higher outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund acquisitions.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Change in loss on extinguishment of debt was due to the Company recording a $13.1 million loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the partial extinguishment of an initial term loan ("Term Loan 3") in an original aggregate principal amount of $480.0 million following the closing of the Business Combination. The loss on extinguishment was related to unamortized debt issuance costs. The loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the refinancing of Term Loan 1 and Term Loan 2 with Term Loan 3 which was $23.3 million.
Change in fair value of the embedded derivative. Change in the fair value of the embedded derivative was $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a change in the fair value of the embedded derivative related to our term loan agreement in 2020. The embedded derivative was settled with the refinancing in November of 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $82.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of a change in the fair value of the public warrants and private placement warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We have financed our operations principally through the Business Combination and debt and borrowings from financial institutions. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $163.2
million and $33.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the Revolving Credit Facility had an available balance of $119.1 million. Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash primarily consist of highly liquid investments in money market funds and cash. Since our inception, we have generated significant operating losses from our operations, as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $78.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and negative cash flows from operations.
We expect to generate operating losses and minimal cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in acquisitions, expansion of operations, and due to additional selling, general, and administrative costs we expect to incur in connection with operating as a public company. As a result, we may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
On November 23, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement with certain lenders, with Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as the administrative agent, collateral agent and a letter of credit issuer, and Credit Suisse Loan Funding LLC, as the sole lead arranger and sole book runner. The Credit Agreement provided for an Initial Term Loan ("Term Loan 3") in an original aggregate principal amount of $480.0 million, a revolving credit facility with original commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $30.0 million (the "Revolving Credit Facility"), and a delayed draw term loan facility with commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $175.0 million (the" Delayed Draw Term Loan Facility"). The Revolving Credit Facility included a $10.0 million sub-limit for the issuance of letters of credit. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility mature, and the revolving commitments thereunder terminate, on November 23, 2025. The Initial Term Loan and Delayed Draw Term Loans mature on November 23, 2027.
Since December 2020, we have completed the following financing activities:
•On June 3, 2021, the Business Combination with Jaws closed. In aggregate, the Company generated approximately $935.4 million in net cash proceeds after transaction costs and advisory fees paid and distributions to PCIH shareholders.
•On June 4, 2021, the Company utilized $400.0 million of the net proceeds from the Business Combination to pay off the Company’s debt under Term Loan 3 and the remainder of the net proceeds was held on the balance sheet for general corporate purposes.
See further discussion related to the Business Combination in Note 1, "Nature of Business and Operations" in our audited consolidated financial statements.
•In June 2021, we borrowed the remaining availability under our Delayed Draw Term Loan Facility of $175.0 million and entered into the Third Amendment and Incremental Facility Amendment to the Credit Agreement pursuant to which we borrowed $295.0 million and made certain other amendments to our Credit Agreement.
See further discussion of the Credit Agreement with Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, in Note 9, “Long-term debt”, under Term Loan 3, in our audited consolidated financial statements.
•On July 2, 2021, we entered into the Bridge Loan Agreement with certain lenders and Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as administrative agent, pursuant to which the lenders provided a $250.0 million unsecured bridge term loan. We used the bridge term loan to acquire DMC.
•On September 30, 2021, we issued senior unsecured notes for a principal amount of $300.0 million (the "Senior Notes") in a private offering. Proceeds from the Senior Notes were used to repay in full the $250.0 million bridge term loan under the Bridge Loan Agreement. The Senior Notes bear interest at 6.25% per annum, payable semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st of each year, commencing April 1, 2022.
•Further, on September 30, 2021, the Credit Agreement was amended to increase the Term Loan 3 by an additional $100.0 million and to increase the Revolving Credit Facility by an additional $30.0 million, bringing the aggregate amount of commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility to $60.0 million.
•On December 10, 2021, Credit Agreement was further amended to increase the Revolving Credit Facility by an additional $60.0 million for an aggregate amount of commitments of $120.0 million.
In total through the Business Combination and debt financing activities we raised $2.1 billion in 2021. We used $657.9 million to pay down debt and invested $1.1 billion in acquisitions.
Upon the completion of the Business Combination, Cano Health, Inc. became a party to the Tax Receivable Agreement ("TRA"). Under the terms of that agreement, Cano Health, Inc. generally will be required to pay to the Seller and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “TRA Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement, 85% of the tax savings, if any, that Cano Health, Inc. is deemed to realize in certain circumstances as a result of certain tax attributes that exist following the Business Combination and that are created thereafter, including as a result of payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. See further discussion related to the TRA agreement in Note 16, "Income Taxes" in our audited consolidated financial statements.
We believe that the proceeds from the Business Combination, our Term Loans, our Senior Notes and our Revolving Credit Facility described above as well as our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could vary because of, and our future capital requirements will depend on, many factors, including our growth rate, medical expenses, and the timing and extent of our expansion into new markets. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $128.5 million, an increase of $119.3 million in cash outflows compared to net cash used in operating activities of $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Significant changes impacting net cash used in operating activities were as follows:
•Increase in net loss after adjusting for the $82.91 million gain from the change in the fair value of the warrant liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $199.7 million compared to a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $71.1 million;
•Increases in accounts receivable, net was $15.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $30.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to timing of collections;
•Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other non-current assets of $28.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher prepaid insurance payments and prepaid bonus incentives;
•Increases in accounts payable was $33.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an increase of $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the addition of MSO provider payments related to the Company's acquisitions and an increase in accrued salaries, bonuses, and interest, and accruals relates to various professional services.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $1.1 billion, an increase of $862.9 million in cash outflows compared to net cash used in investing activities of $268.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to an increase in capital expenditures and cash used for acquisitions of subsidiaries.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.1 billion in cash inflows compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $282.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to $935.4 million in connection with the Business Combination and PIPE financing as well as additional proceeds from long-term debt and Delayed Draw Term Loans offset by an increase in payments of long-term debt.
Non-GAAP Financial Metrics
The following discussion includes references to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a performance metric that departs from GAAP because it excludes earnings components that are required under GAAP. Other companies may define non-GAAP financial measures differently and, as a result, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be directly comparable to those of other companies. These non-GAAP financial metrics should be used as a supplement to, and not as an alternative to, the Company's GAAP financial results.
By definition, EBITDA consists of net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA adjusted to add back the effect of certain expenses, such as stock-based compensation expense, de novo losses (consisting of losses incurred for the twelve months after the opening of a new facility), acquisition transaction costs (consisting of transaction costs, fair value adjustments in contingent consideration, management fees and corporate development payroll costs), restructuring and other charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, changes in fair value of an embedded derivative, and changes in fair value of warrant liabilities. Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure used by our management to assess the operating and financial performance of our Company.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial measures also provides additional information to investors regarding our results of operations and is useful for trending, analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. By excluding certain expenses and other items that may not be indicative of our core business operating results, these non-GAAP financial measures:
•allow investors to evaluate our performance from management’s perspective, resulting in greater transparency with respect to supplemental information used by us in our financial and operational decision making;
•provide better transparency as to the measures used by management and others who follow our industry to estimate the value of our company; and
•allow investors to view our financial performance and condition in the same manner that our significant lenders and landlords require us to report financial information to them in connection with determining our compliance with financial covenants.
Our use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect: (1) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) the potentially dilutive impact of non-cash stock-based compensation; (3) the change in the fair value of our warrant liabilities, ; or (4) net interest expense/income; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and/or Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA along with other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including net loss, cash flow metrics and our GAAP financial results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss to non-GAAP financial information:
(1) De novo losses include those costs associated with the ramp up of new medical centers and that are not expected to be incurred past the first 12 months after opening. These costs collectively are higher than comparable expenses incurred once such a facility has been opened and generating revenue, and would not have been incurred unless a new facility was being opened.
(2) Acquisition transaction costs included $4.0 million, $0.4 million and $0.3 million of corporate development payroll costs for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Corporate development payroll costs include those expenses directly related to the additional staff needed to support our increased acquisition activity.
We experienced a 12.3% increase in EBITDA and a 62.6% decrease in Adjusted EBITDA between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The decrease in adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to an increase in net loss. The Company's membership increased in 2020 and 2021, driving an increase in third-party medical expenses but with a delayed increase in capitated revenue.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Upon the completion of the Business Combination, we qualified as an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Accordingly, we elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies.
We are deemed a large accelerated filer under the SEC guidelines and ceased to qualify as an emerging growth company effective December 31, 2021. As a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting pronouncements at dates applicable to public companies as further described in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements” to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our audited consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. We base
our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. The future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, cash flows and financial position are unclear; however, we believe we have made reasonable estimates and assumptions in preparing the financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our audited consolidated financial statements for more information.
Revenue
Revenue consists primarily of fees for medical services provided under capitated arrangements with HMO health plans. Capitated revenue also consists of revenue earned through Medicare Advantage as well as through commercial and other non-Medicare governmental programs, such as Medicaid, which is captured as other capitated revenue. As we control the healthcare services provided to enrolled members, we act as the principal and the gross fees under these contracts are reported as revenue and the cost of provider care is included in third-party medical costs. Additionally, since contractual terms across these arrangements are similar, we group them into one portfolio.
Capitated revenues are recognized in the month in which we are obligated to provide medical care services. The transaction price for the services provided is variable and depends upon the terms of the arrangement provided by or negotiated with the health plan and includes PMPM rates that may fluctuate. PMPM rates are also subject to adjustment for incentives or penalties based on the achievement of certain quality metrics and other metrics such as member acuity, as defined in the Company's contracts with payors. The Company recognizes these adjustments as earned using the "most likely amount" methodology and only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur once any uncertainty is resolved. Through our Medicare Risk Adjustment ("MRA"), the rates are risk adjusted based on the health status (acuity) and demographic characteristics of members. The fees are paid on an interim basis based on submitted enrolled member data for the previous year and are adjusted in subsequent periods after the final data is compiled by the CMS. MRA revenues are estimated using the "most likely amount" methodology under ASC 606 and the revenue is recorded when the price can be estimated by the Company and only if it is probable that a significant reversal will not occur and any uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved.
Fee-for-service revenue is generated from primary care services provided in the Company’s medical centers. During an office visit, a patient may receive a number of medical services from a healthcare provider. These healthcare services are not separately identifiable and are combined into a single performance obligation. The Company recognizes fee-for-service revenue at the net realizable amount at the time the patient is seen by a provider, and the Company’s performance obligation to the patient is complete.
Pharmacy revenue is generated from the sales of prescription medication to patients. Pharmacy contracts contain a single performance obligation. The Company satisfies its performance obligation and recognizes revenue at the time the patient takes possession of the medical supply. Other revenue includes revenue from certain third parties which include ancillary fees earned under contracts with certain care organizations for the provision of care coordination services and other services.
Third-Party Medical Costs
Third-party medical costs primarily consist of all medical expenses paid by the health plans, including inpatient and hospital care, specialists, and medicines, net of rebates, for which the Company bears risk. Provider costs are accrued based on date of service to members, based in part on estimates, including an accrual for medical services incurred but not reported (“IBNR”). Actual claims expense will differ from the estimated liability due to factors in estimated and actual member utilization of health care services, the amount of charges, and other factors. Liabilities for IBNR are estimated using standard actuarial
methodologies, including our accumulated statistical data, adjusted for current experience. These actuarially determined estimates are continually reviewed and updated; as the amount of unpaid service provider cost is based on estimates, the ultimate amounts paid to settle these liabilities might vary from recorded amounts and these differences may be material.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed periodically for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset.
Business Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting. All assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. The determination of fair value involves estimates and the use of valuation techniques when market value is not readily available. We use various techniques to determine fair value in accordance with accepted valuation models, primarily the income approach. The significant assumptions used in developing fair values include, but are not limited to, EBITDA growth rates, revenue growth rates, the amount and timing of future cash flows, discount rates, useful lives, royalty rates and future tax rates. The excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired is recorded as goodwill. Refer to Note 3, “Business Acquisitions,” for a discussion of the Company's recent acquisitions.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of an acquired business over the fair value of the underlying net tangible and intangible assets acquired. We test goodwill for impairment annually on October 1st or more frequently if triggering events occur or other impairment indicators arise which might impair recoverability. These events or circumstances would include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, sale, disposition of a significant portion of the business or other factors. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level and we have identified a single reporting unit.
ASC 350, "Intangibles-Goodwill and Other" allows entities to first use a qualitative approach to test goodwill for impairment by determining whether it is more likely than not (a likelihood of greater than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the qualitative assessment supports that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset exceeds its carrying value, a quantitative impairment test is not required. If the qualitative assessment does not support the fair value of the asset the Company will perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test, in which we compare the fair value of the reporting unit, that we primarily determine using an income approach based on the present value of expected future cash flows, to the respective carrying value, which includes goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value is higher than the fair value, the difference would be recognized as an impairment loss. We considered the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the overall economy and resulting impact on goodwill. There was no impairment to goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our intangibles consist of trade names, brands, non-compete agreements, and customer, payor, and provider relationships. We amortize intangibles using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the intangible, which range from one to twenty years. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment in conjunction with long-lived assets.
The determination of fair values and useful lives requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired capitation arrangements from a market participant perspective, discount rates, industry data and management’s prior experience. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Stock-Based Compensation
ASC 718, "Compensation-Stock Compensation" requires the measurement of the cost of the employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value or, in certain circumstances, the calculated value of the award. For the restricted stock units ("RSUs"), the fair value is estimated using the Company's closing stock price and for the market condition stock options, the fair value is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation. The Company recognizes compensation expense associated with stock-based compensation as a component of selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. All stock-based compensation is required to be measured at fair value on the grant date, is expensed over the requisite service, generally over a four-year period for RSUs and over the derived vesting period for market-condition stock options, and forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the public warrants and private placement warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity's Own Equity,” under which the public warrants and private placement warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the public warrants and private placement warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the public warrants and private placement warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The public warrants and the private placement warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial lattice simulation model.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - September 30, 2021
Restated and Revised
Key Performance Metrics
In addition to our GAAP and non-GAAP financial information, we review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Members
Members represent those Medicare, Medicaid, and Affordable Care Act ("ACA") patients for whom we receive a fixed per-member-per-month fee under capitation arrangements as of the end of a particular period.
Owned Medical Centers
We define our medical centers as those primary care medical centers open for business and attending to members at the end of a particular period in which we own the medical operations and the physicians are our employees.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s disaggregated revenue for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s member and member month figures for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Three Months Ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Capitated revenue was $473.8 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $222.4 million, or 88.5%, compared to $251.4 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 108.2% increase in the total member months, slightly offset by a 9.5% decrease in total revenue per member per month. The increase in member months was primarily due to an increase in the total number of members served and our acquisitions, primarily University in June 2021 and DMC in July 2021, which resulted in the addition of new members and new markets in Florida.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. Fee-for-service and other revenue was $25.2 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $15.0 million, or 147.7%, compared to $10.2 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase in fee-for-service revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in patients served across existing centers and the acquisitions of affiliates in August 2021. We experienced a decrease in utilization of services due to the impact of COVID-19 in the third quarter of 2020, which contributed to lower fee-for service revenue in that period. Further, other revenue increased in the third quarter of 2021 due to an acquisition that generated ancillary fees earned under contracts with certain care organizations for the provision of care coordination and other services. The increase in pharmacy revenue was driven by organic growth as we continued to increase the number of members served in our established pharmacies, as well as the addition of a new pharmacy from our acquisition of University in June 2021.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs were $381.3 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $196.4 million, or 106.2%, compared to $184.9 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by a 108.2% increase in total member months, the addition of DCE members with higher medical costs, and higher utilization of third party medical services as utilization normalized from lower levels related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense was $50.4 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $19.2 million, or 61.7%, compared to $31.1 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by increases in payroll and benefits of $10.9 million, pharmacy drugs of $3.2 million, medical supplies of $1.1 million and provider payments of $4.0 million.
Selling, general, and administrative expense. Selling, general, and administrative expense was $76.6 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $49.2 million, or 179.7%, compared to $27.4 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by higher salaries and benefits of $19.4 million, stock-based compensation of $9.5 million, occupancy costs of $5.4 million, marketing expenses of $2.8 million, legal and professional services of $4.9 million, and other costs of $7.2 million. These increases were incurred to support the continued growth of our business and expansion into other states.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $17.0 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $11.6 million, or 215.2%, compared to $5.4 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by purchases of new property and equipment to support the growth of our business during the period as well as the addition of several new brand names, non-compete agreements, and payor relationships from our 2020 and 2021 acquisitions.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other were $7.3 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, a decrease of $0.4 million, or 5.8%, compared to $7.7 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The decrease was due to lower integration, legal, internal staff, and other professional fees incurred subsequent to the closing of the Business Combination.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense was $16.0 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $3.7 million, or 29.8%, compared to $12.3 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by interest incurred on our higher outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund our acquisitions.
Change in fair value of the embedded derivative. Change in fair value of the embedded derivative was $5.1 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020 which was due to a change in the fair value of the embedded derivative related to our term loan agreement in 2020. The embedded derivative was settled with the refinancing in November of 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $14.7 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021. This expense was a result of the change in the fair value of the public warrants and private placement warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination.
Comparison of the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Capitated revenue was $1.1 billion for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $516.5 million, or 94.2%, compared to $548.1 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 94.1% increase in the total member months. The increase in member months was due to an increase in members served at new and existing medical centers and our acquisitions of, Healthy Partners in June 2020, University in June 2021, and DMC in July 2021, which resulted in the addition of new members and new markets in Florida.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. Fee-for-service and other revenue was $52.5 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $27.5 million, or 108.1%, compared to $25.0 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase in fee-for-service revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in patients served across existing centers. We experienced a decrease in utilization of services due to the impact of COVID-19 through the third quarter of 2020, which contributed to lower fee-for service revenue in that period. Further, other revenue increased in the third quarter of 2021 due to an acquisition that generated ancillary fees earned under contracts with certain care organizations for the provision of care coordination and other services. The increase in pharmacy revenue was driven by organic growth as we
continued to increase the number of members served in our established pharmacies as well as the addition of a new pharmacy from our acquisition of University in June of 2021.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs were $868.2 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $485.9 million, or 127.1%, compared to $382.3 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by a 94.1% increase in total member months, the addition of DCE members with higher medical costs, and higher utilization of third party medical services as utilization normalized from lower levels related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense was $120.2 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $47.8 million, or 66.0%, compared to $72.4 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by increases in payroll and benefits of $22.5 million, pharmacy drugs of $6.4 million, medical supplies of $2.8 million and provider payments of $16.1 million.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $158.8 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $88.6 million, or 126.1%, compared to $70.2 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by higher salaries and benefits of $35.8 million, stock-based compensation of $13.0 million, occupancy costs of $11.4 million, marketing expenses of $6.0 million, legal and professional services of $7.3 million, and other costs of $15.1 million. These increases were incurred to support the continued growth of our business and expansion into other states.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $30.7 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $18.0 million, or 141.3%, compared to $12.7 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was driven by purchases of new property and equipment to support the growth of our business during the period as well as the addition of several new brand names, non-compete agreements, and payor relationships from our 2020 and 2021 acquisitions.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other were $32.1 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $2.3 million, or 7.6%, compared to $29.9 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was due to higher integration, legal, internal staff, and other professional fees incurred in the first half of 2021 in connection with the closing of the Business Combination.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense was $36.4 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $14.6 million, or 67.4%, compared to $21.7 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by interest incurred on our higher outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund our acquisitions.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $13.2 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 due to the partial extinguishment of Term Loan 3 following the closing of the Business Combination. The loss on extinguishment was related to unamortized debt issuance costs.
Change in fair value of the embedded derivative. Change in the fair value of the embedded derivative was $5.4 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021 due to a change in the fair value of the embedded derivative related to our term loan agreement in 2020. The embedded derivative was settled with the refinancing in November of 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $24.6 million as a result of a change in the fair value of the public warrants and private placement warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We have financed our operations principally through the Business Combination and debt borrowings from financial institutions. As of September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $208.9 million and $33.8 million, respectively. Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash primarily consist of highly liquid investments in money market funds and cash. Since our inception, we have generated significant operating losses from our operations and negative cash flows from operations.
We expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in acquisitions, expansion of operations, and due to additional selling, general, and administrative costs we expect to incur in connection with operating as a public company. As a result, we may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
On November 23, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement with certain lenders, with Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as the administrative agent, collateral agent and a letter of credit issuer, and Credit Suisse Loan Funding LLC, as the sole lead arranger and sole book runner. The Credit Agreement provided for an Initial Term Loan ("Term Loan 3") in an original aggregate principal amount of $480.0 million, a revolving credit facility with original commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $30.0 million (the "Revolving Credit Facility"), and a delayed draw term loan facility with commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $175.0 million (the" Delayed Draw Term Loan Facility"). The Revolving Credit Facility included a $10.0 million sub-limit for the issuance of letters of credit. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility mature, and the revolving commitments thereunder terminate, on November 23, 2025. The Initial Term Loan and Delayed Draw Term Loans mature on November 23, 2027. In June 2021, we borrowed the remaining availability under our Delayed Draw Term Loan Facility and entered into the Third Amendment and Incremental Facility Amendment to the Credit Agreement pursuant to which
we borrowed $295.0 million in incremental term loans ("Term Loan 4"), and made certain other amendments to our Credit Agreement. On September 30, 2021, the Company modified the Credit Agreement by adding an incremental term loan for a principal amount of $100.0 million ("Term Loan 5"), subject to the same terms (including interest rate and maturity date) as Term Loans 3 and 4 above. As of September 30, 2021, the total amount of outstanding debt under our Term Loans under our Credit Agreement was $946.1 million.
The Business Combination closed on June 3, 2021. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, on the Closing Date, Jaws contributed cash to PCIH in exchange for 69.0 million common limited liability company units of PCIH (“PCIH Common Units”) equal to the number of shares of Jaws' Class A ordinary shares outstanding on the Closing Date and 17.25 million Class B ordinary shares owned by Jaws Sponsor LLC (the “Sponsor”) . In connection with the Business Combination, the Company issued 306.8 million shares of Class B common stock to existing shareholders of PCIH. The Company also issued and sold 80.0 million shares of the Company’s Class A common stock in a private placement for $800.0 million. In aggregate, the Company generated approximately $935.4 million in net cash proceeds after transaction costs and advisory fees paid and distributions to PCIH shareholders. On June 4, 2021, the Company utilized $400.0 million of the net proceeds to pay off the Company’s debt under Term Loan 3 and the remainder of the net proceeds was held on the balance sheet for general corporate purposes. See further discussion related to the Business Combination in Note 1, "Nature of Business and Operations" in our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements.
On June 11, 2021, we acquired University Health Care and its affiliates (collectively, "University") for total consideration of $607.9 million, consisting of $538.3 million in cash, $60.0 million of Class A common stock and $9.6 million in contingent consideration from acquisition add-ons based on additional acquired entities. University is comprised of thirteen primary care centers, a managed services organization and a pharmacy serving populations throughout various locations in South Florida.
On July 2, 2021, we entered into the Bridge Loan Agreement with certain lenders and Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as administrative agent, pursuant to which the lenders provided a $250.0 million unsecured bridge term loan. We used the bridge term loan to acquire DMC.
On September 30, 2021, the Company issued senior unsecured notes for a principal amount of $300.0 million (the "Senior Notes") in a private offering. Proceeds from the Senior Notes were used to repay in full the $250.0 million bridge term loan. The Senior Notes bear interest at 6.25% per annum, payable semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st of each year, commencing April 1, 2022. As of September 30, 2021, the effective interest rate of the Senior Notes was 6.65%. Principal on the Senior Notes is due in full on October 1, 2028.
The Company is a holding company with no material assets other than its ownership of the PCIH Common Units and its managing member interest in PCIH. As a result, we have no independent means of generating revenue or cash flow. Our ability to pay taxes, make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and pay dividends will depend on the financial results and cash flows of PCIH and the distributions we receive from PCIH. Deterioration in the financial condition, earnings or cash flow of PCIH for any reason could limit or impair PCIH’s ability to pay such distributions. Additionally, to the extent that we need funds and PCIH is restricted from making such distributions under applicable law or regulation or under the terms of any financing arrangements, or PCIH is otherwise unable to provide such funds, it could materially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition. We anticipate that the distributions we will receive from PCIH may, in certain periods, exceed our actual tax liabilities and obligations to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Our Board, in its sole discretion, may make any determination from time to time with respect to the use of any such excess cash so accumulated, which may include, among other uses, to pay dividends on our Class A common stock. We will have no obligation to distribute such cash (or other available cash other than any declared dividend) to our stockholders.
Dividends on our common stock, if any, will be paid at the discretion of our Board, which will consider, among other things, our available cash, available borrowings and other funds legally available therefore, taking into account the retention of any amounts necessary to satisfy our obligations that will not be reimbursed by PCIH, including taxes and amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreement and any restrictions in then applicable bank financing agreements. Financing arrangements may include restrictive covenants that restrict our ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to our stockholders. In addition, PCIH is generally prohibited under Delaware law from making a distribution to a member to the extent that, at the time of the distribution, after giving effect to the distribution, liabilities of PCIH (with certain exceptions) exceed the fair value of its assets. PCIH’s subsidiaries are generally subject to similar legal limitations on their ability to make distributions to PCIH. If PCIH does
not have sufficient funds to make distributions, our ability to declare and pay cash dividends may also be restricted or impaired.
Under the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement, we generally are required to pay to the Seller, and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “TRA Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement, 85% of the tax savings, if any, that we are deemed to realize in certain circumstances as a result of certain tax attributes that exist following the Business Combination and that are created thereafter, including as a result of payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. To the extent payments are made pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement, we generally will be required to pay to the Sponsor and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “Sponsor Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement such Sponsor Party’s proportionate share of, an amount equal to such payments multiplied by a fraction with the numerator 0.15 and the denominator 0.85. The term of the Tax Receivable Agreement will continue until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired unless we exercise our right to terminate the Tax Receivable Agreement for an amount representing the present value of anticipated future tax benefits under the Tax Receivable Agreement or certain other acceleration events occur. These payments are the obligation of the Company and not of PCIH. Any payments made by us under the Tax Receivable Agreement will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us or PCIH and, to the extent that we are unable to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for any reason, the unpaid amounts generally will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid by us.
We believe that the proceeds from the Business Combination, our Term Loans, our Senior Notes and our Revolving Credit Facility described above as well as our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could vary because of, and our future capital requirements will depend on, many factors, including our growth rate, medical expenses, and the timing and extent of our expansion into new markets. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
For the nine months ended September 30, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $93.3 million, an increase of $73.3 million in cash outflows compared to net cash used in operating activities of $20.0 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020. Significant changes impacting net cash used in operating activities were as follows:
•Net loss for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 of $117.2 million compared to net loss for the nine months ended September 30, 2020 of $21.8 million;
•Decreases in accounts receivable, net of $25.5 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 compared to $36.5 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020, was primarily due to an increase in net loss;
•Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $27.3 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 compared to decreases in prepaid expenses and other current assets for the nine months ended September 30, 2020 of $0.2 million due to higher prepaid insurance payments and prepaid bonus incentives.
•Offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 of $40.6 million compared to increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses for the nine months ended September 30, 2020 of 11.4 million due to the addition of new third-party provider payments related to businesses acquired after the first quarter of 2020 and higher accrued transaction costs; and
Investing Activities
For the nine months ended September 30, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $1.1 billion, an increase of $859.3 million in cash outflows compared to net cash used in investing activities of $253.6 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2020 due primarily to an increase in capital expenditures and cash used for acquisitions of subsidiaries.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.4 billion during the nine months ended September 30, 2021, an increase of $1.1 billion in cash inflows compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $271.7 million during the nine months ended September 30, 2020 due primarily to $935.4 million in connection with the Business Combination and PIPE financing as well as additional proceeds from long-term debt and Delayed Draw Term Loans.
Non-GAAP Financial Metrics
The following discussion includes references to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a performance metric that departs from GAAP because it excludes earnings components that are required under GAAP. Other companies may define non-GAAP financial measures differently and, as a result, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be directly comparable to those of other companies.
By definition, EBITDA consists of net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA adjusted to add back the effect of certain expenses, such as stock-based compensation expense, de novo losses (consisting of losses incurred in the twelve months after the opening of a new facility), acquisition transaction costs (consisting of transaction costs, fair value adjustments in contingent consideration, management fees and corporate development payroll costs), restructuring and other charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, changes in fair value of an embedded derivative, and changes in fair value of warrant liabilities. Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure used by our management to assess the operating and financial performance of our Company.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial measures also provides additional information to investors regarding our results of operations and is useful for trending, analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. By excluding certain expenses and other items that may not be indicative of our core business operating results, these non-GAAP financial measures:
•allow investors to evaluate our performance from management’s perspective, resulting in greater transparency with respect to supplemental information used by us in our financial and operational decision making;
•provide better transparency as to the measures used by management and others who follow our industry to estimate the value of our company; and
•allow investors to view our financial performance and condition in the same manner that our significant lenders and landlords require us to report financial information to them in connection with determining our compliance with financial covenants.
Our use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect: (1) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) the potentially dilutive impact of non-cash stock-based compensation; (3) tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; or (4) net interest expense/income; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and/or Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA along with other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including net loss, cash flow metrics and our GAAP financial results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss to non-GAAP financial information:
(1) De novo losses include those costs associated with the ramp up of new facilities and that are not expected to be incurred past the first 12 months after opening. These costs collectively are higher than comparable expenses incurred once such a facility has been open and generating revenue and would not have been incurred unless a new facility was being opened.
(2) Acquisition transaction costs included $1.3 million and $0.1 million of corporate development payroll costs for the three months ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $3.0 million and $0.3 million of corporate development payroll costs for the nine months ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Corporate development payroll costs include those expenses directly related to the additional staff needed to support our increased acquisition activity.
We experienced a 701% decrease in EBITDA and a 36% decrease in Adjusted EBITDA between the three months ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020.
We experienced a 498.6% decrease in EBITDA and a 71% decrease in Adjusted EBITDA between the nine months ended September 30, 2021 and September 30, 2020. The decrease in EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA related to the overall increase in net loss.
The decreases relate to the Company's membership increasing, driving an increase in third-party medical expenses but with a delayed increase in capitated revenue.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - June 30, 2021
Restated and Revised
Key Performance Metrics
In addition to our GAAP and non-GAAP financial information, we review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Members
Members represent those Medicare, Medicaid, and Affordable Care Act ("ACA") patients for whom we receive a fixed per member per month fee under capitation arrangements as of the end of a particular period.
Owned Medical Centers
We define our medical centers as those primary care medical centers open for business and attending to members at the end of a particular period in which we own the medical operations and the physicians are our employees.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s disaggregated revenue for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s member and member month figures for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Three Months Ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Capitated revenue was $329.5 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $162.9 million, or 97.8%, compared to $166.6 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 79.9% increase in the total member months and a 10.0% increase in total revenue per member per month. The increase in member months was primarily due to an increase in the total number of members served and our acquisitions, primarily Healthy Partners in June 2020 and University in June 2021, which resulted in the addition of new members and new markets in Florida.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. Fee-for-service and other revenue was $14.1 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $6.8 million, or 93.7%, compared to $7.3 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase in fee-for-service revenue was attributable primarily to an increase in members served across existing centers. We experienced a decrease in utilization of services due to the impact of COVID-19 in the second quarter of 2020, which contributed to lower fee-for service revenue in that period. The increase in pharmacy revenue was driven by organic growth as we continued to increase the number of members served in our established pharmacies as well as the addition of a new pharmacy from our acquisition of University in June 2021.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs were $291.8 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $179.8 million, or 160.5%, compared to $112.0 million or the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by a 79.9% increase in total member months, the addition of Direct Contract Entity members with higher medical costs, and higher utilization of third party medical services as utilization normalized from lower levels related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense was $35.6 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $12.9 million, or 57.1%, compared to $22.7 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by increases in payroll and benefits of $6.0 million, pharmacy drugs of $2.0 million, medical supplies of $1.0 million and provider payments of $4.0 million.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense was $47.2 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $25.3 million, or 115.7%, compared to $21.9 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by higher salaries and benefits of $9.6 million, occupancy costs of $3.3 million, marketing expenses of $2.1 million, legal and professional services of $1.2 million, and other costs of $9.1 million. These increases were incurred to support the continued growth of our business and expansion into other states.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $7.9 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $3.9 million, or 99.8%, compared to $4.0 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by purchases of new property and equipment to support the growth of our business during the period as well as the addition of several new brand names, non-compete agreements, and payor relationships from our 2020 and 2021 acquisitions.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other were $15.6 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, a decrease of 0.1 million, or 0.4%, compared to $15.7 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense was $9.7 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $4.0 million, or 69.9%, compared to $5.7 million for the three months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by interest incurred on our higher outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund our acquisitions.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $13.2 million for the three months ended June 30, 2021 and was due to the partial extinguishment of Term Loan 3 following the closing of the Business Combination. The loss on extinguishment was related to unamortized debt issuance costs.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $39.2 million of a reduction in expenses for the three months ended June 30, 2021 as a result of a change in the fair value of the public warrants and private placement warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination.
Comparison of the Six Months Ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Capitated revenue was $590.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $294.1 million, or 99.1%, compared to $296.7 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 83.8% increase in the total member months and a 8.3% increase in total revenue per member per month. The increase in member months was due to an increase in the total number of members served and our acquisitions, primarily Healthy Partners in June 2020 and University in June 2021, which resulted in the addition of new members and new markets in Florida.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. Fee-for-service and other revenue was $27.3 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $12.5 million, or 84.0%, compared to $14.9 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase in fee-for-service revenue was attributable primarily to an increase in members served across existing centers. We experienced a decrease in utilization of services due to the impact of COVID-19 in the first half of 2020, which contributed to lower fee-for service revenue in that period. The increase in pharmacy revenue was driven by organic growth as we continued to increase the number of members served in our established pharmacies as well as the addition of a new pharmacy from our acquisition of University in June of 2021.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs were $486.9 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $289.5 million, or 146.7%, compared to $197.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by a 83.8% increase in total member months, the addition of Direct Contract Entity members with higher medical costs, and higher utilization of third party medical services as utilization normalized from lower levels related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense was $69.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $28.6 million, or 69.3%, compared to $41.3 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by increases in payroll and benefits of $11.6 million, pharmacy drugs of $3.2 million, medical supplies of $1.8 million and provider payments of $12.1 million.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense was $82.2 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $39.3 million, or 91.8%, compared to $42.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by higher salaries and benefits of $16.5 million, occupancy costs of $6.1 million, marketing expenses of $3.3 million, legal and professional services of $2.4 million, and other costs of $11.0 million. These increases were incurred to support the continued growth of our business and expansion into other states.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $13.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $6.4 million, or 87.3%, compared to $7.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was driven by purchases of new property and equipment to support the growth of our business during the period as well as the addition of several new brand names, non-compete agreements, and payor relationships from our 2020 and 2021 acquisitions.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other were $24.9 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $2.7 million, or 12.3%, compared to $22.1 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due to higher integration, legal, internal staff, and other professional fees incurred in connection with the closing of the Business Combination.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense. Interest expense was $20.3 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $11.0 million, or 116.8%, compared to $9.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by interest incurred on our higher outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund our acquisitions.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt was $13.2 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and was due to the partial extinguishment of Term Loan 3 following the closing of the Business Combination. The loss on extinguishment was related to unamortized debt issuance costs.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $39.2 million of a reduction in expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2021 as a result of a change in the fair value of the public warrants and private placement warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We have financed our operations principally through the Business Combination and debt borrowings from financial institutions. As of June 30, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $319.3 million and $33.8 million, respectively. Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash primarily consist of highly liquid investments in money market funds and cash. Since our inception, we have generated significant operating losses from our operations and negative cash flows from operations.
We expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in acquisitions, expansion of operations, and due to additional selling, general and administrative costs we expect to incur in connection with operating as a public company. As a result, we may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
On November 23, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement with certain lenders, Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as administrative agent, collateral agent and a letter of credit issuer, and Credit Suisse Loan Funding LLC, as sole lead arranger and sole book runner. The Credit Agreement provides for an Initial Term Loan ("Term Loan 3") in an original aggregate principal amount of $480.0 million, a revolving credit facility with commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $30.0 million (the "Revolving Credit Facility"), and a delayed draw term loan facility with commitments in an aggregate principal amount of $175.0 million (the" Delayed Draw Term Loan Facility"). The Revolving Credit Facility includes a $10.0 million sub-limit for the issuance of letters of credit. Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility mature, and the revolving commitments thereunder terminate, on November 23, 2025. The Initial Term Loan and Delayed Draw Term Loans mature on November 23, 2027.
The Business Combination closed on June 3, 2021. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, on the Closing Date, Jaws contributed cash to PCIH in exchange for 69.0 million PCIH Common Units equal to the number of shares of Jaws' Class A ordinary shares outstanding on the Closing Date and 17.25 million Class B ordinary shares owned by the Sponsor. In
connection with the Business Combination, the Company issued 306.8 million shares of Class B common stock to existing shareholders of PCIH. The Company also issued and sold 80.0 million shares of the Company's Class A common stock in a private placement for $800.0 million. In aggregate, the Company generated approximately $935.4 million in net cash proceeds after transaction costs and advisory fees paid and distributions to PCIH shareholders. On June 4, 2021, the Company utilized $400.0 million of the net proceeds to pay off Company debt under Term Loan 3 and the remainder of the net proceeds was held on the balance sheet for general corporate purposes. See further discussion related to the Business Combination as described in Note 1, "Nature of Business and Operations" of Cano Health, Inc.’s condensed consolidated financial statements.
On June 11, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement with University for total consideration of $607.9 million. The transaction was financed through $538.3 million of cash on hand, $60.0 million of Class A common stock issued to University's sellers and $9.6 million in contingent consideration from acquisition add-ons based on additional acquired entities.
In June 2021, we borrowed the remaining availability under our Delayed Draw Term Loan Facility and entered into the Third Amendment and Incremental Facility Amendment to the Credit Agreement pursuant to which we borrowed $295.0 million in incremental term loans ("Term Loan 4"), and made certain other amendments to our Credit Agreement. As of June 30, 2021, the total amount of outstanding debt under our Term Loans under our Credit Agreement was $547.4 million.
On July 2, 2021, we entered into the Bridge Loan Agreement with certain lenders and Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, as administrative agent, pursuant to which, the lenders provided a $250.0 million unsecured bridge term loan which was fully outstanding as of July 13, 2021. We used the bridge term loan to acquire Doctor's Medical Center ("DMC").
The Company is a holding company with no material assets other than its ownership of the PCIH Common Units and its managing member interest in PCIH. As a result, we have no independent means of generating revenue or cash flow. Our ability to pay taxes, make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and pay dividends will depend on the financial results and cash flows of PCIH and the distributions it receives from PCIH. Deterioration in the financial condition, earnings or cash flow of PCIH for any reason could limit or impair PCIH’s ability to pay such distributions. Additionally, to the extent that we need funds and PCIH is restricted from making such distributions under applicable law or regulation or under the terms of any financing arrangements, or PCIH is otherwise unable to provide such funds, it could materially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition. We anticipate that the distributions we will receive from PCIH may, in certain periods, exceed our actual tax liabilities and obligations to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Our Board, in its sole discretion, may make any determination from time to time with respect to the use of any such excess cash so accumulated, which may include, among other uses, to pay dividends on our Class A common stock. We will have no obligation to distribute such cash (or other available cash other than any declared dividend) to our stockholders.
Dividends on our common stock, if any, will be paid at the discretion of our Board, which will consider, among other things, our available cash, available borrowings and other funds legally available therefore, taking into account the retention of any amounts necessary to satisfy our obligations that will not be reimbursed by PCIH, including taxes and amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreement and any restrictions in then applicable bank financing agreements. Financing arrangements may include restrictive covenants that restrict our ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to our stockholders. In addition, PCIH is generally prohibited under Delaware law from making a distribution to a member to the extent that, at the time of the distribution, after giving effect to the distribution, liabilities of PCIH (with certain exceptions) exceed the fair value of its assets. PCIH’s subsidiaries are generally subject to similar legal limitations on their ability to make distributions to PCIH. If PCIH does not have sufficient funds to make distributions, our ability to declare and pay cash dividends may also be restricted or impaired.
Under the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement, we generally are required to pay to the Seller, and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “TRA Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement, 85% of the tax savings, if any, that we are deemed to realize in certain circumstances as a result of certain tax attributes that exist following the Business Combination and that are created thereafter, including as a result of payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. To the extent payments are made pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement, we generally will be required to pay to the Sponsor and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “Sponsor Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement such Sponsor Party’s proportionate share of, an amount equal to such payments multiplied by a fraction with the numerator 0.15 and the denominator 0.85. The term of the Tax Receivable Agreement will continue until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired unless we exercise our right to terminate the Tax Receivable Agreement for an amount representing the present value of anticipated future tax benefits under the Tax Receivable Agreement or certain other acceleration events occur. These payments are the obligation of the Company and not of PCIH. Any payments made by us under the Tax Receivable Agreement will generally reduce the amount
of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us or PCIH and, to the extent that we are unable to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for any reason, the unpaid amounts generally will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid by us.
We believe that the proceeds from the Business Combination, our Term Loans and our Revolving Credit Facility described above as well as our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could vary because of, and our future capital requirements will depend on, many factors, including our growth rate, medical expenses, and the timing and extent of our expansion into new markets. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
For the six months ended June 30, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $58.1 million, an increase of $45.0 million in cash outflows compared to net cash used in operating activities of $13.1 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020. Significant changes impacting net cash used in operating activities were as follows:
•Net loss for the six months ended June 30, 2021 of $52.4 million compared to net loss for the six months ended June 30, 2020 of $9.0 million;
•Decreases in accounts receivable, net of $6.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021 compared to an increase of $23.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in net loss;
•Increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2021 of $14.4 million compared to increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses for the six months ended June 30, 2020 of $8.4 million due to the addition of new third-party provider payments related to businesses acquired after the first quarter of 2020 and higher accrued transaction costs; and
•Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $16.1 million for the six months ended June 30, 2021 compared to increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets for the six months ended June 30, 2020 of $0.3 million due to higher prepaid insurance payments and prepaid bonus incentives.
Investing Activities
•For the six months ended June 30, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $646.1 million, an increase of $400.2 million in cash outflows compared to net cash used in investing activities of $245.9 million for the six months ended June 30, 2020 due primarily to an increase in capital expenditures and cash used for acquisitions of subsidiaries.
Financing Activities
•Net cash provided by financing activities was $989.7 million during the six months ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $749.1 million in cash inflows compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $240.6 million during the six months ended June 30, 2020 due primarily to $935.4 million in connection with the Business Combination and PIPE financing as well as additional net proceeds from long-term debt.
Non-GAAP Financial Metrics
The following discussion includes references to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA which are non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a performance metric that departs from GAAP because it excludes earnings components that are required under GAAP. Other companies may define non-GAAP financial measures differently and, as a result, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be directly comparable to those of other companies.
By definition, EBITDA consists of net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA adjusted to add back the effect of certain expenses, such as stock-based compensation expense, de novo losses (consisting of losses incurred in the twelve months after the opening of a new facility), acquisition transaction costs (consisting of transaction costs, fair value adjustments in contingent consideration, management fees and corporate development payroll costs), restructuring and other charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, changes in fair value of an embedded derivative, and changes in fair value of warrant liabilities. Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure used by our management to assess the operating and financial performance of our Company.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial measures also provides additional information to investors regarding our results of operations and is useful for trending, analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. By excluding certain expenses and other items that may not be indicative of our core business operating results, these non-GAAP financial measures:
•allow investors to evaluate our performance from management’s perspective, resulting in greater transparency with respect to supplemental information used by us in our financial and operational decision making;
•provide better transparency as to the measures used by management and others who follow our industry to estimate the value of our company; and
•allow investors to view our financial performance and condition in the same manner that our significant lenders and landlords require us to report financial information to them in connection with determining our compliance with financial covenants.
Our use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect: (1) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) the potentially dilutive impact of non-cash stock-based compensation; (3) tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; or (4) net interest expense/income; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and/or Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA along with other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including net income, cash flow metrics and our GAAP financial results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income (loss) to non-GAAP financial information:
(1) De novo losses include those costs associated with the ramp up of new facilities and that are not expected to be incurred past the first 12 months after opening. These costs collectively are higher than comparable expenses incurred once such a facility has been open and generating revenue and would not have been incurred unless a new facility was being opened.
(2) Acquisition transaction costs included $0.9 million and $0.1 million of corporate development payroll costs for the three months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and $1.7 million and $0.2 million of corporate development payroll costs for the six months ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Corporate development payroll costs include those expenses directly related to the additional staff needed to support our increased acquisition activity.
We experienced a 1,940% decrease in EBITDA and a 181% decrease in our Adjusted EBITDA between the three months ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
We experienced a 359% decrease in EBITDA and a 93% decrease in our Adjusted EBITDA between the six months ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
The decreases relate to the Company's membership increasing, driving an increase in third-party medical expenses but with a delayed increase in capitated revenue.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - March 31, 2021
Restated and Revised
Key Performance Metrics
In addition to our U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") and non-GAAP financial information, we review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Members
Members represent those Medicare, Medicaid, and Affordable Care Act ("ACA") patients for whom we receive a fixed per-member-per-month fee under capitation arrangements as of the end of a particular period.
Owned Medical Centers
We define our medical centers as those primary care medical centers open for business and attending to members at the end of a particular period in which we own the medical operations and the physicians are our employees.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated:
The Company’s revenue from its revenue streams described in the preceding paragraphs for the three months ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
The following table sets forth the Company’s member and member month figures as of and for the three months ended March 31, 2021 and 2020:
Comparison of the Three Months Ended March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020
Revenue
Capitated revenue. Capitated revenue was $261.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $131.2 million, or 100.8%, compared to $130.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was driven by a 91% increase in the total number of members served and a 6% increase in total revenue per member per month. Additionally, the increase was attributable to our acquisition of Healthy Partners in the second quarter of 2020 which resulted in the addition of new members and new markets in Florida.
Fee-for-service and other revenue. Fee-for-service and other revenue was $13.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $5.7 million, or 74.7%, compared to $7.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase in fee-for-service revenue was attributable primarily to an increase in members served across existing centers. March 2020 was the first month we experienced a decrease in utilization of services due to the impact of COVID-19, which contributed to lower fee-for service revenue in that period. The increase in pharmacy revenue was driven by organic growth as we continued to increase the number of members served in our established pharmacies.
Operating Expenses
Third-party medical costs. Third-party medical costs were $195.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $109.7 million, or 128.6%, compared to $85.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was consistent with our revenue growth and primarily driven by a 91% increase in total members. Our acquisition of Healthy Partners in the second quarter of 2020 also contributed to the addition of new members across additional counties in Florida.
Direct patient expense. Direct patient expense was $34.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $15.6 million, or 84.2%, compared to $18.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was driven by increases in payroll and benefits of $5.6 million, pharmacy drugs of $1.2 million, medical supplies of $0.8 million and provider payments of $8.0 million.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense was $35.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $14.0 million, or 66.8%, compared to $21.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was driven by higher salaries and benefits of $6.9 million, occupancy costs of $2.8 million, marketing expenses of $1.2 million, legal and professional services of $1.2 million, and other costs of $1.9 million. These increases were incurred to support the continued growth of our business and expansion into other states.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Depreciation and amortization expense was $5.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $2.5 million, or 72.8%, compared to $3.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was driven by purchases of new property and equipment to support the growth of our business during the period as well as the addition of several new brand names, non-compete agreements, and payor relationships from our 2020 acquisitions.
Transaction costs and other. Transaction costs and other were $9.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $2.8 million, or 43.2%, compared to $6.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was due to higher integration, legal, internal staff, and other professional fees incurred in connection with the Closing of the Business Combination.
Fair value adjustment - contingent consideration. Fair value adjustment - contingent consideration was $0.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021. For the three months ended March 31, 2020, there was no such adjustment. The increase was due to a change in the fair value of contingent consideration due to sellers in connection with our acquisitions.
Management fees. Management fees were $0.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $0.2 million, or 104.7%, compared to $0.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was due to higher fees for financial and management consulting services.
Other Expenses
Interest expense. Interest expense was $10.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021, an increase of $7.0 million, or 189.9%, compared to $3.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by interest incurred on our higher outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund our acquisitions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
To date, we have financed our operations principally from notes payable, term loan borrowings and a revolving credit facility. As of March 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $6.6 million and $33.8 million, respectively. Our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash primarily consist of highly liquid investments in money market funds and cash. Since our inception, we have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations.
We expect to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in acquisitions, expansion of operations, and due to additional selling, general and administrative costs we expect to incur in connection with operating as a public company. As a result, we may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
After completion of this offering, the Company will be a holding company with no material assets other than its ownership of the PCIH Common Units and its managing member interest in PCIH. As a result, we will have no independent means of generating revenue or cash flow. Our ability to pay taxes, make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement and pay dividends will depend on the financial results and cash flows of PCIH and the distributions it receives from PCIH. Deterioration in the financial condition, earnings or cash flow of PCIH for any reason could limit or impair PCIH’s ability to pay such distributions. Additionally, to the extent that we need funds and PCIH is restricted from making such distributions under applicable law or regulation or under the terms of any financing arrangements, or PCIH is otherwise unable to provide such funds, it could materially adversely affect our liquidity and financial condition. We anticipate that the distributions we will receive from PCIH may, in certain periods, exceed our actual tax liabilities and obligations to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Our Board, in its sole discretion, may make any determination from time to time with respect to the use of any such excess cash so accumulated, which may include, among other uses, to pay dividends on our Class A common stock. We will have no obligation to distribute such cash (or other available cash other than any declared dividend) to our stockholders. See the section entitled “Shareholder Proposal 2: The Business Combination Proposal - Certain Agreements Related to the Business Combination - Second Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement.”
Dividends on our common stock, if any, will be paid at the discretion of our Board, which will consider, among other things, our available cash, available borrowings and other funds legally available therefor, taking into account the retention of any amounts necessary to satisfy our obligations that will not be reimbursed by PCIH, including taxes and amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreement and any restrictions in then applicable bank financing agreements. Financing arrangements may include restrictive covenants that restrict our ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to our stockholders. In addition, PCIH is generally prohibited under Delaware law from making a distribution to a member to the extent that, at the time of the distribution, after giving effect to the distribution, liabilities of PCIH (with certain exceptions) exceed the fair value of its assets. PCIH’s subsidiaries are generally subject to similar legal limitations on their ability to make distributions to PCIH. If PCIH does not have sufficient funds to make distributions, our ability to declare and pay cash dividends may also be restricted or impaired.
Under the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement, we generally will be required to pay to the Seller, and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “TRA Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement, 85% of the tax savings, if any, that we are deemed to realize in certain circumstances as a result of certain tax attributes that exist following the Business Combination and that are created thereafter, including as a result of payments made under the Tax Receivable Agreement. To the
extent payments are made pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement, we generally will be required to pay to JAWS Sponsor LLC, and to each other person from time to time that becomes a “Sponsor Party” under the Tax Receivable Agreement such Sponsor Party’s proportionate share of, an amount equal to such payments multiplied by a fraction with the numerator 0.15 and the denominator 0.85. The term of the Tax Receivable Agreement will continue until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired unless we exercise our right to terminate the Tax Receivable Agreement for an amount representing the present value of anticipated future tax benefits under the Tax Receivable Agreement or certain other acceleration events occur. These payments are the obligation of the Company and not of PCIH. Any payments made by us under the Tax Receivable Agreement will generally reduce the amount of overall cash flow that might have otherwise been available to us or PCIH and, to the extent that we are unable to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for any reason, the unpaid amounts generally will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid by us.
We believe that following the Closing of the Business Combination, our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could vary because of, and our future capital requirements will depend on, many factors, including our growth rate, medical expenses, and the timing and extent of our expansion into new markets. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
For the three months ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $14.7 million an increase of $12.6 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $2.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. Significant changes impacting net cash used in operating activities were as follows:
•Net loss for the three months ended March 31, 2021 of $16.1 million compared to net loss for the three months ended March 31, 2020 of $0.5 million;
•Increases in accounts receivable, net of $6.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021 compared to $9.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in net loss; and
•Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $6.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2021 compared to increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets for the three months ended March 31, 2020 of $1.1 million due to prepaid insurance payments.
•Offset by Increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2021 of $6.0 million compared to $3.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020 was due to the addition of new third-party provider payments related to businesses acquired after the first quarter of 2020.
Investing Activities
For the three months ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $9.7 million, a decrease of $49.5 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $59.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020. Significant changes impacting net cash used in investing activities were as follows:
•Increase in cash used for acquisitions of subsidiaries for the three months ended March 31, 2021 of $0.9 million compared to an increase of $55.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020; and
•Decrease in due to sellers for the three months ended March 31, 2021 of $6.2 million compared to a decrease of $1.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $2.8 million during the three months ended March 31, 2021, a decrease of $38.4 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $35.6 million during the three months ended March 31, 2020. Significant changes impacting net cash used in and provided by financing activities were as follows:
•No contributions from the Seller for the three months ended March 31, 2021 as compared to contributions of $10.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020;
•No proceeds from long-term debt for the three months ended March 31, 2021 as compared to proceeds of $20.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020; and
•No proceeds from the revolving credit facility for the three months ended March 31, 2021 as compared to proceeds of $4.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Metrics
The following discussion includes references to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA which are non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a performance metric that departs from GAAP because it excludes earnings components that are required under GAAP. Other companies may define non-GAAP financial measures differently and, as a result, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be directly comparable to those of other companies.
By definition, EBITDA consists of net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA adjusted to add back the effect of certain expenses, such as stock-based compensation expense, de novo losses (consisting of losses incurred in the twelve months after the opening of a new facility), acquisition transaction costs (consisting of transaction costs, fair value adjustments to contingent consideration, management fees and corporate development payroll costs), restructuring and other charges, fair value adjustments to an embedded derivative, and loss on extinguishment of debt. Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure used by our management to assess the operating and financial performance of our Company.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial measures also provides additional information to investors regarding our results of operations and is useful for trending, analyzing and benchmarking the performance and value of our business. By excluding certain expenses and other items that may not be indicative of our core business operating results, these non-GAAP financial measures:
•allow investors to evaluate our performance from management’s perspective, resulting in greater transparency with respect to supplemental information used by us in our financial and operational decision making;
•provide better transparency as to the measures used by management and others who follow our industry to estimate the value of our company; and
•allow investors to view our financial performance and condition in the same manner that our significant lenders and landlords require us to report financial information to them in connection with determining our compliance with financial covenants.
Our use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are as follows:
•although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect: (1) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (2) the potentially dilutive impact of non-cash stock-based compensation; (3) tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; or (4) net interest expense/income; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and/or Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA along with other GAAP-based financial performance measures, including net income, cash flow metrics and our GAAP financial results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss from operations to non-GAAP financial information:
(1) Acquisition transaction costs included $0.9 million and $0.1 million of corporate development payroll costs for the three months ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We experienced a 83% decrease in EBITDA which was primarily due to the increase in net loss. In addition, we experienced a 20% increase in Adjusted EBITDA primarily due to increases in denovo losses and acquisition tranactions costs.