ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following MD&A is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. This section is provided as a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with Items 1, 1A and 8 (which includes our consolidated financial statements) contained in this report.
MD&A is organized as follows:
•
Recent Developments-This section describes significant recent developments, including our acquisition of certain assets from 7-Eleven.
•
Significant Factors Affecting Our Profitability-This section describes the significant impact on our results of operations caused by crude oil commodity price volatility, seasonality and acquisition and financing activities.
•
Results of Operations-This section provides an analysis of our results of operations, including the results of operations of our business segments and non-GAAP financial measures.
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources-This section provides a discussion of our financial condition and cash flows. It also includes a discussion of our debt, capital requirements, other matters impacting our liquidity and capital resources and an outlook for our business.
•
New Accounting Policies-This section describes new accounting pronouncements that we have already adopted, those that we are required to adopt in the future and those that became applicable in the current year as a result of new circumstances.
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-This section describes the accounting policies and estimates that we consider most important for our business and that require significant judgment.
Recent Developments
Acquisition of Assets from 7-Eleven
On April 28, 2021, certain newly formed subsidiaries of CrossAmerica, including Joe’s Kwik Marts (collectively, “Buyer”), entered into the Asset Purchase Agreement with 7-Eleven, pursuant to which Buyer agreed to purchase certain assets related to the ownership and operations of 106 company operated sites (90 fee; 16 leased) located in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast regions of the U.S. (the “Properties”) for an aggregate purchase price of $263.0 million, excluding working capital and subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the Asset Purchase Agreement. The assets were sold by 7-Eleven as part of a divestiture process in connection with its previously announced acquisition of the Speedway business from Marathon Petroleum Corporation.
The assets purchased by Buyer include real property and leasehold rights to the Properties, and all inventory and other assets located at the Properties, other than specific excluded assets, such as rights to intellectual property or rights with respect to “7-Eleven” or “Speedway” branding. Substantially all of the sites purchased were operated under the Speedway brand, and all sites were rebranded in connection with the closing of such site pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement. Buyer also assumed certain specified liabilities associated with the assets.
Starting in late June 2021, Buyer closed on the acquisition of the Properties on a rolling basis of generally ten sites per week. Through December 31, 2021, Buyer consummated the closing under the Asset Purchase Agreement of 103 Properties for a purchase price of $273.0 million, including inventory and other working capital. In February 2022, we closed on the final three Properties for a purchase price of $3.6 million, a portion of which will be paid on or prior to February 8, 2027.
We funded these transactions primarily through the new JKM Credit Facility further described below, undrawn capacity under our existing revolving credit facility and cash on hand.
JKM Credit Facility
On July 16, 2021, CAPL JKM Partners LLC (“Borrower”), an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of CrossAmerica, entered into a Credit Agreement, as amended on July 29, 2021 (the “JKM Credit Facility”) among Borrower, JKM Holdings LLC (“Holdings”) and Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company, as administrative agent, swingline lender and issuing bank.
The JKM Credit Facility provides for a $200 million senior secured credit facility, consisting of a $185 million delayed draw term loan facility (the “Term Loan Facility”) and a $15 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”). The Revolving Credit Facility permits up to $7.5 million of swingline borrowings and $5.0 million in letters of credit. The interest rate applicable to loans outstanding under the JKM Credit Facility is equal to, at Borrower’s option, either (i) a base rate plus a margin (which will be determined based on Borrower’s consolidated leverage ratio) ranging from 0.50% to 1.50% per annum or (ii) LIBOR plus a margin (which will also be determined based on Borrower’s consolidated leverage ratio) ranging from 1.50% to 2.50% per annum. The Term Loan Facility will amortize in equal quarterly installments equal to 1.50% of the unpaid principal amount of the Term Loan Facility, with the first payment due April 1, 2022 and the balance payable on the maturity date of the Term Loan Facility. Letters of credit are subject to a 0.125% fronting fee and other customary administrative charges. Standby letters of credit accrue a fee at a rate based on the applicable margin of LIBOR loans. In addition, beginning in October 2021, a commitment fee was charged based on the unused portion of the JKM Credit Facility at a rate ranging from 0.25% to 0.375% per annum depending on Borrower’s consolidated leverage ratio. The JKM Credit Facility will mature on July 16, 2026.
The obligations under the JKM Credit Facility are guaranteed by Holdings and its subsidiaries (other than Borrower) and secured by a lien on substantially all of the assets of Holdings and its subsidiaries (including Borrower). The obligations under the JKM Credit Facility are nonrecourse to CrossAmerica and its subsidiaries other than Holdings, Borrower and their respective subsidiaries.
The JKM Credit Facility contains customary events of default and covenants, including, among other things, and subject to certain exceptions, covenants that restrict the ability of Holdings and its subsidiaries to create or incur liens on assets, make investments, incur additional indebtedness, merge or consolidate and dispose of assets.
The JKM Credit Facility also contains financial covenants requiring Borrower to comply with, as of the last day of each fiscal quarter of Borrower, commencing with Borrower’s fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021, (i) a maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 6.25 to 1.00, with step-downs to 6.00 to 1.00, 5.75 to 1.00, 5.50 to 1.00 and 5.25 to 1.00 on March 31, 2022, March 31, 2023, March 31, 2024 and March 31, 2025, respectively, and (ii) a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.10 to 1.00.
If an event of default under the JKM Credit Facility occurs and is continuing, the commitments thereunder may be terminated and the principal amount outstanding thereunder, together with all accrued unpaid interest and other amounts owed thereunder, may be declared immediately due and payable.
As of February 24, 2022, we had $183.6 million outstanding under our Term Loan Facility.
Amendment to CAPL Credit Facility
On July 28, 2021, the Partnership entered into an amendment (the “Amendment”) to its Credit Agreement, dated as of April 1, 2019 (as previously amended by the First Amendment to Credit Agreement, dated as of November 19, 2019, the “CAPL Credit Facility”), among the Partnership and Lehigh Gas Wholesale Services, Inc., as borrowers, the guarantors from time to time party thereto, the lenders from time to time party thereto and Citizens Bank, N.A., as administrative agent. The Amendment, among other things, (i) amended certain provisions relating to unrestricted subsidiaries, (ii) increased the maximum level for the consolidated leverage ratio financial covenant to 6.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, 2021 and December 31, 2021, 5.75 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022, 5.50 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2022, and 5.25 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2022, after which the maximum level generally reverts to 4.75 to 1.00 unless in a specified acquisition period or a qualified note offering has occurred, and (iii) modified the applicable margin for borrowings under the CAPL Credit Facility (as amended by the Amendment), such that borrowings bear interest, at the Partnership’s option, at either LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 1.50% to 3.00% per annum or a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.50% to 2.00% per annum (in each case depending on the Partnership’s consolidated leverage ratio).
See Notes 3 and 12 to the financial statements for additional information regarding this acquisition and the related financing.
COVID-19 Pandemic
During the first quarter of 2020, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus spread worldwide, including to the U.S., posing public health risks that have reached pandemic proportions. We experienced a sharp decrease in fuel volume in mid-to-late March 2020. Although fuel volumes largely recovered during the second half of 2020 and continued to recover in 2021, we cannot predict the scope and severity with which COVID-19 will impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability
The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Wholesale segment
The prices paid to our motor fuel suppliers for wholesale motor fuel (which affects our cost of sales) are highly correlated to the price of crude oil. The crude oil commodity markets are highly volatile, and the market prices of crude oil, and, correspondingly, the market prices of wholesale motor fuel, experience significant and rapid fluctuations. For approximately 62% of gallons sold to our customers, we receive a per gallon rate equal to the posted rack price, less any applicable discounts, plus transportation costs, taxes and a fixed rate per gallon of motor fuel. The remaining gallons are primarily DTW priced contracts, including intersegment sales to the retail segment. These contracts provide for variable, market-based pricing.
Regarding our supplier relationships, a majority of our total gallons purchased are subject to Terms Discounts. The dollar value of these discounts increases and decreases corresponding to motor fuel prices. Therefore, in periods of lower wholesale motor fuel prices, our gross profit is negatively affected, and, in periods of higher wholesale motor fuel prices, our gross profit is positively affected (as it relates to these discounts).
Retail segment
We attempt to pass along wholesale motor fuel price changes to our retail customers through “at the pump” retail price changes; however, market conditions do not always allow us to do so immediately. The timing of any related increase or decrease in “at the pump” retail prices is affected by competitive conditions in each geographic market in which we operate. As such, the prices we charge our customers for motor fuel and the gross profit we receive on our motor fuel sales can increase or decrease significantly over short periods of time.
Changes in our average motor fuel selling price per gallon and gross margin are directly related to the changes in crude oil and wholesale motor fuel prices. Variations in our reported revenues and cost of sales are, therefore, primarily related to the price of crude oil and wholesale motor fuel prices and generally not as a result of changes in motor fuel sales volumes, unless otherwise indicated and discussed below.
As previously reported, we converted 46 company operated sites to dealer operated sites in the third quarter of 2019. As a result of this transition, we did not have any company operated sites for the period from September 30, 2019 through closing on the retail and wholesale acquisition on April 14, 2020, since which we have again been operating company operated sites.
Seasonality Effects on Volumes
Our business is subject to seasonality due to our wholesale and retail sites being located in certain geographic areas that are affected by seasonal weather and temperature trends and associated changes in retail customer activity during different seasons. Historically, sales volumes have been highest in the second and third quarters (during the summer months) and lowest during the winter months in the first and fourth quarters.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation affects our financial performance by increasing certain of our operating expenses and cost of goods sold. Operating expenses include labor costs, leases, and general and administrative expenses. While our wholesale segment benefits from higher Terms Discounts as a result of higher fuel costs, inflation could negatively impact our operating expenses. Although we have historically been able to pass on increased costs through price increases, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so in the future.
Acquisition and Financing Activity
Our results of operations and financial condition are also impacted by our acquisition and financing activities as summarized below.
•
On April 1, 2019, we entered into a credit facility as further discussed in Note 12 to the financial statements.
•
On May 21, 2019 and September 5, 2019, we completed the first two asset exchange transactions with Circle K.
•
We completed four additional tranches of the asset exchange with Circle K on February 25, 2020, April 7, 2020, May 5, 2020 and September 15, 2020. With the closing of the sixth tranche, the transactions contemplated under the Asset Exchange Agreement have concluded.
•
On February 6, 2020, we closed on the Equity Restructuring Agreement that eliminated the IDRs.
•
Effective March 25, 2020, we closed on the CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
•
On April 14, 2020, we closed on the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
•
From late June 2021 through December 31, 2021, we closed on the purchase of 103 sites of our 106-site acquisition from 7-Eleven, and in July 2021, we entered into a new credit agreement and amended our existing credit facility as further described in Notes 3 and 12 to the financial statements.
Results of Operations
We have omitted discussion of the earliest of the three years covered by our consolidated financial statements presented in this Annual Report because that disclosure was already included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021. You are encouraged to reference Part II, Item 7, within that report, for a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Consolidated Income Statement Analysis
Below is an analysis of our consolidated statements of income and provides the primary reasons for significant increases and decreases in the various income statement line items from period to period. Our consolidated statements of income are as follows (in thousands):
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Consolidated Results
Operating revenues increased $1.6 billion or 85%, while operating income decreased $79 million or 69%.
Operating revenues
Significant items impacting these results prior to the elimination of intercompany revenues were:
•
A $1.5 billion (89%) increase in our wholesale segment revenues primarily attributable to the increase in crude oil prices. The average daily spot price of WTI crude oil increased 74% to $68.14 per barrel in 2021, compared to $39.16 per barrel in 2020. The wholesale price of motor fuel is highly correlated to the price of crude oil. See “Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability-The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit.” Volume increased 20% primarily as a result of the volume generated by the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, the acquisition of the retail and wholesale assets and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven (the average number of sites with wholesale fuel distribution increased 6% from 2020 compared to 2021), as well as continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic.
•
A $756 million (111%) increase in our retail segment revenues primarily attributable to the increase in company operated and commission sites as a result of the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven (the average total system sites increased 27% from 2020 compared to 2021). Volume increased 56% from 2020 to 2021 driven by the acquisitions as well as the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic. The average retail fuel price increased 43% between those same periods due primarily due to the increase in wholesale motor fuel prices noted above. In addition, merchandise revenues increased $85.8 million (70%) driven by the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven.
Intersegment revenues
We present the results of operations of our segments on a consistent basis with how our management views the business. Therefore, our segments are presented before intersegment eliminations (which consist of motor fuel sold by our wholesale segment to our retail segment). As a result, in order to reconcile to our consolidated change in operating revenues, a discussion of the change in intersegment revenues is included in our consolidated MD&A discussion.
Our intersegment revenues increased $559 million (151%), primarily attributable to the incremental intersegment revenues generated by the company operated and commission sites acquired in the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange, and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven, as well as higher volume from the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales increased $1.6 billion (92%) as a result of the increase in wholesale motor fuel prices and the impact of the increase in sites acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven, as well as the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Gross profit
The $65 million (31%) increase in gross profit was primarily driven by an increase in motor fuel and merchandise gross profit due to: 1) the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, which primarily resulted in an increase in fuel margin partially offset by a decrease in income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests; 2) the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, which primarily resulted in an increase in fuel margin and merchandise margin and other revenues partially offset by a decrease in lease margin; 3) the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven, which resulted in an increase in fuel margin, merchandise margin and other revenues; and 4) an increase in volume driven by the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic. See “Results of Operations-Segment Results” for additional gross profit analyses.
Income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests and Operating expenses
See “Segment Results” for additional analyses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $9.9 million (47%) primarily driven by a $6.0 million increase in acquisition-related costs as a result of higher legal fees incurred in connection with the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven, a $1.9 million increase in management fees related to an increase in headcount, a $1.1 million increase in equity-based compensation expense as a result of more grants being outstanding during 2021 as compared to 2020 and overall higher general and administrative expenses stemming from the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven, partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in credit loss expense.
Depreciation, amortization and accretion expense
Depreciation, amortization and accretion expense increased $9.1 million (13%) primarily from the property and equipment and intangible assets acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven. We recorded $7.7 million of impairment charges in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort and the resulting reclassification of these sites to assets held for sale, as compared to $9.1 million in 2020.
Gain on dispositions and lease terminations, net
During 2021, we recorded a $3.3 million gain related to sites sold in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort, partially offset by net losses on lease terminations and asset disposals.
During 2020, we recorded a $67.6 million gain on the sale of our 17.5% investment in CST Fuel Supply (see Note 4 to the financial statements for additional information). In addition, we recorded $19.3 million in gains related to the properties sold in the asset exchanges with Circle K and $6.4 million in gains related to the sale of sites in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort. Partially offsetting these gains, we recorded a $10.9 million loss on lease terminations, including a write-off of deferred rent income, in connection with the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased $1.7 million (10%) primarily due to $1.8 million in interest expense on the JKM Credit Facility along with a $0.8 million increase in amortization of deferred financing costs as a result of entering into the JKM Credit Facility and the amendment to the CAPL Credit Facility. The higher interest expense due to the higher outstanding balance on the CAPL Credit Facility (driven by the borrowings to fund a portion of the purchase price of the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven) was more than offset by a reduction in the average rate on borrowings under our CAPL Credit Facility from 2.6% to 2.1%.
Income tax benefit
We recorded an income tax benefit of $3.2 million and $7.9 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The benefits were primarily driven by losses incurred by our taxable subsidiaries and changes in state apportionment. See Note 20 for additional information.
Segment Results
We present the results of operations of our segments consistent with how our management views the business. Therefore, our segments are presented before intersegment eliminations (which consist of motor fuel sold by our wholesale segment to our retail segment). These comparisons are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Wholesale
The following table highlights the results of operations and certain operating metrics of our wholesale segment. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of the results of operations of that segment (thousands of dollars, except for the number of distribution sites and per gallon amounts):
(a)
Represents income from our former equity interest in CST Fuel Supply. The CST Fuel Supply Exchange closed on March 25, 2020.
(b)
In addition, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we distributed motor fuel to 15 and 13 sub-wholesalers who distributed to additional sites, respectively.
(c)
The decrease in the independent dealer site count from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to loss of contracts, most of which were lower margin, partially offset by the increase in independent dealer sites as a result of the real estate rationalization effort and the resulting reclassification of the site from a lessee dealer or commission site to an independent dealer site when we continue to supply the sites after divestiture.
(d)
The decrease in the lessee dealer and commission site counts from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 were primarily attributable to our real estate rationalization effort.
(e)
The increase in the company operated site count from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the 103 company operated sites acquired from 7-Eleven.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gross profit increased $21.1 million (14%), while operating income increased $14.4 million (12%). These results were driven by:
Motor fuel gross profit
The $19.4 million (19%) increase in motor fuel gross profit was primarily driven by a 20% increase in volume as a result of the asset exchanges with Circle K, the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, the acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven and the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic. During 2020, we benefitted from the reduction in wholesale fuel prices. As such, DTW margins were negatively impacted in 2021 as compared to 2020. See “Significant Factors Affecting our Profitability-The Significance of Crude Oil and Wholesale Motor Fuel Prices on Our Revenues, Cost of Sales and Gross Profit.”
Rent gross profit
Rent gross profit increased $0.3 million (1%) primarily due to $0.5 million in rent concessions during the second quarter of 2020 and the positive impact from the CST Fuel Supply Exchange, partially offset by a decrease as a result of terminating leases in connection with the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets.
Income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests
Income from CST Fuel Supply equity interests is no longer generated as a result of the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses increased $3.5 million (10%) primarily as a result of a $2.7 million increase in environmental costs related to remediation, costs of compliance testing and monitoring and a $1.2 million increase in insurance costs due to the increase in controlled sites as a result of the acquisitions.
Retail
The following table highlights the results of operations and certain operating metrics of our retail segment. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of the results of operations of that segment (thousands of dollars, except for the number of retail sites, gallons sold per day and per gallon amounts):
(a)
The decrease in the commission site count from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to our real estate rationalization effort.
(b)
The increase in the company operated site count from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the 103 company operated sites acquired from 7-Eleven.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gross profit increased $43.8 million (77%), while operating income increased $4.1 million (311%). These results were impacted by:
Gross profit
•
Our motor fuel gross profit increased $15.1 million (119%) attributable to realizing a higher average margin per gallon as the higher retail fuel margins at our company operated sites comprised a larger percentage of our overall retail fuel margins in 2021 as compared to 2020. In addition, volume increased 56% stemming from the increase in company operated and commission sites as a result of the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange, the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven as well as the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 Pandemic (the average total system sites increased 27% from 2020 compared to 2021).
•
Our merchandise gross profit and other revenues increased $23.1 million and $4.5 million, respectively, as a result of the increase in company operated sites driven by the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven.
•
Rent gross profit increased $1.1 million (14%) due primarily to the company operated and commission sites acquired in the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange and the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses increased $39.7 million (71%) primarily due to the increase in company operated and commission sites as a result of the April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets, the March 2020 CST Fuel Supply Exchange and a $15.8 million increase as a result of the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use non-GAAP financial measures EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio. EBITDA represents net income available to us before deducting interest expense, income taxes and depreciation, amortization and accretion (which includes certain impairment charges). Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA as further adjusted to exclude equity-based compensation expense, gains or losses on dispositions and lease terminations, net, certain discrete acquisition related costs, such as legal and other professional fees and separation benefit costs associated with recent acquisitions, and certain other discrete non-cash items arising from purchase accounting. Distributable Cash Flow represents Adjusted EBITDA less cash interest expense, sustaining capital expenditures and current income tax expense. Distribution Coverage Ratio is computed by dividing Distributable Cash Flow by the weighted average diluted common units and then dividing that result by the distributions paid per limited partner unit.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio are used as supplemental financial measures by management and by external users of our financial statements, such as investors and lenders. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are used to assess our financial performance without regard to financing methods, capital structure or income taxes and the ability to incur and service debt and to fund capital expenditures. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA is used to assess the operating performance of our business on a consistent basis by excluding the impact of items which do not result directly from the wholesale distribution of motor fuel, the leasing of real property, or the day to day operations of our retail site activities. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio are also used to assess the ability to generate cash sufficient to make distributions to our unitholders.
We believe the presentation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio provides useful information to investors in assessing the financial condition and results of operations. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio should not be considered alternatives to net income or any other measure of financial performance or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio have important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some but not all items that affect net income. Additionally, because EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Distributable Cash Flow and Distribution Coverage Ratio may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility.
The following table presents reconciliations of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Distributable Cash Flow to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except for per unit amounts):
(a)
We recorded gains on the sale of sites in connection with our ongoing real estate rationalization effort of $3.3 million, $6.4 million and $1.4 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, we also recorded $19.3 million in gains on the sale of sites in connection with the asset exchange with Circle K and a $67.6 million gain on the sale of our 17.5% investment in CST Fuel Supply. Also in 2020, we recorded a loss on lease terminations, including the non-cash write-off of deferred rent income associated with these leases, of $10.9 million.
(b)
Relates to certain acquisition related costs, such as legal and other professional fees, separation benefit costs and purchase accounting adjustments associated with recent acquisitions.
(c)
Under the Partnership Agreement, sustaining capital expenditures are capital expenditures made to maintain our long-term operating income or operating capacity. Examples of sustaining capital expenditures are those made to maintain existing contract volumes, including payments to renew existing distribution contracts, or to maintain our sites in conditions suitable to lease, such as parking lot or roof replacement/renovation, or to replace equipment required to operate the existing business.
(d)
Consistent with prior divestitures, the current income tax benefit in 2021, 2020 and 2019 excludes income tax incurred on the sale of sites. 2020 and 2019 also include the tax benefit of 100% bonus depreciation on the eligible assets acquired in the asset exchanges with Circle K as well as certain dispenser upgrades and rebranding costs.
(e)
On January 20, 2022, the Board approved a quarterly distribution of $0.5250 per unit attributable to the fourth quarter of 2021. The distribution was paid February 10, 2022 to all unitholders of record on February 3, 2022.
(f)
The distribution coverage ratio is computed by dividing Distributable Cash Flow by the weighted average diluted common units and then dividing that result by the distributions paid per limited partner unit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our principal liquidity requirements are to finance our operations, fund acquisitions, service our debt and pay distributions to our unitholders. We expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include cash generated by operations, proceeds from sales of sites in connection with our real estate rationalization efforts, borrowings under the CAPL Credit Facility and JKM Credit Facility, and if available to us on acceptable terms, issuances of equity and debt securities. We regularly evaluate alternate sources of capital to support our liquidity requirements.
Our ability to meet our debt service obligations and other capital requirements, including capital expenditures, acquisitions, and partnership distributions, will depend on our future operating performance, which, in turn, will be subject to general economic, financial, business, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other conditions, many of which are beyond our control. As a normal part of our business, depending on market conditions, we will, from time to time, consider opportunities to repay, redeem, repurchase or refinance our indebtedness. Changes in our operating plans, lower than anticipated sales, increased expenses, acquisitions or other events may cause us to seek additional debt or equity financing in future periods.
We believe that we will have sufficient cash flow from operations, proceeds from the sale of sites in connection with our real estate rationalization effort, borrowing capacity under the CAPL Credit Facility and JKM Credit Facility, access to capital markets and alternate sources of funding to meet our financial commitments, debt service obligations, contingencies, anticipated capital expenditures and partnership distributions. However, we are subject to business and operational risks that could adversely affect our cash flow. A material decrease in our cash flows would likely produce an adverse effect on our borrowing capacity as well as our ability to issue additional equity and/or debt securities and/or maintain or increase distributions to unitholders.
See “Recent Developments-COVID-19 Pandemic” for a discussion of the impacts and potential impacts on our liquidity from the COVID-19 Pandemic as well as actions we have taken or could take to mitigate its impact.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes cash flow activity (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $9.0 million for 2021 compared to 2020. Although the acquisitions drove incremental cash flow from operations, changes in working capital and a $6.0 million increase in acquisition costs reduced cash provided by operating activities for 2021 as compared to 2020.
As is typical in our industry, our current liabilities exceed our current assets as a result of the longer settlement of real estate and motor fuel taxes as compared to the shorter settlement of receivables for fuel, rent and merchandise.
Investing Activities
In 2021, we incurred capital expenditures of $41.9 million driven by site upgrades, including store remodels, carwash build-outs, EMV upgrades, and rebranding of certain sites, including the sites acquired from 7-Eleven. We received $15.4 million in proceeds from the sales of assets, largely driven by our real estate rationalization effort. We paid $273.0 million in connection with our acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven.
In 2020, we received $23.0 million from Circle K primarily in connection with the CST Fuel Supply Exchange that closed in March 2020. In addition, we received $21.2 million in proceeds from disposals during 2020 in connection with our real estate rationalization effort and paid $28.2 million in connection with our April 2020 acquisition of retail and wholesale assets. Also, we incurred capital expenditures of $37.1 million in 2020.
Financing Activities
In 2021, we paid $79.7 million in distributions. We made net borrowings on our CAPL Credit Facility and JKM Credit Facility of $117.4 million and $182.5 million, respectively, primarily to fund the acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven and to pay $9.4 million in acquisition costs and $7.2 million of deferred financing costs.
In 2020, we paid $77.9 million in distributions and made net repayments on our CAPL Credit Facility of $5.8 million.
Distributions
Distribution activity for 2021 was as follows (in thousands):
The amount of any distribution is subject to the discretion of the Board, which may modify or revoke our cash distribution policy at any time. Our Partnership Agreement does not require us to pay any distributions. As such, there can be no assurance we will continue to pay distributions in the future.
IDRs
We distributed $0.1 million to the Topper Group with respect to the IDRs in 2020. On February 6, 2020, we closed on the Equity Restructuring Agreement that eliminated the IDRs.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, our debt and finance lease obligations consisted of the following (in thousands):
Taking the interest rate swap contracts into account, our effective interest rate on our CAPL Credit Facility at December 31, 2021 was 2.8% (our applicable margin was 2.5% as of December 31, 2021). Letters of credit outstanding under our CAPL Credit Facility at December 31, 2021 totaled $4.0 million. The amount of availability under our CAPL Credit Facility at February 24, 2022, after taking into consideration debt covenant restrictions, was $104.3 million.
The CAPL Credit Facility contains financial covenants related to leverage and interest coverage as further described in Note 12 to the financial statements. These financial covenants and other covenants may restrict or limit our ability to make distributions, incur additional indebtedness, make certain capital expenditures or dispose of assets in excess of specified levels, among other restrictions.
Our effective interest rate on our JKM Credit Facility at December 31, 2021 was 2.6% (our applicable margin was 2.5% as of December 31, 2021). Letters of credit outstanding under our JKM Credit Facility at December 30, 2021 totaled $0.8 million. The amount of availability under the JKM Credit Facility at February 24, 2022, after taking into consideration debt covenant restrictions, was $14.2 million.
Similarly, our JKM Credit Facility contains financial covenants related to leverage and fixed charge coverage as further described in Note 12 to the financial statements. These financial covenants and other covenants may restrict or limit Holdings’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, make certain capital expenditures or dispose of assets in excess of specified levels, among other restrictions.
See “Recent Developments-Acquisition of Assets from 7-Eleven” and Note 12 to the financial statements for information regarding the JKM Credit Facility and an amendment of the CAPL Credit Facility, both entered into in July 2021.
Capital Expenditures
We make investments to expand, upgrade and enhance existing assets. We categorize our capital requirements as either sustaining capital expenditures, growth capital expenditures or acquisition capital expenditures. Sustaining capital expenditures are those capital expenditures required to maintain our long-term operating income or operating capacity. Acquisition and growth capital expenditures are those capital expenditures that we expect will increase our operating income or operating capacity over the long term. We have the ability to fund our capital expenditures from proceeds from sales of sites in connection with our real estate rationalization effort, through additional borrowings under our CAPL Credit Facility and JKM Credit Facility, or, if available to us on acceptable terms, accessing the capital markets and issuing additional equity and debt securities or other options. Our ability to access the capital markets may have an impact on our ability to fund acquisitions. We may not be able to complete any offering of securities or other options on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
The following table outlines our capital expenditures and acquisitions (in thousands):
As noted previously, the increase in growth capital expenditures was largely driven by site upgrades, including store remodels, car wash build-outs, EMV upgrades, and rebranding of certain sites, including the sites being acquired from 7-Eleven.
A significant portion of our growth capital expenditures are discretionary and we regularly review our capital plans in light of anticipated proceeds from sales of sites.
Contractual Obligations, Contingencies, Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Concentration Risks
Our contractual obligations primarily include payments of debt and finance lease obligations and related interest payments and operating lease obligations.
As discussed previously, our CAPL Credit Facility matures April 25, 2024 and our JKM Credit Facility matures July 16, 2026. In addition, we have finance lease obligations that expire in 2027 and operating leases that expire through 2041. See Note 12 to the financial statements for additional information on our debt and finance lease obligations, Note 13 for information on interest rate swap contracts and Note 14 for information on our operating lease obligations.
See Note 11 for information on AROs, Note 16 for information on environmental matters and Note 17 for information on minimum fuel volume purchase commitments and legal matters.
See Note 2 for information on our concentration risks related to our customers, fuel suppliers and fuel carriers.
Outlook
As noted previously, the prices paid to our motor fuel suppliers for wholesale motor fuel (which affects our cost of sales) are highly correlated to the price of crude oil. The crude oil commodity markets are highly volatile, and the market prices of crude oil, and, correspondingly, the market prices of wholesale motor fuel, experience significant and rapid fluctuations, which affect our motor fuel gross profit.
Our results for 2022 are anticipated to be impacted by the following:
•
The acquisition of assets from 7-Eleven is anticipated to increase gross profit in both the wholesale and retail segments.
•
We anticipate that we will continue to realize reductions in our fuel costs as a result of new or amended fuel purchase contracts.
•
Our volume starting in mid-March 2020 was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic. Although fuel volumes largely recovered during the second half of 2020 and continued to recover in 2021, we cannot predict the scope and severity with which COVID-19 will impact our results. See “Recent Developments-COVID-19 Pandemic” for additional information and actions we have and could take in the future to mitigate its impact.
We will continue to evaluate acquisitions on an opportunistic basis. Additionally, we will pursue acquisition targets that fit into our strategy. Whether we will be able to execute acquisitions will depend on market conditions, availability of suitable acquisition targets at attractive terms, acquisition related compliance with customary regulatory requirements, and our ability to finance such acquisitions on favorable terms and in compliance with our debt covenant restrictions.
New Accounting Policies
For information on recent accounting pronouncements impacting our business, see Note 2 to the financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. See Note 2 to the financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Critical accounting policies are those we believe are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because we must make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We believe the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The core principle of accounting guidance on revenue recognition is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. This guidance applies to over 90% of our revenues as the only primary revenue stream outside the scope of this guidance is rental income.
Revenues from the delivery of motor fuel are recorded at the time of delivery to our customers, by which time the price is fixed, title to the products has transferred and payment has either been received or collection is reasonably assured, net of applicable discounts and allowances. Incremental costs incurred to obtain certain contracts with customers are deferred and amortized over the contract term and are included in other noncurrent assets on the balance sheets. Amortization of such costs are classified as a reduction of operating revenues.
Revenues from the sale of convenience store products are recognized at the time of sale to the customer.
Revenues from leasing arrangements for which we are the lessor are recognized ratably over the term of the underlying lease.
In transactions in which we sell and lease back property, we apply guidance from ASC 606 in determining whether the transfer of the property should be accounted for as a sale. Specifically, we assess if we have satisfied a performance obligation by transferring control of the property.
Accounts receivable primarily result from the sale of motor fuels to customers. Our accounts receivable is generally considered as having a similar risk profile. Credit is extended to a customer based on an evaluation of the customer’s financial condition. In certain circumstances collateral may be required from the customer and fuel and lease agreements are generally cross-collateralized when applicable. Receivables are recorded at face value, without interest or discount.
The allowance for credit losses is generally based upon historical experience while also factoring in any new business conditions that might impact the historical analysis, such as market conditions and bankruptcies of particular customers. Credit loss expense is included in general and administrative expenses. We review all accounts receivable balances on at least a quarterly basis.
LGW and CAPL JKM Wholesale collect motor fuel taxes, which consist of various pass-through taxes collected from customers on behalf of taxing authorities and remits such taxes directly to those taxing authorities. LGW’s and CAPL JKM Wholesale’s accounting policy is to exclude the taxes collected and remitted from wholesale revenues and cost of sales and account for them as liabilities. LGWS’s and Joe’s Kwik Marts’ retail sales and cost of sales include motor fuel taxes as the taxes are included in the cost paid for motor fuel and LGWS and Joe’s Kwik Mart’s have no direct responsibility to collect or remit such taxes to the taxing authorities.
See Notes 6 and 22 to the financial statements for additional information on our revenues and related receivables.
Asset Acquisitions and Business Combinations
When closing on an acquisition, we must first determine whether substantially all of the fair value of the set of gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets. If this threshold is met, the set is not a business. If this threshold is not met, we determine whether the set meets the definition of a business.
A business is defined as an integrated set of assets and activities that is capable of being conducted and managed for the purpose of providing a return to investors or other owners, members or participants. A business typically has inputs, processes applied to those inputs and outputs that are used to generate a return to investors, but outputs are not required for a set to be a business. A business must include, at a minimum, an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs.
We account for asset acquisitions (i.e., transactions involving the acquisition of a set of assets that does not meet the definition of a business) in accordance with the guidance under ASC 805-50 and other applicable guidance. Asset acquisitions are generally accounted for by allocating the cost of the acquisition to the individual assets acquired and liabilities assumed on a relative fair value basis. Two of the key differences in accounting for transactions as asset acquisitions as compared to business combination are summarized below:
•
Transaction costs are capitalized as a component of the cost of the assets acquired rather than expensed as incurred;
•
Goodwill is not recognized. Rather, any excess consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired is allocated on a relative fair value basis to the identifiable net assets other than certain non-qualifying assets as defined in the guidance.
We account for business combinations in accordance with the guidance under ASC 805-Business Combinations. The purchase price is recorded for assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on fair value. The excess of the fair value of the consideration conveyed over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
The income statement includes the results of operations for each acquisition from their respective date of acquisition.
Whether we account for a transaction as an asset acquisition or a business combination, determining the fair value of these items requires management’s judgment, the utilization of independent valuation experts and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to the timing and amounts of future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives, among other items. The judgments made in the determination of the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the investee, as well as the estimated useful life of each asset and the duration of each liability, can materially impact the financial statements in periods after acquisition, such as through depreciation and amortization.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of the consideration conveyed to acquire a business over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level at least annually, and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the goodwill might be impaired. The annual impairment testing date of goodwill is October 1.
In performing our annual impairment analysis, we use qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. We consider macroeconomic conditions such as developments in equity and credit markets, industry and market conditions such as the competitive environment, cost factors such as changes in our cost of fuel, our financial performance and our unit price.
If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, no further testing is necessary. However, if we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform the goodwill impairment test.
In the goodwill impairment test, the reporting unit’s carrying amount (including goodwill) and its fair value are compared. If the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized for the deficit up to the amount of goodwill recorded.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had goodwill totaling $100.5 million and $88.8 million, respectively. Of the December 31, 2021 balance, $82.3 million was assigned to the wholesale reporting unit and $18.2 million was assigned to the retail reporting unit. After assessing the totality of events and circumstances, we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units exceed their carrying amounts and therefore goodwill is not impaired at December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Tax Matters
As a limited partnership, we are not subject to federal and state income taxes. However, our corporate subsidiaries are subject to income taxes. Income tax attributable to our taxable income (including any dividend income from our corporate subsidiaries), which may differ significantly from income for financial statement purposes, is assessed at the individual limited partner unitholder level. We are subject to a statutory requirement that non-qualifying income, as defined by the Internal Revenue Code, cannot exceed 10% of total gross income for the calendar year. If non-qualifying income exceeds this statutory limit, we would be taxed as a corporation. The non-qualifying income did not exceed the statutory limit in any annual period.
Certain activities that generate non-qualifying income are conducted through our wholly owned taxable corporate subsidiaries, LGWS and Joe’s Kwik Marts. Current and deferred income taxes are recognized on the earnings of these subsidiaries. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and are measured using enacted tax rates.
Valuation allowances are reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. We consider a number of factors in assessing the realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, projections of future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The amount of deferred tax assets ultimately realized may differ materially from the estimates utilized in the computation of valuation allowances and may materially impact the financial statements in the future.