ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the audited consolidated notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
Capricor Therapeutics, Inc. is a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the development of transformative cell and exosome-based therapeutics for the treatment and prevention of a broad spectrum of diseases and disorders.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantial resources to developing CAP-1002 and our other product candidates including our exosomes platform, developing our manufacturing processes, staffing our company and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any products approved for sale. Our ability to eventually generate any product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development, approval and eventual commercialization of CAP-1002 and our other product candidates. If successfully developed and approved, we intend to commercialize CAP-1002 in the United States with our partner, Nippon Shinyaku, and may enter into additional licensing agreements or strategic collaborations in other markets. If we generate product sales or enter into licensing agreements or strategic collaborations, or further distribution relationships, we expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year as a result of the timing and amount of any product sales, license fees, milestone payments and other payments. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
A summary description of our key product candidates, is as follows:
● CAP-1002 for the treatment of DMD (Phase III): Our core cell therapy technology, CAP-1002, is based on cardiosphere-derived cells, or CDCs, which have been shown in pre-clinical and clinical studies to exert potential immunomodulatory activity and is being investigated for its potential to modify the immune system’s activity to encourage cellular regeneration. To date, we have completed two promising clinical trials, investigating CAP-1002 for DMD. We are initiating HOPE-3, a Phase III pivotal study for the potential approval of CAP-1002 in the United States in this indication.
● CAP-1002 for the treatment of cytokine storm associated with COVID-19 (Phase II): In the fourth quarter of 2021, we announced completion of enrollment of our INSPIRE, Phase II trial and plan to have top-line data available by the end of the first quarter of 2022. Following receipt of this data, we will discuss next steps for the program with FDA and evaluate an appropriate path forward.
● Exosome-Based Therapeutics and Vaccines (Preclinical): We are focused on developing a precision-engineered exosome platform technology that has the ability to deliver defined sets of effector molecules which exert their effects through defined mechanisms of action. At this time, we are developing therapeutics and vaccines for infectious diseases, monogenic diseases and other potential indications. Our platform builds on advances in fundamental RNA science, targeting technology and manufacturing, providing us the opportunity to potentially build a broad pipeline of new therapeutic candidates.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, and general administrative costs associated with our operations, we have generated substantial operating losses in each period since our inception. Our net losses were $20.0 million and $13.7 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $108.1 million. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 3,566,349 shares pursuant to a sales agreement by and between us and H.C. Wainwright & Co. LLC, or Wainwright, resulting in net proceeds of $20.2 million.
In January 2022 we entered into a Commercialization and Distribution Agreement with Nippon Shinyaku for the exclusive commercialization and distribution of CAP-1002 for DMD in the US. Under the terms of the NS Distribution Agreement, we will be responsible for the conduct of the HOPE-3 trial as well as for the manufacturing of CAP-1002. Nippon Shinyaku will be responsible for the distribution of CAP-1002 in the United States. We will sell commercial product to Nippon Shinyaku and in addition will receive a meaningful, double-digit share of product revenue and additional development and sales-based milestone payments. We expect to receive an upfront payment of $30.0 million with potential additional milestone payments of up to $705.0 million.
We recently moved our corporate and research headquarters to San Diego, California. In order to attract scientific talent and grow efficiently, this relocation allows us to continue this growth as our programs continue to develop.
As we seek to develop and commercialize CAP-1002 or any other product candidates including those related to our exosomes program, we anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly and that we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations. Until such time when we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity financings, debt financings or other sources, which may include licensing agreements or strategic collaborations or other distribution agreements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, if at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of CAP-1002 or our other product candidates.
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world. Our business operations and financial condition and results have been impacted to varying degrees, and we expect the impact will continue in future quarters.
We are continuing to assess and plan our development for the ongoing and potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial condition and results. Despite careful tracking and planning, however, we are unable to accurately predict the extent of the impact of the pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial condition due to the uncertainty of future developments involving the pandemic and its impact on our employees and operations. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
We have no commercial product sales to date and will not have the ability to generate any commercial product revenue until after we have received approval from the FDA or equivalent foreign regulatory bodies to begin selling our pharmaceutical product candidates. Developing pharmaceutical products is a lengthy and very expensive process. Even if we obtain the capital necessary to continue the development of our product candidates, whether through a strategic transaction or otherwise, we do not expect to complete the development of a product candidate for several years, if ever. To date, most of our development expenses have related to our product candidates, consisting of CAP-1002 and our exosome technologies. As we proceed with the clinical development of CAP-1002, and as we further develop our exosome technologies, our expenses will further increase. Accordingly, our success depends not only on the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, but also on our ability to finance the development of our products and our clinical programs. Our recent major sources of working capital have been primarily proceeds from private and public equity sales of securities. While we pursue our preclinical and clinical programs, we continue to explore potential partnerships for the development of one or more of our product candidates in the US and in other territories across the world.
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs, supplies, clinical trial costs, patient treatment costs, rent for laboratories and manufacturing facilities, consulting fees, costs of personnel and supplies for manufacturing, costs of service providers for preclinical, clinical and manufacturing, and certain legal expenses resulting from intellectual property prosecution, stock compensation expense and other expenses relating to the design, development, testing and enhancement of our product candidates. Except for certain capitalized intangible assets, R&D costs are expensed as incurred.
General and administrative, or G&A, expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for executive, finance and other administrative personnel, stock compensation expense, accounting, legal and other professional fees, consulting expenses, rent for corporate offices, business insurance and other corporate expenses.
Our results have included non-cash compensation expense due to the issuance of stock options and warrants, as applicable. We expense the fair value of stock options and warrants over their vesting period as applicable. When more precise pricing data is unavailable, we determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The terms and vesting schedules for share-based awards vary by type of grant and the employment status of the grantee. Generally, the awards vest based upon time-based or performance-based conditions. Performance-based conditions generally include the attainment of goals related to our financial performance and product development. Stock-based compensation expense is included in the consolidated statements of operations under G&A or R&D expenses, as applicable. We expect to record additional non-cash compensation expense in the future, which may be significant.
Results of Operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Grant Income. Grant income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was zero and approximately $0.2 million, respectively. The decrease in grant income of approximately $0.2 million in 2021 as compared to 2020 is due to the timing of grant activities. The DoD grant award came to completion during the third quarter of 2020.
Miscellaneous Income. Miscellaneous income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively. The miscellaneous income was related to providing CAP-1002 for investigational purposes for clinical trials sponsored by CSMC. The clinical trials sponsored by CSMC experienced delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative Expenses. G&A expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $7.6 million and $5.5 million, respectively. The increase of approximately $2.1 million in G&A expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is attributable to an approximately $0.9 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, an approximately $0.5 million increase in salaries and recruiting related expenses, an approximately $0.4 million increase in other general corporate expenses, and an approximately $0.4 million increase in insurance costs.
Research and Development Expenses. R&D expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $13.6 million and $8.5 million, respectively. The increase of approximately $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to an approximate $2.5 million increase in research and development expenses primarily related to our exosomes program and an increase of approximately $2.3 million in technology transfer and manufacturing related activities of CAP-1002. Furthermore, there was a net increase of approximately $0.1 million due to clinical development activities of CAP-1002 (DMD and COVID-19 clinical trials). Lastly, there was an increase of approximately $0.2 million in stock-based compensation expenses allocable to R&D for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020.
Other Income
Other Income. Other income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $0.5 million and zero, respectively. Other income for 2021 was related to the Employer Retention Credit under the CARES Act.
Investment Income. Investment income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $57,460 and $32,943, respectively. The increase in investment income in 2021 as compared to 2020 is due to increased interest rates and the higher principal balance in our savings and money market fund accounts.
Products Under Active Development
CAP-1002 for the treatment of DMD - We are initiating a Phase III pivotal study for DMD for which we expect to spend approximately $10.0 million to $14.0 million in 2022. The expenses for our DMD program will include costs for
clinical, regulatory and manufacturing-related expenses, including expenses related to the scale-up for commercial scale manufacturing. We expect to receive a $30.0 million upfront payment under the terms of our NS Distribution Agreement with Nippon Shinyaku which will support these endeavors.
CAP-1002 for the treatment of COVID-19 - Following the receipt of our INSPIRE data, we will discuss the program with FDA and evaluate an appropriate path forward. At this time, it is difficult to estimate our future expenses until our development becomes more clear.
Exosome-Based Therapeutics and Vaccines - Our exosome platform is in early-stage development. We expect to spend approximately $5.0 million to $7.0 million during 2022 on development expenses related to our exosomes program, which includes preclinical and manufacturing related expenses for these technologies. Our expenses for this program are primarily focused on the expansion of our engineered exosomes platform.
Our expenditures on current and future clinical development programs, particularly our CAP-1002 and exosomes programs, cannot be predicted with any significant degree of certainty as they are dependent on the results of our current trials and our ability to secure additional funding and additional strategic partners. Further, we cannot predict with any significant degree of certainty the amount of time which will be required to complete our clinical trials, the costs of completing research and development projects or whether, when and to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates. The duration and cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of unanticipated events arising during manufacturing and clinical development and as a result of a variety of other factors, including:
● the number of trials and studies in a clinical program;
● the number of patients who participate in the trials;
● the number of sites included in the trials;
● the rates of patient recruitment and enrollment;
● the duration of patient treatment and follow-up;
● the costs of manufacturing our product candidates;
● the costs, requirements and timing of, and the ability to secure, regulatory approvals; and
● additional delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our liquidity and capital resources as of and for each of our last two fiscal years, and our net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents as of and for each of our last two fiscal years and is intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows. The amounts stated in the tables below are expressed in thousands.
Our total cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $34.9 million compared to approximately $32.7 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in cash and cash equivalents from December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net financing activities of approximately $20.2 million which were partially offset by the net loss of approximately $20.0 million in 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $10.0 million in total liabilities, of which approximately $2.9 million related to lease liabilities in connection with our operating lease right-of-use assets. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $32.3 million in net working capital. We had a net loss of approximately $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash used in operating activities was approximately $16.8 million and $10.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The difference of approximately $6.7 million in cash from operating activities is primarily due to an increase of approximately $6.4 million in net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. Furthermore, there was a change of approximately $1.0 million in stock-based compensation expense, a net change of approximately $0.8 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses, which includes related party accounts payable and accrued expenses, and a change of approximately $0.5 million in receivables for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. To the extent we obtain sufficient capital and/or long-term debt funding and are able to continue developing our product candidates, including if we expand our technology portfolio, engage in further research and development activities, and, in particular, conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials, we expect to continue incurring substantial losses, which will generate negative net cash flows from operating activities.
We had cash flow provided by (used in) investing activities of approximately $(1.2) million and $5.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash flow by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 is primarily due to the net effect from purchases, sales, and maturities of marketable securities as well as purchases of property and equipment.
We had cash flow provided by financing activities of approximately $20.2 million and $33.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 is primarily due to the net proceeds from the sale of common stock. During 2021 we received net proceeds from the sale of stock options, warrants, and equities of approximately $20.2 million compared to approximately $33.1 million over the same period of 2020. Furthermore, we received $0.3 million under the SBA Paycheck Protection Program of the CARES Act in 2020.
From inception through December 31, 2021, we financed our operations primarily through private and public sales of our equity securities, NIH and DoD grants, a payment from a former collaboration partner, a CIRM loan and a CIRM grant award. As we have not generated any revenue from the commercial sale of our products to date, and we do not expect to generate revenue for several years, if ever, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to fund our research and development, including our long-term plans for clinical trials and new product development. We may seek to raise additional funds through various potential sources, such as equity and debt financings, government grants, or through strategic collaborations and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, complete our clinical trials or if such funds become available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs. Moreover, to the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience significant dilution, and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or our product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Our estimates regarding the sufficiency of our financial resources are based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong. We may need to obtain additional funds sooner than planned or in greater amounts than we currently anticipate. At this time, we believe our cash resources are sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. The actual amount of funds we will need to operate is subject to many factors, some of which are beyond our control. These factors include the following:
● the progress of our research activities;
● the number and scope of our research programs;
● the progress and success of our preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we have entered into research and development agreements;
● the costs of manufacturing our product candidates, and the progress of efforts with parties with whom we may enter into commercial manufacturing agreements;
● our ability to maintain current research and development programs and to establish new research and development and licensing arrangements;
● additional costs associated with maintaining licenses and insurance;
● the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
● the costs and timing of regulatory approvals.
As a result of the spread of the COVID-19 coronavirus, uncertainties have arisen that could potentially impact enrollment of clinical trials, deliverables related to contract performance, payments from trial sponsors, workforce stability, supply chain disruptions or delays, timing of grant disbursements as well as other potential business operations. While the disruption is currently expected to be temporary, there is considerable uncertainty around its expected duration. In addition to potential impact on grant disbursements, there may be risks to the Company’s ability to obtain financing from other sources, due to the impact of the coronavirus. There could be other financial impacts on our business of the coronavirus, the specifics of which are unknown at this time.
Financing Activities by the Company
Commercialization and Distribution Agreement with Nippon Shinyaku
In January 2022, Capricor entered into an Exclusive Commercialization and Distribution Agreement (the “NS Distribution Agreement”) with Nippon Shinyaku. Under the terms of the NS Distribution Agreement, Capricor appointed Nippon Shinyaku as its exclusive distributor for the United States of CAP-1002, the Company’s lead product candidate, for the treatment of DMD.
Under the terms of the NS Distribution Agreement, Capricor will be responsible for the conduct of HOPE-3 as well as the manufacturing of CAP-1002. Nippon Shinyaku will be responsible for the distribution of CAP-1002 in the United States. Capricor will sell commercial product to Nippon Shinyaku and in addition will receive a meaningful, double-digit share of product revenue and additional development and sales-based milestone payments. We expect to receive an upfront payment of $30.0 million with potential additional sales and development milestone payments of up to $705.0 million.
June 2021 ATM Program. On June 21, 2021, the Company initiated an at-the-market offering under a prospectus supplement for aggregate sales proceeds of up to $75.0 million, or the June 2021 ATM Program, with the common stock to be distributed at the market prices prevailing at the time of sale. The June 2021 ATM Program was established under a Common Stock Sales Agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with H.C. Wainwright & Co. LLC, or Wainwright, under which we may, from time to time, issue and sell shares of our common stock through Wainwright as sales agent. The Sales Agreement provides that Wainwright will be entitled to compensation for its services at a commission rate of 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold. All shares issued pursuant to the June 2021 ATM Program were issued pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-254363), which was initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, on March 16, 2021, amended on June 15, 2021 and declared effective by the SEC on June 16, 2021. From June 21, 2021 through December 31, 2021, the Company sold an aggregate of 1,267,475 shares of common stock under the June 2021 ATM Program at an average price of approximately $5.89 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $7.5 million. Approximately $67.5 million of common stock may still be sold pursuant to the June 2021 ATM Program. The Company paid cash commissions on the gross proceeds, plus reimbursement of expenses to Wainwright, as well as legal and accounting fees in the aggregate amount of approximately $0.3 million.
May 2020 ATM Program. On May 4, 2020, the Company initiated an at-the-market offering under a prospectus supplement for aggregate sales proceeds of up to $40.0 million, or the May 2020 ATM Program, with the common stock to be distributed at the market prices prevailing at the time of sale. The May 2020 ATM Program was established under the Sales Agreement with Wainwright, under which we may, from time to time, issue and sell shares of our common stock through Wainwright as sales agent. The July 2019 Sales Agreement provides that Wainwright will be entitled to compensation for its services at a commission rate of 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold. All shares issued pursuant to the May 2020 ATM Program were issued pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-227955), which was initially filed with the SEC on October 24, 2018, amended on July 17, 2019 and declared effective by the SEC on July 18, 2019. Since May 4, 2020 and through June 21, 2021, the Company sold an aggregate of 6,027,852 shares of common stock under the May 2020 ATM Program at an average price of approximately $6.15 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $37.1 million. The Company paid cash commissions on the gross proceeds, plus reimbursement of expenses of Wainwright, as well as legal and accounting fees in the aggregate amount of approximately $1.2 million. As of June 21, 2021, the May 2020 ATM Program expired and was replaced with the June 2021 ATM Program.
March 2020 Warrant Inducement. On March 25, 2020, the Company entered into a letter agreement, or the Exercise Agreement, with a holder, or the Exercising Holder, or then outstanding warrants to purchase shares of Common Stock, or the Prior Warrants. Pursuant to the Exercise Agreement, in connection with the exercise by the Exercising Holder
of the remaining 4,000,000 Prior Warrants held by the Exercising Holder which had not been previously exercised, the Company agreed to issue 4,000,000 additional warrants, or the New Warrants, to purchase Common Stock. The Prior Warrants had a per share exercise price of $1.10, and pursuant to the Exercise Agreement, the Exercising Holder agreed to pay $1.225 per share to cover both the exercise price of the Prior Warrants and a $0.125 per share purchase price for the New Warrants. The New Warrants had an exercise price of $1.27 per share.
The New Warrants and the shares of Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the New Warrants were not registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and were offered pursuant to the exemption provided in Section 4(a)(2) under the Securities Act or Rule 506(b) promulgated thereunder. The New Warrants were exercisable immediately upon issuance, and had a term of exercise of 5 1/2 years.
The Company received aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $4.9 million from the exercise of the Prior Warrants by the Exercising Holder. These gross proceeds were reduced by fees due and payable to the placement agent for the transactions pursuant to the Exercise Agreement and New Warrants in the amount of $343,000, and further reduced by reimbursements to the placement agent for legal fees and other expenses. In addition, certain employees of the placement agent received new warrants, or the Placement Agent Warrants, for shares of Common Stock equal to 5.0% of the New Warrants issued, or 200,000 shares. These Placement Agent Warrants are exercisable immediately and have a term of exercise of 5 years. The holders of each of the New Warrants and of the Placement Agent Warrants had the option to make a cashless exercise of such warrant if no resale registration statement covering the shares of the Company’s Common Stock underlying such warrant is effective after six months. On May 7, 2020, the Company filed a resale registration statement on Form S-3 for the shares underlying the New Warrants and Placement Agent Warrants, and that resale registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on May 19, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, 65,000 Placement Agent Warrants and no New Warrants remained outstanding.
CIRM Grant Award
On June 16, 2016, Capricor entered into the CIRM Award with CIRM in the amount of approximately $3.4 million to fund, in part, Capricor’s Phase I/II HOPE-Duchenne clinical trial investigating CAP-1002 for the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy-associated cardiomyopathy. Pursuant to terms of the CIRM Award, the disbursements were tied to the achievement of specified operational milestones. In addition, the terms of the CIRM Award included a co-funding requirement pursuant to which Capricor was required to spend approximately $2.3 million of its own capital to fund the CIRM funded research project. The CIRM Award is further subject to the conditions and requirements set forth in the CIRM Grants Administration Policy for Clinical Stage Projects. Such requirements include, without limitation, the filing of quarterly and annual reports with CIRM, the sharing of intellectual property pursuant to Title 17, California Code of Regulations (CCR) Sections 100600-100612, and the sharing with the State of California of a fraction of licensing revenue received from a CIRM funded research project and net commercial revenue from a commercialized product which resulted from the CIRM funded research as set forth in Title 17, CCR Section 100608. The maximum royalty on net commercial revenue that Capricor may be required to pay to CIRM is equal to nine times the total amount awarded and paid to Capricor.
After completing the CIRM funded research project and at any time after the award period end date (but no later than the ten-year anniversary of the date of the award), Capricor has the right to convert the CIRM Award into a loan, the terms of which will be determined based on various factors, including the stage of the research and development of the program at the time the election is made. On June 20, 2016, Capricor entered into a Loan Election Agreement with CIRM whereby, among other things, CIRM and Capricor agreed that if Capricor elects to convert the grant into a loan, the term of the loan could be up to five years from the date of execution of the applicable loan agreement; provided that the maturity date of the loan will not surpass the ten-year anniversary of the grant date of the CIRM Award. Beginning on the date of the loan, the loan shall bear interest on the unpaid principal balance, plus the interest that has accrued prior to the election point according to the terms set forth in CIRM’s Loan Policy, or the New Loan Balance, at a per annum rate equal to the LIBOR rate for a three-month deposit in U.S. dollars, as published by the Wall Street Journal on the loan date, plus one percent. Interest shall be compounded annually on the outstanding New Loan Balance commencing with the loan date and the interest shall be payable, together with the New Loan Balance, upon the due date of the loan. If Capricor elects to convert the CIRM Award into a loan, certain requirements of the CIRM Award will no longer be applicable, including the revenue sharing requirements. Capricor has not yet made its decision as to whether it will elect to convert the CIRM Award into a loan. If we elect to do so, Capricor would be required to repay some or all of the amounts awarded by CIRM, therefore the Company accounts for this award as a liability rather than income.
In June 2019, Capricor completed all milestones associated with the CIRM Award and expended all funds received. In the third quarter of 2019, Capricor completed all final close-out documentation associated with this award. As of December 31, 2021, Capricor’s liability balance for the CIRM Award was approximately $3.4 million.
U.S. Department of Defense Grant Award
In September 2016, Capricor was approved for a grant award from the Department of Defense in the amount of approximately $2.4 million to be used toward developing a scalable, commercial-ready process to manufacture CAP-2003, Capricor’s exosome product candidate. Under the terms of the award, disbursements were made to Capricor over a period of approximately four years, subject to annual and quarterly reporting requirements. The Company utilized approximately $2.3 million under the terms of the award. No revenue was recognized in 2021 in relation to this award. In the third quarter of 2021, Capricor completed all final close-out documentation associated with this award.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis, including research and development and clinical trial accruals, and stock-based compensation estimates. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements and accompanying notes.
Leases
ASC 842, as adopted in the first quarter of 2019, requires lessees to recognize most leases on the balance sheet with a corresponding right-to-use asset, or ROU asset. ROU assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. The assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the estimated present value of fixed lease payments over the lease term. ROU assets are evaluated for impairment using the long-lived assets impairment guidance.
Leases will be classified as financing or operating, which will drive the expense recognition pattern. The Company elects to exclude short-term leases if and when the Company has them.
The Company leases office and laboratory space, all of which are operating leases. Most leases include the option to renew and the exercise of the renewal options is at the Company’s sole discretion. Options to renew a lease are not included in the Company’s assessment unless there is reasonable certainty that the Company will renew. In addition, the Company’s lease agreements generally do not contain any residual value guarantees or restrictive covenants.
The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As a result, the Company utilizes its incremental borrowing rate, which reflects the fixed rate at which the Company could borrow on a collateralized basis the amount of the lease payments in the same currency, for a similar term, in a similar economic environment.
For real estate leases, the Company has elected the practical expedient under ASC 842 to account for the lease and non-lease components together for existing classes of underlying assets and allocates the contract consideration to the lease component only. This practical expedient is not elected for manufacturing facilities and equipment embedded in product supply arrangements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company applies ASU 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, for all contracts.
Grant Income
The determination as to when income is earned is dependent on the language in each specific grant. Generally, we recognize grant income in the period in which the expense is incurred for those expenses that are deemed reimbursable under the terms of the grant. Grant income is due upon submission of reimbursement request. The transaction price varies for grant income based on the expenses incurred under the awards.
Miscellaneous Income
Revenue is recognized in connection with the delivery of doses which were developed as part of our past R&D efforts. Income is recorded when the Company has satisfied the obligations as identified in the contracts with the customer. Miscellaneous income is due upon billing. Miscellaneous income is based on contracts with fixed transaction prices.
CIRM Grant Award
Capricor accounts for the disbursements under its CIRM Award as long-term liabilities. Capricor recognizes the CIRM grant disbursements as a liability as the principal is disbursed rather than recognizing the full amount of the grant award. After completing the CIRM funded research project and after the award period end date, Capricor has the right to convert the CIRM Award into a loan, the terms of which will be determined based on various factors, including the stage of the research and the stage of development at the time the election is made. In June, 2016, Capricor entered into a Loan Election Agreement with CIRM whereby, among other things, CIRM and Capricor agreed that if Capricor elects to convert the grant into a loan, the term of the loan could be up to five years from the date of execution of the applicable loan agreement; provided that the maturity date of the loan will not surpass the ten-year anniversary of the grant date of the CIRM Award. Since Capricor may be required to repay some or all of the amounts awarded by CIRM, the Company accounts for this award as a liability rather than income.
Research and Development Expenses and Accruals
R&D expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs, supplies, clinical trial costs, patient treatment costs, rent for laboratories and manufacturing facilities, consulting fees, costs of personnel and supplies for manufacturing, costs of service providers for preclinical, clinical and manufacturing, and certain legal expenses resulting from intellectual property prosecution, stock compensation expense and other expenses relating to the design, development, testing and enhancement of our product candidates. Except for certain capitalized intangible assets, R&D costs are expensed as incurred.
Our cost accruals for clinical trials and other R&D activities are based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with numerous clinical trial centers and contract research organizations, or CROs, clinical study sites, laboratories, consultants or other clinical trial vendors that perform activities in connection with a trial. Related contracts vary significantly in length and may be for a fixed amount, a variable amount based on actual costs incurred, capped at a certain limit, or for a combination of fixed, variable and capped amounts. Activity levels are monitored through close communication with the CROs and other clinical trial vendors, including detailed invoice and task completion review, analysis of expenses against budgeted amounts, analysis of work performed against approved contract budgets and payment schedules, and recognition of any changes in scope of the services to be performed. Certain CRO and significant clinical trial vendors provide an estimate of costs incurred but not invoiced at the end of each quarter for each individual trial. These estimates are reviewed and discussed with the CRO or vendor as necessary and are included in R&D expenses for the related period. For clinical study sites which are paid periodically on a per-subject basis to the institutions performing the clinical study, we accrue an estimated amount based on subject screening and enrollment in each quarter. All estimates may differ significantly from the actual amount subsequently invoiced, which may occur several months after the related services were performed.
In the normal course of business, we contract with third parties to perform various R&D activities in the on-going development of our product candidates. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under the contracts depend on factors such as the achievement of certain events, the successful enrollment of patients, and the completion of portions of the clinical trial or similar conditions. The objective of the accrual policy is to match the recording of expenses in the financial statements to the actual services received and efforts expended. As such, expense accruals related to clinical trials and other R&D
activities are recognized based on our estimates of the degree of completion of the event or events specified in the applicable contract.
No adjustments for material changes in estimates have been recognized in any period presented.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our results include non-cash compensation expense as a result of the issuance of stock, stock options and warrants, as applicable. We have issued stock options to employees, directors and consultants under our five stock option plans: (i) the 2006 Stock Option Plan, (ii) the 2012 Restated Equity Incentive Plan (which superseded the 2006 Stock Option Plan), (iii) the 2012 Non-Employee Director Stock Option Plan, (iv) the 2020 Equity Incentive Plan, and (v) the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan.
We expense the fair value of stock-based compensation over the vesting period. When more precise pricing data is unavailable, we determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. This valuation model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculation. These variables and assumptions include the weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding, the volatility of our common stock, and the risk-free interest rate. We account for forfeitures upon occurrence.
Stock options or other equity instruments to non-employees (including consultants) issued as consideration for goods or services received by us are accounted for based on the fair value of the equity instruments issued. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Company calculates the fair value for non-qualified options as of the date of grant and expenses over the applicable vesting periods.
The terms and vesting schedules for share-based awards vary by type of grant and the employment status of the grantee. Generally, the awards vest based upon time-based or performance-based conditions. Performance-based conditions generally include the attainment of goals related to our financial and development performance. Stock-based compensation expense is included in general and administrative expense or research and development expense, as applicable, in the Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss. We expect to record additional non-cash compensation expense in the future, which may be significant.
Clinical Trial Expense
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. Our clinical trial accrual process is designed to account for expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, consultants, and CROs and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our consolidated financial statements by matching the appropriate expenses with the period in which services are provided and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through financial models that take into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accrual and prepaid assets are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period.
Recently Issued or Newly Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In October 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, which affects general principles within Topic 740, Income Taxes. The amendments of ASU 2019-12 are meant to simplify and reduce the cost of accounting for income taxes. For public business entities, the amendments in this Update are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those
fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company adopted ASU 2019-12 in the first quarter of 2021. The adoption of this update did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements and footnote disclosures.
In November 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-10, Government Assistance (Topic 832), which requires business entities to disclose information about transactions with a government that are accounted for by applying a grant or contribution model by analogy. For transactions within scope, the new standard requires the disclosure of information about the nature of the transaction, including significant terms and conditions, as well as the amounts and specific financial statement line items affected by the transaction. The new guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021. The Company does not expect that the adoption of this standard will have an impact on its consolidated financial statements.
Other recent accounting pronouncements issued by the FASB, including its Emerging Issues Task Force, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the SEC, did not or are not believed by management to have a material impact on the Company’s present or future consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.