Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The following discussion and analysis of our business, financial condition, results of operations and quantitative and qualitative disclosures should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis also contains forward-looking statements and should also be read in conjunction with the disclosures and information contained in “Note About Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
References in this discussion and analysis to “CARS”, “we,” “us,” “our” and similar terms refer to Cars.com Inc. and its subsidiaries, collectively, unless the context indicates otherwise.
Business Overview. We are a leading digital marketplace and solutions provider for the automotive industry, connecting car shoppers with sellers. Through our marketplace, dealer websites and other digital products, we showcase dealer inventory, elevate and amplify dealers’ and automotive manufacturers (“OEMs”) brands, connect sellers with our ready-to-buy audience and empower shoppers with the resources and information needed to make confident car buying decisions. Our digital solutions strategy builds on the rich data and audience of our digital marketplace to offer media and solutions that drive growth and efficiency for the automotive industry. Our portfolio of brands now includes Cars.com™, Dealer Inspire®, DealerRater®, FUEL™, Auto.com™, PickupTrucks.com™, CreditIQ™ and NewCars.com®.
Overview of Results.
(1)The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is primarily attributed to goodwill and intangible asset impairments of $905.9 million and $461.5 million, respectively.
2021 Highlights and Recent Trends.
Dealer Customers. In the fourth quarter of 2021, Dealer Customers increased by 150, or 1%, to 19,179 as of December 31, 2021, as compared with 19,029 as of September 30, 2021, continuing six consecutive quarters of growth in Dealer Customers.
Total Dealer Customers increased by 807, or 4%, as compared with December 31, 2020. This increase was a result of sustained high retention rates and new sales to Dealer Customers. Dealer Customers as of December 31, 2020 were lower due to higher cancellations of marketplace customers in 2020, principally due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
CreditIQ. In November 2021, we acquired all the outstanding stock of CreditIQ, Inc. (the "CIQ Acquisition"), a cutting edge automotive fintech platform that provides instant online loan screening and approvals to facilitate online car buying. Through the CIQ Acquisition, we are now able to make advanced digital financing technology available to dealers across the CARS platform. Using cash on hand, we paid $30.0 million at the closing excluding transaction fees and expenses. As part of the transaction, we may be required to pay additional cash consideration of up to $50.0 million based on future performance over a three-year period with a mutually agreed upon option for a fourth year.
Technology Transformation. In June 2021, we announced the completion of a transformed online platform and mobile app for our users. Our new Cars.com site offers load times up to 80% faster and real-time inventory updates of over 50,000 cars added to the site daily, an especially important feature in today's inventory-starved environment. The upgraded Cars.com site, built on cloud-based technology, now delivers a more streamlined and dynamic experience for both car shoppers and sellers. Our updated site experience builds on a wealth of content and offers even more advanced tools, interactive features and personalized content combined with a vibrant, intuitive and accelerated path to purchase.
FordDirect Agreement. In April 2021, we announced that we were selected by FordDirect as a preferred website and technology platform provider for its approximately 3,000 U.S. dealerships.
Debt Repayments. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated substantial cash flow enabling us to make $120.0 million of debt repayments, of which $110.0 million were voluntary prepayments.
FUEL. Launched in early 2020, FUEL is a unique, high-ROI, targeted video advertising solution that generates superior returns compared to high-cost broadcast television advertising, on which the auto industry spends approximately $10 billion per year, in addition to what is spent on other expensive advertising mediums. FUEL continues to be one of our fastest growing products. FUEL enables
dealerships and OEMs to target and reach in-market car shoppers by leveraging the power of Cars.com's exclusive first-party audience data.
Impact of COVID-19 on our business. Beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic spread throughout the United States and the rest of the world and resulted in governmental authorities around the country implementing numerous measures to contain the virus, such as quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business shutdowns (the “related restrictions”). As cases of COVID-19 persist in various regions around the globe and new COVID-19 variants emerge, these related restrictions may still be enforced or be renewed in certain markets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, and to a lesser extent during the year ended December 31, 2021, our business, financial condition, liquidity and operating results were adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, as a widespread increase in unemployment, reduced consumer spending and supply chain disruptions impacted the greater macroeconomic automotive industry.
Key Operating Metrics. We regularly review a number of key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make operating and strategic decisions. Information regarding Traffic, Average Monthly Unique Visitors and Monthly Average Revenue Per Dealer is as follows (in thousands, except for Monthly Average Revenue Per Dealer):
Information regarding our Dealer Customers is as follows:
Traffic ("Visits"). Traffic is fundamental to our business. Traffic to the CARS network of websites and mobile apps provides value to our advertisers in terms of audience, awareness, consideration and conversion. In addition to tracking traffic volume and sources, we monitor activity on our properties, allowing us to innovate and refine our consumer-facing offerings. Traffic is defined as the number of visits to CARS desktop and mobile properties (responsive sites and mobile apps), measured using Adobe Analytics. Traffic does not include traffic to Dealer Inspire websites. Traffic provides an indication of our consumer reach. Although our consumer reach does not directly result in revenue, we believe our ability to reach in-market car shoppers is attractive to our dealer customers and national advertisers.
Traffic for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was essentially flat compared to the prior year.
Average Monthly Unique Visitors (“UVs”). Growth in unique visitors to our network of websites and mobile apps increases the number of impressions, clicks, leads and other events we can monetize to generate revenue. We define UVs in a given month as the number of distinct visitors that engage with our platform during that month. Visitors are identified when a user first visits an individual CARS property on an individual device/browser combination or installs one of our mobile apps on an individual device. If a visitor accesses more than one of our web properties or apps or uses more than one device or browser, each of those unique property/browser/app/device combinations count toward the number of UVs. UVs do not include Dealer Inspire UVs. We measure UVs using Adobe Analytics.
UVs increased 5% from December 31, 2020. We believe the growth in UVs was primarily related to heightened consumer demand resulting from an increase in consumer confidence due to the economic stimulus during the first half of 2021. This was partially offset by certain short-term negative impacts in connection with the completion of the Technology Transformation.
Average Revenue Per Dealer (“ARPD”). We believe that our ability to grow ARPD is an indicator of the value proposition of our platform. We define ARPD as Dealer revenue, excluding digital advertising services, during the period divided by the monthly average number of Dealer Customers during the same period.
ARPD for the quarter remained essentially flat from September 30, 2021 and increased 3% from December 31, 2020, primarily driven by growth in FUEL revenue, as well as growth in digital solutions.
ARPD for the year increased 16% from December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the second quarter 2020 invoice credits provided to our customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions, as well as our dealer customers' further adoption of FUEL and digital solutions.
Dealer Customers. Dealer Customers represent dealerships using our products as of the end of each reporting period. Each physical or virtual dealership location is counted separately, whether it is a single-location proprietorship or part of a large, consolidated dealer group. Multi-franchise dealerships at a single location are counted as one dealer.
Total Dealer Customers increased 1% from September 30, 2021. Dealer Customers increased, as a result of growth in marketplace and solutions only dealer customers, reflecting improved retention rates.
Total Dealer Customers increased by 4%, from December 31, 2020. This increase was a result of sustained high retention rates and new sales to Dealer Customers. Dealer Customers as of December 31, 2020 were lower due to higher cancellations of marketplace customers in 2020, principally due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Factors Affecting Our Performance. Our business is impacted by the changes in the larger automotive ecosystem, including inventory supply and supply chain disruptions, semiconductor shortages, employee retention and changes related to automotive advertising, among other macroeconomic factors. Changes in vehicle sales volumes in the United States also influence OEMs’ and dealerships’ willingness to increase investments in technology solutions and automotive marketplaces like Cars.com and could impact our pricing strategies and/or revenue mix.
Our long-term success will depend in part on our ability to continue to transform our business toward a multi-faceted suite of digital solutions that complement our online marketplace offerings. We believe our core strategic strengths, including our powerful family of brands, growing high-quality audience and suite of digital solutions for advertisers, will assist us as we navigate a rapidly changing automotive environment. Additionally, we are focused on equipping our customers with digital solutions to enable them to compete in an environment in which an increasing number of car-buying customers are shopping online. These solutions include virtual showrooms, home delivery, online chat, vehicle financing and our FUEL product that allows dealers to target in-market buyers on streaming platforms. The foundation of our continued success is the value we deliver to customers, and we believe that our large audience of in-market, car shoppers and innovative solutions deliver significant value to our customers.
Although the future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are unknown and depend on numerous factors outside of our control, we believe our marketplace, advertising and digital solutions remain critical in helping our customers navigate certain challenges of the pandemic and related restrictions. We also believe our solutions will continue to be important tools for our customers in the future and, in particular, may help mitigate potential future impacts of the pandemic and related restrictions.
Results of Operations.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
*** Not meaningful
Dealer revenue. Dealer revenue consists of marketplace and digital solutions sold to dealer customers. Dealer revenue is our largest revenue stream, representing 88.2% and 84.6% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and increased by $86.9 million, or 19%, compared to the prior year.
We experienced continued growth in our FUEL and digital solutions products, as well as a 4% increase in Dealer Customers. Dealer revenue in 2020 was also impacted significantly by our response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In an effort to assist our dealer customers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions, we provided, among other measures, approximately $38.2 million of financial relief in the form of certain invoice credits of 50% for April 2020 and 30% for May and June 2020.
OEM and National revenue. OEM and National revenue consists of display advertising and other solutions sold to OEMs, certain advertising agencies, automotive dealer associations and auto adjacent businesses. OEM and National revenue represents 10.4% and 13.4% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. OEM and National revenue declined 11%, primarily due to pullbacks in OEM spending associated with fewer new model releases and continued production shortages, both driven by supply-chain disruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, several of the financial statement line items described below were significantly lower as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021, due to our management of expenses in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we implemented multiple initiatives to align our expenses with the lower revenue resulting from our invoice credits. The impact of lower spending in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic primarily impacted the second quarter of 2020 and to a lesser extent, the latter half of 2020.
Cost of revenue and operations. Cost of revenue and operations expense primarily consists of costs related to our pay per lead products, third-party costs for processing dealer vehicle inventory, product fulfillment and compensation costs for the product fulfillment and customer service teams. Cost of revenue and operations expense represents 18.3% and 18.5% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cost of revenue and operations expense increased, primarily due to lower spending in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic expense adjustments, as well as revenue growth from FUEL and digital solutions products, which have an inherently higher cost of revenue.
Product and technology. The product team creates and manages consumer and dealer-facing innovation and user experience. The technology team develops and supports our products and websites. Product and technology expense includes compensation costs, hardware and software maintenance, software licenses, data center and other infrastructure costs. Product and technology expense represents 12.4% and 11.1% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Product and technology expense increased, primarily due to lower spending in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as continued investment in the business.
Marketing and sales. Marketing and sales expense primarily consists of traffic and lead acquisition costs (including search engine and other online marketing), TV and digital display/video advertising and creative production, market research, trade events and compensation costs for the marketing, sales and sales support teams, as well as bad debt expense related to the allowance for doubtful accounts. Marketing and sales expense represents 33.4% and 33.5% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Marketing and sales expense increased, primarily due to lower spending in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic that reduced our advertising and trade events spend.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense primarily consists of compensation costs for certain of the executive, finance, legal, human resources, facilities and other administrative employees. In addition, general and administrative expense includes office space rent, legal, accounting and other professional services, transaction-related costs, severance, transformation and other exit costs and costs related to the write-off and loss on assets, excluding the goodwill and intangible asset impairment discussed below. General and administrative expense represents 11.8% and 10.8% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. General and administrative expense increased, primarily due to $11.9 million in transaction related costs, including $9.6 million of compensation expense recognized as part of the $30.0 million upfront purchase consideration of CreditIQ recorded in the fourth quarter. In addition, the increase includes the impact of lower spending in the prior year as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as increased compensation costs, including stock-based compensation.
Affiliate revenue share. Affiliate revenue share expense ended in June 2020. For information related to the affiliate market conversions, see Note 6 (Unfavorable Contracts Liability) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased 10%, primarily due to certain assets being fully depreciated and amortized as compared to the prior year period, partially offset by depreciation and amortization on additional assets acquired.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment. As of March 31, 2020, we determined there was a triggering event, caused by the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. We performed interim quantitative impairment tests as of March 31, 2020. The results of the goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment tests indicated that the carrying values exceeded the estimated fair values and thus, we recorded an impairment of $505.9 million and $400.0 million, respectively.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net increased by $0.9 million compared to the prior year period, due to a higher overall interest rate on our outstanding debt, partially offset by lower debt outstanding. For information related to our Term and Revolving Loans and interest rate swap, see Note 7 (Debt) and Note 8 (Interest Rate Swap) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other expense, net. Other expense, net changed, primarily due to the $9.4 million impairment of a non-marketable investment, triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020. For information related to the impairment, see Note 2 (Significant Accounting Policies) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income tax expense (benefit). The effective income tax rate, expressed by calculating the income tax expense (benefit) as a percentage of Income (loss) before income tax, was 19% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to the tax benefit realized from a partial release of the valuation allowance, stock-based compensation and tax credits, partially offset by an increase in our uncertain tax positions and the impact of nondeductible transaction expenses. The effective income tax rate was 13% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to the goodwill and intangible asset impairments and the establishment of a valuation allowance recorded against the deferred tax assets. For information related to income taxes, see Note 14 (Income Taxes) to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The comparison of the 2020 results with 2019 can be found under the heading “Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019” in “Part II, Item 7., Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section of our 2020 Form 10-K, which comparison is incorporated by reference herein.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview. Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, available cash reserves and debt capacity available under our credit facilities. Our positive operating cash flow, along with our Revolving Loan described below, provide adequate liquidity to meet our short and long-term business needs, including those for investments and strategic acquisitions. However, our ability to maintain adequate liquidity for our operations in the future is dependent upon a number of factors, including our revenue, macroeconomic conditions, the duration and severity of the economic and operational impacts caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to manage costs, including capital expenditures, and to collect accounts receivable, and various other factors, many of which are beyond our direct control.
As discussed below, we are subject to certain financial and other covenants contained in our debt agreements, as amended, including by the third amendment to the Credit Agreement (the "Third Amendment"). For information related to the Credit Amendment, as amended, see Note 7 (Debt) in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We may also seek to raise funds through debt or equity financing in the future to fund acquisitions, investments, or operations, consistent with our strategy. If we need to access the capital markets, there can be no assurance that financing may be available on attractive terms, if at all. As of December 31, 2021, Cash and cash equivalents were $39.1 million and including our undrawn Revolving Loan our total liquidity was $269.1 million.
Indebtedness. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of our indebtedness was $477.5 million, at an effective interest rate of 5.7%, including $77.5 million of outstanding principal under the Term Loan, which carries an interest rate of 2.5% and outstanding principal under the bonds of $400.0 million, at an interest rate of 6.375%. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we made $120.0 million in Term Loan payments, of which $10.0 million were mandatory. As of December 31, 2021, $230.0 million was available to borrow under the Revolving Loan. Our borrowings are limited by our Senior Secured Leverage Ratio and Interest Coverage Ratio, calculated in accordance with our Credit Agreement, which were 0.41x and 5.72x as of December 31, 2021, respectively. For further information, see Note 7 (Debt) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On October 30, 2020, we issued $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.375% senior unsecured notes due 2028 (the "Notes”). We used the net proceeds from the offering, together with cash on hand, to repay $235.0 million of borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, repay $162.8 million of borrowings under our Term Loan and pay fees associated with the offering.
On October 30, 2020, we entered into the Third Amendment to our Credit Agreement in connection with a broader refinancing, in which we reduced the size of our outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement to an aggregate principal amount of $430.0 million, comprised of a $230.0 million Revolving Credit Facility and a $200.0 million Term Loan, and extended the maturity date to May 31, 2025. The Third Amendment also included the following:
•A maximum Senior Secured Leverage Ratio of 3.50x (as defined within the Credit Agreement, as amended), with a temporary step up for material permitted acquisitions;
•A minimum Interest Coverage Ratio of 2.75x and 3.00x beginning June 30, 2023;
•A revised interest rate grid updated to reflect a maximum ABR margin of 1.75% and a maximum Eurodollar margin of 2.75%;
•Reduction of the LIBOR floor to 0.50%;
•Certain modifications to negative covenants restricting additional indebtedness, investments, acquisitions, debt repayments and certain dividends and distribution;
•Provisions to accommodate the replacement of the existing LIBOR Rate with a successor benchmark interest rate; and
•Ended the Covenant Adjustment Period and removed the related minimum liquidity requirement and anti-cash hoarding covenant that were implemented pursuant to the second amendment of our Credit Agreement (the "Second Amendment").
Interest Rate Swap. The interest rate on borrowings under our Term Loan is floating and, therefore, subject to fluctuations. In order to manage the risk associated with changes in interest rates on its borrowing under the Term Loan, we entered into an interest rate swap (the “Swap”) effective December 31, 2018. Under the terms of the Swap, we are locked into a fixed rate of interest of 2.96% on a notional amount of $300 million. The Swap was initially designated as a cash flow hedge of interest rate risk.
The Second Amendment triggered a quantitative hedge effectiveness test, which resulted in the loss of hedge accounting. As a result, as of the date of the Second Amendment, the unrealized loss included within Accumulated other comprehensive loss was frozen and is now being ratably reclassified into Net income (loss) over the remaining life of the Swap through Interest expense, net and Income tax expense (benefit) on the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). Subsequent to the Second Amendment, any changes in the fair value of the Swap are recorded within Other (expense) income, net on the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
The Third Amendment triggered a partial extinguishment of the underlying Term Loan. Due to the extinguishment, we wrote-off a proportional amount of the frozen Accumulated other comprehensive loss balance as of the date of the partial extinguishment proportional to the reduction in the underlying Term Loan. As a result, we included $4.5 million in Interest expense, net on the Consolidated Statement of Income (Loss) during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the Swap was an unrealized loss of $3.5 million, which is recorded in Other accrued liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the Swap was an unrealized loss of $12.1 million, of which $8.5 million and $3.6 million was recorded in Other accrued liabilities and Other noncurrent liabilities, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, $5.7 million and $11.1 million was reclassified from Accumulated other comprehensive loss and recorded in Interest expense, net, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we made payments of $8.6 million related to the Swap. During the year ended December 31, 2021, $0.9 million was reclassified as a tax benefit from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into Income tax expense (benefit) on the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
Affiliate Agreements. As of October 2019, we successfully converted all affiliates to our direct control, as our last affiliate agreement terminated in October 2019. Therefore, we have a direct relationship with all dealer customers and recognize the revenue associated with converted dealers as Dealer revenue, rather than Wholesale revenue, in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). During 2021 and, to a lesser extent in 2020, we realized incremental cash flow, as we are no longer required to make any further payments to the affiliates under these agreements.
Share Repurchase Program. In March 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program to acquire up to $200 million of our common stock over a two-year period. Under this program, we were able to repurchase shares from time to time in open market transactions or through privately negotiated transactions in accordance with applicable federal securities laws. The timing and amounts of any purchases under the share repurchase program was based on market conditions and other factors including price. The repurchase program did not require the purchase of any minimum number of shares and could have been suspended, modified or discontinued at any time without prior notice. In March 2020, the repurchase program expired and there were no share repurchases during the year ended December 31, 2020. We repurchased and subsequently retired 1.7 million shares for $40.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows. Details of our cash flows are as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was essentially flat compared to the prior period.
Investing Activities. The change in cash used in investing activities is primarily due to payments related to the CIQ Acquisition in 2021, net of cash acquired.
Financing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities was primarily related to $120.0 million of debt repayments, of which $110.0 million were voluntary prepayments. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities is primarily related to $50.6 million of net debt repayments, inclusive of $615.6 million in debt repayments, partially offset by $565.0 million in proceeds related to the issuance of the bond and our draw on our Revolving Credit Facility during the first quarter of 2020. Additionally, there was $17.3 million of debt issuance costs associated with the bond offering and the second and third amendments. For information related to our debt, see Note 7 (Debt) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations. As of December 31, 2021, we had the following obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts, contractual obligations and commercial commitments (in thousands):
(1)Long-term debt includes future principal payments on long-term borrowings through scheduled maturity dates. Excluded from these amounts are the non-cash amortization of debt issuance and other costs related to indebtedness.
(2)Interest payments for variable rate debt were calculated using interest rates as of December 31, 2021 and factor in scheduled amortization payments primarily on the Term Loan and Swap.
(3)Other obligations represent commitments under certain vendor and other contracts. Excluded from the above table is the contingent consideration related to the CIQ Acquisition as the amounts and timing are uncertain. As part of the CIQ Acquisition, we may be required to pay up to an additional $50.0 million in cash consideration to the former owners based on two earn-out achievement objectives, including an earnings related metric and lender market share. The actual amount to be paid will be based on the acquired business’s future performance to be attained over a three-year performance period with a mutually agreed upon option for a fourth year.
Commitments and Contingencies. For further information, see Note 10 (Commitments and Contingencies) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Subsequent Events.
Accu-Trade Acquisition. In February 2022, we signed a definitive agreement to acquire 100% of the assets of Accu-Trade, Galves Market Data and MADE Logistics ("Accu-Trade"), which includes real-time, VIN-specific appraisal and valuation data, instant guaranteed offer capabilities and logistics technology. Consideration for the transaction will be $65 million in cash at closing. There is also the potential for additional cash and stock consideration based on achievement of certain financial thresholds. The transaction is expected to close in March 2022.
Share Repurchase Program. In February 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a three-year share repurchase program to acquire up to $200 million of our common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates. We believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition. We account for a customer arrangement when we and the customer have an approved contract that specifies the rights and obligations of each party and the payment terms, and we believe it is probable we will collect substantially all of the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for the services that will be provided to the customer. We periodically enter into arrangements that include multiple promises that we evaluate to determine whether the promises are separate performance obligations. We identify performance obligations based on services to be transferred to a customer that are distinct within the context of the contractual terms. We allocate the contractual transaction price to each distinct performance obligation and recognize revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by providing a service to a customer. Revenue is generated through our direct sales force and prior to October 2019, through affiliate sales channels (Wholesale revenue).
Marketplace Subscription Advertising Revenue. Our primary source of revenue is through the sale of marketplace subscription advertising packages to dealer customers. Our subscription packages allow dealer customers to showcase their new and used vehicle inventory to in-market shoppers on the Cars.com website. The subscription packages are generally a fixed price arrangement with varying contract terms, typically ranging from three to six months, that are automatically renewed, typically on a month-to-month basis. We recognize subscription package revenue ratably as the service is provided over the contract term. Marketplace subscription advertising revenue is recorded in Dealer revenue and, prior to October 2019, Wholesale revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
We also offer our customers several add-on products to the subscription packages, as well as FUEL. Add-on products include premium advertising products that can be uniquely tailored to an individual dealer customer’s current needs. Substantially all of our add-on products, as well as FUEL, are sold from the subscription packages as the customer cannot benefit from add-on products on their own. Therefore, the subscription packages and add-on products, as well as FUEL, are combined as a single performance obligation, and we recognize the related revenue ratably as the services are provided over the contract term.
We also provide services, including hosting flexible, custom designed website platforms supporting highly personalized digital marketing campaigns, digital retailing and messaging platform products. We recognize revenue related to these services ratably as the service is provided over the contract term. The related revenue is recorded in Dealer revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
Prior to October 2019, our affiliates also sold marketplace subscription advertising to dealer customers, and we earned Wholesale revenue through our affiliate agreements. Affiliates were assigned certain sales territories in which they sold our products. Under these agreements, we charged the affiliates 60% of the corresponding Cars.com retail rate for products sold to affiliate dealer customers. We recognized Wholesale revenue ratably as the service was provided over the contract term. In situations where our direct sales force sold our products within an affiliate’s assigned territory, we paid the affiliate a revenue share which was classified as Affiliate revenue share in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). Wholesale revenue also included the amortization of the Unfavorable contracts liability. For information related to the Unfavorable contracts liability, see Note 6 (Unfavorable Contracts Liability) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Display Advertising Products and Services Revenue. We also earn revenue through the sale of display advertising on our website to national advertisers, pursuant to transaction-based contracts, which are billed for impressions delivered or click-throughs on their advertisements. An impression is the display of an advertisement to an end-user on the website and is a measure of volume. A click-through occurs when an end-user clicks on an impression. We recognize revenue as the impressions or click-throughs are delivered. If the impressions or click-throughs delivered are less than the amount invoiced to the customer, the difference is recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue when earned. We recognize revenue related to these services at the point in time the service is provided. Display advertising products revenue sold to OEMs is recorded in OEM and National revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). We also provide services related to customized digital marketing and customer acquisition services, including paid, organic, social and creative services to dealer customers. We recognize revenue related to these services at the point in time the service is provided. Display advertising products revenue sold to dealers is recorded in Dealer revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
Pay Per Lead Revenue. We also sell leads, which are connections from consumers to dealer customers in the form of phone calls, emails and text messages, to dealer customers, OEMs and third-party resellers. We recognize pay per lead revenue primarily on a per-lead basis at the point in time in which the lead has been delivered. Revenue related to pay per lead is recorded in Dealer revenue, OEM and National revenue, Other revenue or, prior to October 2019, Wholesale revenue, depending on the customer who is purchasing this product, in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
Other Revenue. Other revenue primarily includes revenue related to vehicle listing data sold to third parties and peer-to-peer vehicle advertising. We recognize other revenue either ratably as the services are provided or at the point in time the services have been performed. Other revenue is recorded in Other revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss).
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost over the fair value of assets acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, net of liabilities assumed. Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis or between annual tests if events occur or circumstances changed that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. Our goodwill is tested for impairment at a level referred to as the reporting unit. The level at which we test goodwill for impairment requires us to determine whether the operations below the business segment level constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results. We determined that we operated as a single reporting unit.
The process of estimating the fair value of goodwill is subjective and requires us to make estimates that may significantly impact the outcome of the analysis. A qualitative assessment considers events and circumstances such as macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors and overall financial performance, as well as company specifications. If after performing this assessment, we concluded it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we would perform the quantitative test.
Under the quantitative test, a goodwill impairment is identified by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, goodwill is considered
impaired and an impairment charge is recognized in an amount equal to the excess, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
We estimate the fair value of the reporting unit with an income approach using the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis and we also considered a market-based valuation methodology using comparable public company trading values and our market capitalization. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, long-term growth rates, the discount rate and relevant comparable public company earnings multiples. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis are based on our best estimate of future sales, earnings and cash flows after considering factors such as general market conditions and recent operating performance. The discount rate utilized in the DCF analysis is based on the reporting unit’s weighted-average cost of capital, which takes into account the relative weights of each component of capital structure (equity and debt) and represents the expected cost of new capital, adjusted as appropriate to consider the risk inherent in future cash flows of our reporting unit.
Impairment assessment inherently involves management judgments regarding a number of assumptions described above. The reporting unit fair value also depends on the future strength of the U.S. economy. New and developing competition as well as technological change could also adversely affect future fair value estimates. Due to the many variables inherent in the estimation of a reporting unit’s fair value and the relative size of our recorded goodwill, differences in assumptions could have a material effect on the estimated fair values.
For information related to the goodwill impairment recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Note 5 (Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Indefinite-Lived Intangibles. In connection with TEGNA's acquisition of Cars.com, we recorded an intangible asset with an indefinite life associated with the Cars.com trade name. The indefinite-lived intangible asset is tested annually, or more often if circumstances dictate, for impairment and is written down to fair value as required. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we performed a qualitative test for impairment and noted no quantitative test or impairment was required.
For information related to the intangible asset impairment recorded during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see Note 5 (Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net) to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Combinations.
Intangible Assets. Intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. The fair values assigned to the intangible assets acquired were determined based on management’s estimates and assumptions, as well as other information compiled by management, including third-party valuations that utilize customary valuation procedures and techniques, such as the multi-period excess earnings and the relief of royalty methods. These preliminary fair values are subject to change within the one-year measurement period. We amortize intangible assets over their estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis. Amortization is recorded over the relevant estimated useful lives ranging from five to ten years.
We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on at least an annual basis and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, we amortize the remaining carrying value of the intangible asset prospectively over the revised remaining useful life. If an impairment is identified, the asset is written down to fair value as required.
For the CIQ Acquisition, we did not identify any impairments or changes to the useful lives of the intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Contingent Consideration. As part of the CIQ Acquisition, we may be required to pay up to an additional $50.0 million in cash consideration to the former owners based on two different earn-out achievement objectives, including an earnings related metric and lender market share. The actual amount to be paid will be based on the acquired business’s future performance to be attained over a three-year performance period with a mutual option for a fourth year. The contingent consideration is classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy and the fair value is measured based on a Monte Carlo simulation or a scenario-based method, depending on the earn-out achievement objective, utilizing projections about future performance. Significant inputs include volatility, discount rate and projected financial information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements. There are no recent accounting pronouncements that materially impact our financial statements as of December 31, 2021.