ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report. See also “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
We are a U.S. biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing innovative therapeutics and pharmaceutical products in China, the United States, and throughout the world. We were incorporated in 1991, and in 2012, with new leadership, the Company shifted its business strategy to China and has since built an infrastructure in China that includes sales and marketing, medical affairs, regulatory and clinical development and in the foreseeable future, manufacturing. In 2014, the Company changed its name to “CASI Pharmaceuticals, Inc.” We are focused on acquiring, developing and commercializing products that augment our hematology oncology therapeutic focus as well as other areas of unmet medical need. The Company is executing our plan to become a biopharmaceutical leader by launching medicines in the greater China market, leveraging our China-based regulatory, clinical and commercial competencies and our global drug development expertise. The majority of the Company’s operations are now located in China and are conducted primarily through two of our subsidiaries: (i) CASI Pharmaceuticals (China) Co., Ltd.. (“CASI China”), which is wholly owned and is located in Beijing, China, and (ii) CASI Pharmaceuticals (Wuxi) Co., Ltd.. (“CASI Wuxi”), which is located in Wuxi, China. Our Beijing office is primarily responsible for our day-to-day operations and our commercial team of over 100 hematology/oncology sales and marketing specialists based in China. CASI Wuxi is part of the long-term strategy to support our future clinical and commercial manufacturing needs, to manage our supply chain for certain products, and to develop a GMP manufacturing facility in China.
We launched our first commercial product, EVOMELA® (Melphalan for Injection) in China in August 2019. In China, EVOMELA® is approved for use as a conditioning treatment prior to stem cell transplantation and as a palliative treatment for patients with multiple myeloma. The other core hematology/oncology assets in the Company’s pipeline include:
● CNCT19 is an autologous CD19 CAR-T investigative product (CNCT19) being developed by the Company’s partner Juventas for which the Company has exclusive World-Wide co-commercial and profit-sharing rights. CNCT19 is being developed as a potential treatment for patients with hematological malignancies which express CD19 including, B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (“B-ALL”) and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (“B-NHL”). The CNCT19 Phase 1 studies in patients with B-ALL and B-NHL in China have been completed by Juventas, the Phase 2 B-ALL and B-NHL registration studies are both currently enrolling in China the fourth quarter of 2020.
● BI-1206 is an antibody which has a novel mode-of-action, blocking the inhibitory antibody checkpoint receptor FcγRIIB to unlock anti-cancer immunity and enhance the efficacy of antibody-based immunotherapy in both hematological malignancies and solid tumors for which the Company has licensed exclusive greater China rights from BioInvent International AB (“BioInvent”). BI-1206 is being investigated by BioInvent in a Phase 1/2 trial, in combination with anti-PD1 therapy Keytruda® (pembrolizumab), in patients with solid tumors, and in a Phase 1/2a trial in combination with MabThera® (rituximab) in patients with relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). BI-1206 has the potential to restore the activity of rituximab in patients with relapsed/refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Clinical Trial Application (CTA) was approved by China National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) in December 2021. The Company is planning Phase 1 trials of BI-1206 as a single agent to evaluate the PK/safety profile and in combination with rituximab in patients with NHL (mantle cell lymphoma, marginal zone lymphoma, and follicular lymphoma) to assess safety and tolerability, select the Recommended Phase 2 Dose and assess early signs of clinical efficacy as part of its development program for BI-1206 in China. The studies are expected to start in the first half of 2022.
● CB-5339 is a novel VCP/p97 inhibitor focused on valosin-containing protein (VCP)/p97 as a novel target in protein homeostasis, DNA damage response and other cellular stress pathways for therapeutic use in the treatment of patients with various malignancies. The Company entered into an exclusive license on March 21, 2021 with Cleave Therapeutics, Inc. (Cleave”) for the development and commercialization of CB-5339 in Mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan. CB-5339, an oral second-generation, small molecule VCP/p97 inhibitor, is being evaluated in a Phase 1 clinical trial in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). CB-5339 CTA application for the multiple myeloma indication is in preparation after receiving an acceptance letter for the CB-5339 IND package from the China CDE.
● CID-103 is a full human IgG1 anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody recognizing a unique epitope that has demonstrated encouraging preclinical efficacy and safety profile compared to other anti-CD38 monoclonal antibodies for which the Company has exclusive global rights. CID-103 is being developed for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma. The Phase 1 dose escalation and expansion study of CID-103, in patients with previously treated, relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma is ongoing in the UK and France.
The Company also has greater China rights to Octreotide (Long Acting Injectable), a standard of care for the treatment of acromegaly and for the control of symptoms associated with certain neuroendocrine tumors; and Thiotepa, a cytotoxic agent which has a long history of established use in the hematology/oncology setting, the Company has an exclusive China license and distribution rights to a novel formulation of thiotepa, which has multiple indications including use as a conditioning treatment for certain allogeneic haemopoietic stem cell transplants. However, due to the evolving standard of care environment, the rare and niche indication for these products, potential US regulatory action and the Company’s commitment to prioritize resources, the Company is currently evaluating its options for these products. In addition, the Company’s assets include six FDA-approved ANDAs which the Company is evaluating due to generic drug pricing reforms by the Chinese government and its impact on the pricing and competitiveness of these products.
CASI has built a fully integrated, world class biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the successful development and commercialization of innovative and other therapeutic products. Our business development strategy is currently focused on acquiring additional targeted drugs and immuno-oncology therapeutics through licensing that will expand our hematology/oncology franchise. We use a market-oriented approach to identify pharmaceutical/biotechnology candidates that we believe to have the potential for gaining widespread market acceptance, either globally or in China, and for which development can be accelerated under our global drug development strategy. In many cases our business development strategy includes direct equity investments in the licensor company. We intend for our pipeline to reflect a diversified and risk-balanced set of assets that include (1) late-stage clinical drug candidates in-licensed for China or global regional rights, (2) proprietary or licensed innovative drug candidates, and (3) select high quality pharmaceuticals that fit our therapeutic focus. We have focused on US/EU approved product candidates, and product candidates with proven targets or product candidates that have reduced clinical risk with a greater emphasis on innovative therapeutics. Although oncology with a focus on hematological malignancies is our principal clinical and commercial target, we are opportunistic about other therapeutic areas that can address unmet medical needs. We will continue to pursue building a robust pipeline of drug candidates for development and commercialization in China as our primary market, and if rights are available for the rest of the world.
We believe our China operations offer a significant market and growth potential due to the extraordinary increase in demand for high quality medicines coupled with regulatory reforms in China that facilitate the entry of new pharmaceutical products into the country. We will continue to in-license clinical-stage and late-stage drug candidates, and leverage our cross-border operations and expertise, and hope to be the partner of choice to provide access to the China market. We expect the implementation of our plans will
include leveraging our resources and expertise in both the U.S. and China so that we can maximize regulatory, development and clinical strategies in both countries.
The Company’s commercial product, EVOMELA®, was originally licensed from Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Spectrum”) and the Company had a supply agreement with Spectrum to support the Company’s application for import drug registration and for commercialization purposes. Spectrum completed the sale of its portfolio of FDA-approved hematology/oncology products including EVOMELA® to Acrotech Biopharma L.L.C. (“Acrotech”) on March 1, 2019. The original supply agreement with Spectrum was assumed by Acrotech; Spectrum agreed to continue with a short-term supply agreement for EVOMELA® for the initial commercial product supply in connection with the Company’s launch, with the long-term supply assumed by Acrotech.
As part of the long-term strategy to support our future clinical and commercial manufacturing needs and to manage our supply chain for certain products, on December 26, 2018, we established CASI Wuxi, between the Company and Wuxi LP, to develop a future GMP manufacturing facility that will be located in the Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone in Jiangsu Province, China. In November 2019, CASI Wuxi entered into a fifty-year lease agreement for the right to use state-owned land in China for the construction of a GMP manufacturing facility. Pursuant to the agreement, CASI Wuxi has committed to invest land use right and property, plant and equipment of RMB1 billion (equivalent to $143 million) by August 2022. In April 2020, CASI Wuxi received RMB 15.9 million (equivalent to $2.2 million) from the Jiangsu Province Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone as government grant for this development project which was recorded as deferred income in April 2020. In November 2021, CASI Wuxi received an additional RMB 3.0 million (equivalent to $0.5 million) from the Jiangsu Province Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone as a government grant for this development project which was recorded as deferred income in November 2021. In 2020, for the design and construction work of the land, CASI Wuxi entered into several contracts for RMB 76.1 million ($12.0 million) to complete the phase 1 project of CASI Wuxi's research and development production base, the project was the estimated to be completed in October 2023. In February 2022, CASI Wuxi has reached an alignment with the Wuxi local government that it will collaborate with Wuxi LP to co-develop the land continuously in the future, and the development plan will be extended, details regarding the plan are under negotiation. Also in 2020, CASI Wuxi entered in to a lease agreement with local government for a manufactory building next to the leased land. Since then, the Company entered into a series of contracts for the remodeling and installation work of the building and warehouse, as well as purchase of equipments. The total contract amount entered into for this building is approximately RMB 92.9 million ($14.6 million).
During the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, we experienced disruptions to the EVOMELA® marketing and sales activities as well as to the supply chain for EVOMELA®. The COVID-19 pandemic also impacted our targeted start time of our CID-103 trial due to the lock down of many medical facilities in Europe. During 2021, we have experienced minimal disruption to our business activities or supply chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, in June 2021 we achieved the First-Patient-In (FPI) in the Phase 1 dose escalation and expansion study of CID-103 in patients with previously treated, relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. The study is designed to assess the safety, tolerability, pharmacology and clinical activity of CID-103.
We currently rely on a single source for the supply of EVOMELA®. The continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic or the emergence of new COVID-19 variants or new pandemics may affect the economies and financial markets of many countries, which may result in a period of economic slowdown or recessions. In such an event, our ability to continue to commercialize and expand distribution of EVOMELA® could be adversely affected if the supplier refuses or is unable to provide products for any reason (including the occurrence of an event like the COVID-19 pandemic that makes delivery impractical). We would have to work with Acrotech to negotiate an agreement with a substitute supplier, which, assuming a substitute supplier was available, would likely interrupt the manufacturing of EVOMELA®, cause supply chain delays and increase costs.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, the economies and financial markets of many countries, which may result in a period of regional, national, and global economic slowdown or regional, national, or global recessions that could affect our ability to continue to commercialize and expand distribution of EVOMELA® (Melphalan For Injection) or other drugs in our existing product pipeline. Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a disruption to our supply chain for EVOMELA®, we have experienced no supply disruption in 2021; however, there can be no assurance that restrictions will not be imposed again. In addition, economic and other uncertainties may adversely affect other parties’ willingness to negotiate and execute product licenses and thus hamper our ability to in-license clinical-stage and late-stage drug candidates in China or elsewhere.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND THE USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our critical accounting policies, including the items in our financial statements requiring significant estimates and judgments, are as follows:
Stock-Based Compensation
We record compensation expense associated with service and performance-based stock options in accordance with provisions of authoritative guidance. The estimated fair value of service-based awards is measured on the grant date and is generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period and based on the proportionate amount of the requisite service period that has been rendered during each reporting period. The estimated fair value of performance-based awards is measured on the grant date and is recognized when it is determined that it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. If the required vesting conditions are not met resulting in the forfeiture of the share-based awards, previously recognized compensation expense relating to those awards are reversed as occurred.
Grant date fair value was determined using an option pricing model which is affected by the fair value of underlying ordinary shares as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, such as expected volitality, expected term of options, risk-free rate, and expected dividend yield.
Fair value measurement of investment in equity interests of Juventas Cell Therapy Ltd. using the measurement alternative
The investment in the equity interests of Juventas was accounted for as an investment in equity securities using the measurement alternative at its cost, minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer, as the fair value of the equity securities of Juventas is not readily determinable. The fair value of such investment was determined based on the price in the orderly transaction for newly issued equity interests of Juventas, which is further adjusted to reflect the differences between the newly issued equity interests of Juventas and the Company’s investment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Items
Revenues
Product Sales
Revenues consist of product sales of EVOMELA® that launched during August 2019. Revenue was $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenues increased by 100% in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to same period in 2020 due to the continued growth in EVOMELA® sales.
Lease Income
Lease income consists primarily of an equipment lease with Juventas (a related party). Lease income was $148,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $140,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues consists primarily of the cost of inventories of EVOMELA® and sales-based royalties related to the sale of EVOMELA®.
Costs of revenues were $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of costs of revenues primarily resulted from the increase of EVOMELA sales during the same period. Included in our costs of revenues are royalty amounts of $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The other primary components of our costs of revenues are cost of goods sold, which were approximately $6.6 million and $6.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and as a percentage of revenues were 22% in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 44% in the year ended December 31, 2020, with such decrease as a percentage of revenue mainly due to the alternate manufacturer in place, resulting in a considerable decrease in the unit cost of inventories of EVOMELA.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of compensation and other expenses related to research and development personnel, research collaborations, costs associated with internal and contract preclinical testing and clinical trials of our product candidates, including the costs of drug substance and drug product, regulatory maintenance costs of ANDAs, facilities expenses, and amortization expense of acquired ANDAs.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $14.4 million, compared with $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in R&D expenses primarily due to an increase in R&D expenses incurred related to the development of CID-103, BI-1206 and CB-5339.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include compensation and other expenses related to executive, finance, business development and administrative personnel, professional services, investor relations and facilities.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $23.8 million, compared with $19.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase in headcount and payroll expenses amounted to $2.7 million and an increase in professional fees amounted to $1.9 million.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses are the direct costs related to the sales of EVOMELA® that was launched in China in August 2019, such as sales force salaries, bonuses, advertising, and other marketing efforts.
Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $14.7 million, compared with $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to the increase of sales commission in accordance with the increase sales of EVOMELA.
Gain on disposal of intangible assets
There was no gain on disposal of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gain on disposal of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.2 million. The gain on disposal during 2020 was primarily due to the $1.2 million gain on the sale of twenty-one ANDAs during the year.
Impairment of intangible assets
There was no impairment of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Impairment of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.5 million. The impairment of intangible assets was primarily due to the reduction of the carrying value of intangible assets to their fair value.
Acquired in-process Research and Development Expenses
Acquired in-process R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $6.6 million, compared with $17.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The amount reported for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of the upfront payment of $5.5 million to Cleave for the development of CB-5339 and milestone payments to Alesta of $1.06 million for the development of CID-
103. The amount reported for the year ended December 31, 2020 comprised of milestone fees paid to Pharmathen of $1.7 million, to Juventas of $10.3 million and to BioInvent of $5.9 million, respectively.
Non-Operating Items
Interest income, net
Interest income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.3 million compared with $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income, net, is mainly due to that the amount reported for the year ended December 31, 2020 included interest income from loans made to Juventas (a related party) which was repaid in September 2020.
Other income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $558,000, compared with $82,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income of $51,000 and $35,000 recorded in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, relate to CASI Wuxi’s receipt of RMB 15.9 million (equivalent to $2.2 million) in April 2020, and RMB 3.0 million (equivalent to $0.5 million) in November 2021 from the Jiangsu Province Wuxi Huishan Economic Development Zone as government grant for the development of leased state-owned land in China for the construction of a manufacturing facility. The grants were recorded as deferred income and amortized over the term of the lease of the land. Other income of $471,807 recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the loan to the Company under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) that was forgiven in September 2021.
Foreign exchange gains and losses
Foreign exchange gains (losses) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was gain of $0.3 million compared with losses of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The foreign exchange gains (losses) are primarily due to accounts receivable with CRPCGIT and USD denominated cash accounts that are held by our Chinese subsidiaries.
Change in fair value of investments
The change in fair value of investments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $5.7 million and $4.3 million respectively. The changes represent unrealized gains or losses on the Company’s investments in equity securities and long-term investment.
Impairment loss of long-term investments
Impairment loss of long-term investments for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $865,000 relating to the investment in a privately held UK Company, Black Belt Tx”. The Company did not record any impairment loss of long-term investments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
To date, the Company has been engaged primarily in research and development activities. As a result, the Company has incurred and expect to continue to incur operating losses in 2022 and the foreseeable future.
The Company will require significant additional funding to fund operations beyond the first quarter of 2023 until such time, if ever, it becomes profitable. The Company intends to augment its cash balances by pursuing other forms of capital infusion, including strategic alliances or collaborative development opportunities with organizations that have capabilities and/or products that are complementary to its capabilities and products in order to continue the development of its potential product candidates that they intend to pursue to commercialization. If the Company seeks strategic alliances, licenses, or other alternative arrangements, such as arrangements with collaborative partners or others, to raise further financing, it may need to relinquish rights to certain of its existing product candidates, or products they would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize on its own, or to license the rights to its product candidates on terms that are not favorable to it.
The Company will also continuously invest in its development of the Wuxi land and construction of the manufacturing building. Commencing from the fourth quarter of 2020, in relation to the development of the Wuxi land and construction of the manufacturing
building, the Company entered into a series of contracts for the development and construction work. Total commitment under these contracts was RMB 69.1 million ($10.8 million) as of December 31, 2021.
The Company will continue to seek to raise additional capital to fund its commercialization efforts, expansion of its operations, capital expenditure, research and development, and for the acquisition of new product candidates, if any. The Company intends to and is currently actively communicating to explore one or more of the following alternatives to raise additional capital:
● raising bank loans;
● selling additional equity securities;
● out-licensing product candidates to one or more corporate partners;
● completing an outright sale of non-priority assets; and/or
● engaging in one or more strategic transactions.
The Company also will continue to manage its cash resources prudently and cost-effectively.
There can be no assurance that adequate additional financing under such arrangements will be available to the Company on terms that they deem acceptable, if at all. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, dilution to existing stockholders may result, or the equity securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of the holders of its common stock. If they fail to obtain additional capital when needed, they may be required to delay or scale back their commercialization efforts, advancement of the Spectrum products, and the ANDA products, or plans for other product candidates, if any.
Since its inception in 1991, the Company has incurred significant losses from operations and, as of December 31, 2021, has incurred an accumulated deficit of $605.6 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a consolidated balance of cash and cash equivalents of $38.7 million. The Company believes that it has sufficient resources to fund its operations at least one year beyond the date that the audited consolidated financial statements are issued.
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Stock repurchase program
On December 15, 2021, our board of directors approved a stock repurchase program for the repurchase of up to USD 10 million of our common stock (and no more than 12,500,000 shares of our common stock) through open market purchases in compliance with Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and through trading plans established pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 of the Securities Exchange Act. Under any Rule 10b5-1 trading plan we might adopt, our third-party broker, subject to Securities and Exchange Commission regulations regarding certain price, market, volume and timing constraints, would have authority to purchase our common stock in accordance with the terms of the plan. The actual timing, number and value of shares repurchased under the stock repurchase program will depend on a number of factors, including constraints specified in any Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, price, general business and market conditions, and alternative investment opportunities. Subject to the purchase terms under our existing and future Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, the stock repurchase program does not obligate the Company to acquire any specific number of shares in any period, and may be expanded, extended, modified or discontinued at any time. The Company has funded and anticipates funding for stock repurchase program to come from available corporate funds, including cash on hand and future cash flow. As of March 18, 2022, the Company has repurchased 3,207,661 shares of common stock for an aggregate of $2.5 million under a Rule 10b5-1 trading plan that will terminate on March 31, 2022.
March 2021 Underwritten Public Offering
On March 24, 2021, the Company closed an underwritten public offering of 15,853,658 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “Offering”) at a price to the public of $2.05 per share. The gross proceeds to CASI from the Offering were $32.5 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by CASI.
The Offering was made by means of a written prospectus supplement and accompanying prospectus forming part of a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, previously filed with the SEC on November 20, 2020, which was declared effective on December 2, 2020. We have filed a final prospectus supplement, dated March 24, 2021, with the SEC relating to the Offering.
The Company is using the net proceeds of this offering for working capital and general corporate purposes, which include, but are not limited to advancing the Company’s product portfolio, acquiring the rights to new product candidates and general and administrative expenses.
July 2020 Underwritten Public Offering
On July 24, 2020, the Company closed an underwritten public offering of 23 million shares of common stock (the "Offering") and received gross proceeds of $43.7 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by CASI. Certain insiders, including CASI's Chairman and CEO, and CASI's President, purchased shares of common stock in the Offering at the public offering price and on the same terms as the other purchasers in this Offering. CASI's Chairman and CEO purchased 2,952,426 shares directly and ETP Global Fund LP purchased 1,200,000 shares. CASI's President purchased 20,152 shares.
Sales Agreements
On February 23, 2018, the Company entered into a Common Stock Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”), as amended, with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“HCW”) that would allow the Company to sell up to $20 million of shares of common stock in “at-the-market” transactions, subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has not offered and sold any shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement, and a total of 143,248 shares, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $475,000 have been issued since inception. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has not offered and sold any shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement. Concurrently with and upon the execution of the new Stock Sales Agreement mentioned below, the Sales Agreement dated as of February 23, 2018, between CASI and HCW, was terminated by mutual agreement of the parties.
On July 19, 2019, the Company entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent (the “Open Market Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company may elect to sell from time to time, at its option, up to $30 million in shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to the terms and conditions of the Open Market Agreement. In 2019, the Company issued 59,000 shares under the Open Market Agreement resulting in net proceeds to the Company of $182,000. In 2020, there were 434,000 shares issued under the Open Market Agreement with net proceeds of $1,357,000. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has not offered and sold any shares of common stock under the Open Market Agreement. As of March 25, 2022, the Company has issued 493,000 shares with net proceeds of $1,539,000. As of March 25, 2022, $28.5 million remained available under the Open Market Agreement.
On October 29, 2021, the Company has entered into a common stock sales agreement (“Stock Sales Agreement”), with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, relating to shares of common stock of the Company. In accordance with the terms of the sales agreement, the Company may offer and sell shares of common stock in “at-the-market” transactions, subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of the Stock Sales Agreement, with an aggregate offering price of no more than $20,000,000. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has not offered or sold any shares of common stock under the sales agreement. As of March 25, 2022, the Company has not offered or sold any shares of common stock under the sales agreement.
INTEREST RATE CHANGES
Management does not believe that our working capital needs are sensitive to changes in interest rates.
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We had no off-balance sheet arrangements.