Item 7
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risk, uncertainties and, assumptions. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including but not limited to those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the forward looking statements. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
The Company
Colony Bankcorp, Inc. is a bank holding company headquartered in Fitzgerald, Georgia that provides, through its wholly-owned subsidiary Colony Bank (collectively referred to as the Company), a broad array of products and services throughout central, south and coastal Georgia markets. The Company offers commercial, consumer and mortgage banking services.
Recent Developments
On August 1, 2021, the Company completed its previously announced acquisition (the “Merger”) of SouthCrest Financial Group, Inc. (“SouthCrest”), a Georgia corporation and the parent holding company of SouthCrest Bank, N.A. The Merger was completed pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), dated April 22, 2021, by and between the Company and SouthCrest. In accordance with the terms of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time, SouthCrest was merged with and into the Company, with the Company surviving the Merger. Immediately following the holding company Merger, SouthCrest Bank, N.A. was merged with and into Colony Bank, with Colony Bank as the surviving bank.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, each issued and outstanding share of SouthCrest stock was converted into the right to receive either $10.45 in cash or 0.7318 of a share of the Company's common stock, subject to certain proration and allocation procedures. In aggregate, the Company issued approximately 4.0 million shares of its common stock at a fair value of $71.4 million and paid approximately $21.6 million cash in the Merger.
The Company paid dividends to its shareholders throughout 2021 and 2020 on a quarterly basis. In 2021, we had a quarterly dividend of $0.1025 per common stock and in 2020, we had a quarterly dividend of $0.10 per common stock.
On February 10, 2022, the Company completed a public offering of 3,848,485 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $16.50 per share, with aggregate proceeds of approximately $63.5 million.
GAAP Reconciliation and Management Explanation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the United States and prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, certain non-GAAP measures are used by management to supplement the evaluation of our performance. These include the fully-taxable equivalent measures: tax-equivalent net interest income, tax-equivalent net interest margin and tax-equivalent net interest spread, which include the effects of taxable-equivalent adjustments using a federal income tax rate of 19% and 21% to increase tax-exempt interest income to a tax-equivalent basis for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Tax-equivalent adjustments are reported in Notes 1 and 2 to the Average Balances with Average Yields and Rates table under Rate/Volume Analysis. Management believes that non-GAAP financial measures provide additional useful information that allows investors to evaluate the ongoing performance of the company and provide meaningful comparisons to its peers. Management believes these non-GAAP financial measures also enhance investors' ability to compare period-to-period financial results and allow investors and company management to view our operating results excluding the impact of items that are not reflective of the underlying operating performance.
Tax-equivalent net interest income, net interest margin and net interest spread. Net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis is a non-GAAP measure that adjusts for the tax-favored status of net interest income from loans and investments. We believe this measure to be the preferred industry measurement of net interest income and it enhances comparability of net interest income arising from taxable and tax-exempt sources. The most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is our net interest income. Net interest margin on a tax-equivalent basis is net interest income on a tax-equivalent basis divided by average interest-earning assets on a tax-equivalent basis. The most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is our net interest margin. Net interest spread on a tax-equivalent basis is the difference in the average yield on average interest-earning assets on a tax equivalent basis and the average rate paid on average interest-bearing liabilities. The most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is our net interest spread.
These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered alternatives to GAAP-basis financial statements, and other bank holding companies may define or calculate these non-GAAP measures or similar measures differently.
A reconciliation of these performance measures to GAAP performance measures is included in the tables below.
Non-GAAP Performance Measures Reconciliation
COVID-19 and Recent Events
The U.S. economy contracted in the first half of 2020, ending the longest expansionary period in U.S. history, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During March 2020, in an effort to lessen the impact of COVID-19 on consumers and businesses, the Federal Reserve reduced the federal funds rate 1.5 percentage points to 0.00 to 0.25 percent and the U.S. government enacted the CARES Act, the largest economic stimulus package in the nation’s history. The Company responded to the pandemic, beginning in March 2020, by supporting our clients, employees, and communities with such measures as remote work capabilities and branch service enhancements, loan payment deferrals, and accelerated investments in several technology initiatives that provided more convenience and a better digital experience as clients adapted to this highly virtual environment. The Company participated in the PPP and funded approximately 2,600 loans totaling approximately $193.2 million under the programs available in both 2020 and 2021, and $144.0 million in PPP loans related to CARES Act were forgiven.
Additional government spending measures and the availability of vaccines improved consumer confidence and demand, and the economy largely reopened in 2021, leading to a reduction in the unemployment rate and accelerated GDP growth. While 2021 has seen a recovery in the U.S. economy compared to 2020, uncertainty and market disruptions such as additional coronavirus variants, pandemic-related supply chain issues and labor shortages persist. The economic expansion has been met with inflationary pressures that are expected to result in the Federal Open Market Committee policy-tightening in 2022, likely including multiple interest rate hikes. With a strong asset-sensitive balance sheet and our strong position in our market markets, we expect increases in loan demand and interest rates will improve returns going forward.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The consolidated financial statements of Colony are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and follow general practices within the industry in which it operates. This preparation requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the consolidated financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, actual results could differ from the estimates, assumptions and judgments reflected in the consolidated financial statements. Certain policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments and, as such, have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. Estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant change include the valuation of loan acquisition transactions, as well as the determination of the allowance for loan losses and income taxes and, therefore, are critical accounting policies. In addition to the discussion that follows, the accounting policies related to these estimates are further described in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, under Part II, Item 8.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Loans Acquired in Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, which requires the use of the acquisition method of accounting. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recorded at the estimated fair value on their purchase date. As provided for under GAAP, management has up to 12 months following the date of the acquisition to finalize the fair values of acquired assets and assumed liabilities, where it was not possible to estimate the acquisition date fair value upon consummation. Management finalized the fair values of acquired assets and assumed liabilities within this 12-month period and management currently considers such values to be the Day 1 Fair Values for the acquisition transactions.
In particular, the valuation of acquired loans involves significant estimates, assumptions and judgment based on information available as of the acquisition date. Loans acquired in a business combination transaction are evaluated either individually or in pools of loans with similar characteristics; including consideration of a credit component. A number of factors are considered in determining the estimated fair value of purchased loans including, among other things, the remaining life of the acquired loans, estimated prepayments, estimated loss ratios, estimated value of the underlying collateral, estimated holding periods, contractual interest rates compared to market interest rates, and net present value of cash flows expected to be received.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is a critical accounting estimate that requires significant judgments and assumptions, which are inherently subjective. The use of different estimates or assumptions could have a significant impact on the provision for credit losses, allowance for loan losses, financial condition, and results of operations. The economic and business climate in any given industry or market is difficult to gauge and can change rapidly, and the effects of those changes can vary by borrower.
The allowance consists of specific, historical and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are classified as either doubtful, substandard or special mention. For loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan are lower than the carrying value of that loan. The historical component covers nonclassified loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. A general component is maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses. The general component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating specific and historical losses in the portfolio. General valuation allowances are based on internal and external qualitative risk factors such as (1) changes in lending policies and procedures, including changes in underwriting standards and collections, charge offs, and recovery practices, (2) changes in international, national, regional, and local conditions, (3) changes in the nature and volume of the portfolio and terms of loans, (4) changes in the experience, depth, and ability of lending management, (5) changes in the volume and severity of past due loans and other similar conditions, (6) changes in the quality of the organization's loan review system, (7) changes in the value of underlying collateral for collateral dependent loans, (8) the existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the levels of such concentrations, and (9) the effect of other external factors (i.e. competition, legal and regulatory requirements) on the level of estimated credit losses.
Consolidated net income and stockholders’ equity could be affected if management’s estimate of the allowance necessary to cover loan losses is subsequently materially different, requiring a change in the level of provision for loan losses to be recorded. While management uses currently available information to recognize losses on loans, future adjustments may be necessary based on newly received appraisals, updated commercial customer financial statements, rapidly deteriorating customer cash flow, and changes in economic conditions or forecasts that affect the Company's customers.
Income Taxes
The assessment of income tax assets and liabilities involves the use of estimates, assumptions, interpretation, and judgment concerning certain accounting pronouncements and federal and state tax codes. There can be no assurance that future events, such as court decisions or positions of federal and state taxing authorities, will not differ from management’s current assessment, the impact of which could be significant to the consolidated results of operations and reported earnings.
Colony files a consolidated federal income tax return and a combined state income tax return (both of which include Colony and its wholly owned subsidiaries). Accordingly, amounts equal to tax benefits of those companies having taxable federal losses or credits are reimbursed by the companies that incur federal tax liabilities. Amounts provided for income tax expense are based on income reported for financial statement purposes and do not necessarily represent amounts currently payable under tax laws. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed quarterly for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax law rates
applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through provision for income tax expense. Valuation allowances are established when it is more likely than not that a portion of the full amount of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the ability to realize deferred tax assets, management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies. Colony may also recognize a liability for unrecognized tax benefits from uncertainty in income taxes. Unrecognized tax benefits represent the differences between a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return and the benefit recognized and measured in the financial statements. Penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are classified as income tax expense.
Overview
The following discussion and analysis present the more significant factors affecting the Company’s financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and results of operations for each of the two year-periods ended December 31, 2021. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements, notes thereto and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report.
Taxable-equivalent adjustments are the result of increasing income from tax-free loans and investments by an amount equal to the taxes that would be paid if the income were fully taxable based on a 19% federal tax rate for 2021 and a 21% federal rate for 2020, thus making tax-exempt yields comparable to taxable asset yields.
Dollar amounts in tables are stated in thousands, except for per share amounts.
Results of Operations
The Company’s results of operations are determined by its ability to effectively manage interest income and expense, to minimize loan and investment losses, to generate noninterest income and to control noninterest expense. Since market forces and economic conditions beyond the control of the Company determine interest rates, the ability to generate net interest income is dependent upon the Company’s ability to obtain an adequate spread between the rate earned on interest-earning assets and the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Thus, the key performance for net interest income is the interest margin or net yield, which is taxable-equivalent net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Net income available to common shareholders totaled $18.7 million, or $1.66 per diluted shares in 2021, compared to $11.8 million, or $1.24 per diluted shares in 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between interest income on earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets. Net interest income is the Company’s largest source of revenue, representing 64.3% of total revenue during 2021 and 66.76% of total revenue during 2020.
Net interest margin is the taxable-equivalent net interest income as a percentage of average interest-earning assets for the period. The level of interest rates and the volume and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities impact net interest income and net interest margin.
The Company’s loan portfolio is significantly affected by changes in the prime interest rate. The prime interest rate, which is the rate offered on loans to borrowers with strong credit, was 3.25% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Federal Reserve Board sets general market rates of interest, including the deposit and loan rates offered by many financial institutions. During 2021, the prime interest rate remained the same. During 2020, the prime interest rate decreased by 100 basis points.
The following table presents the changes in taxable-equivalent net interest income and identifies the changes due to differences in the average volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the changes due to changes in the average interest rate on those assets and liabilities. The changes in net interest income due to changes in both average volume and average interest rate have been allocated to the average volume change or the average interest rate change in proportion to the absolute amounts of the change in each. The Company’s consolidated average balance sheets along with an analysis of taxable-equivalent net interest earnings are presented in the Rate/Volume Analysis.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The rate/volume analysis presented hereafter illustrates the change from year to year for each component of the taxable equivalent net interest income separated into the amount generated through volume changes and the amount generated by changes in the yields/rates.
(a)Changes in net interest income for the periods, based on either changes in average balances or changes in average rates for interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, are shown on this table. During each year there are numerous and simultaneous balance and rate changes; therefore, it is not possible to precisely allocate the changes between balances and rates. For the purpose of this table, changes that are not exclusively due to balance changes or rate changes have been attributed to rates.
The Company maintains about 22.36% of its loan portfolio in adjustable rate loans that reprice with prime rate changes, while the bulk of its other loans mature within 3 years. The liabilities to fund assets are primarily in non-maturing core deposits and short term certificates of deposit that mature within one year. During 2021, Federal Reserve rates remained stable. The Federal Reserve rates decreased 150 basis points in 2020. We have seen the net interest margin decrease to 3.39% for 2021, compared to 3.50% for 2020.
Taxable-equivalent net interest income for 2021 increased by $11.1 million or 20.0%, compared to 2020, due to an increase in loan fee income generated through PPP loan originations during 2021, which was approximately $5.4 million and increase in investment securities income, along with decreases in interest expense. The average volume of interest-earning assets during 2021 increased $378.5 million compared to 2020 while over the same period the net interest margin decreased 11 basis points to 3.39% from 3.50%. The change in the net interest margin in 2021 and 2020 was primarily driven by a continued higher level of low yielding assets offset by a decrease in the cost of funds, as well as downward pressure exerted from lower yielding PPP loans offset by lowering our borrowing costs during the year as well as lower interest on the level of deposits on our balance sheet. Growth in average earning assets during 2021 was primarily in loans and interest-bearing deposits in other banks related to the acquisition of SouthCrest Financial Group, Inc ("SouthCrest").
The average volume of loans increased $94.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020, which reflects both organic loan growth, growth from acquisition of SouthCrest offset by $144.0 million in loans PPP loans forgiven. The average yield on loans remained stable from 2021 compared to 2020, and only decreased two basis points. The average volume of interest-bearing deposits increased $279.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020. Average demand deposits increased $286.8 million while average time deposits decreased $7.7 million in 2021 compared to 2020.
Accordingly, the ratio of average interest-bearing deposits to total average deposits was 75.3% in 2021 and 78.8% in 2020. For 2021, this deposit mix, combined with a general decrease in interest rates, had the effect of (i) decreasing the average cost of
total deposits by 32 basis points in 2021 compared to 2020 and (ii) offsetting a portion of the impact of decreasing yields on interest-earning assets on the Company’s net interest income.
The Company’s net interest spread, which represents the difference between the average rate earned on interest-earning assets and the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities, remained stable and only decreasing to 3.32% in 2021 from 3.37% in 2020. The net interest spread, as well as the net interest margin, will be impacted by future changes in short-term and long-term interest rate levels, as well as the impact from the competitive environment. A discussion of the effects of changing interest rates on net interest income is set forth in "Market Risk and Interest Rate Sensitivity" included elsewhere in this report.
AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS
(1)The average balance of loans includes the average balance of nonaccrual loans. Income on such loans is recognized and recorded on the cash basis. Taxable-equivalent adjustments totaling $268,000 and $252,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, are included in income and fees on loans. Accretion income of $470,000 and $763,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are also included in income and fees on loans.
(2)Taxable-equivalent adjustments totaling $244,000 and $69,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, are included in tax-exempt interest on investment securities. The adjustments are based on federal tax rate of 19% and 21% with appropriate reductions for the effect of disallowed interest expense incurred in carrying tax-exempt obligations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is determined by management as the amount to be added to the allowance for loan losses after net charge-offs have been deducted to bring the allowance to a level which, in management’s best estimate, is necessary to absorb
probable losses within the existing loan portfolio. The provision for loan losses totaled $700,000 in 2021 compared to $6.6 million in 2020. See the section captioned “Allowance for Loan Losses” elsewhere in this discussion for further analysis of the provision for loan losses. The decrease in provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is largely due to the reserve levels that have already been established in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. See the section captioned “Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses” elsewhere in this discussion for further analysis of the provision for loan losses. Net recoveries for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $83,000 compared to net charge-offs of $1.3 million for the same period in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, Colony’s allowance for loan losses was $12.9 million, or 0.96% of total loans, compared to $12.1 million, or 1.14% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, nonperforming assets were $5.8 million and $10.2 million, or 0.21% and 0.58% of total assets, respectively. While asset quality remains stable period over period, social and economic disruption in response to the COVID-19 pandemic continued to result in business closures and job losses during the year ended 2021.
Noninterest Income
The components of noninterest income were as follows:
Noninterest income increased $12.0 million, or 49.69% from 2020. The Company saw considerable increases in mortgage fee income, gain on sale of SBA loans, and interchange fees, off-set slightly by losses on sales of securities and the absence of a gain on sale of assets in 2021. The increase in mortgage fee income is primarily attributed to the increase in volume of mortgage activity as well as the acquisition of SouthCrest in August 2021. Furthermore, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, there was an increase in the demand for mortgage rate locks and mortgage closings due to a historically low interest rate environment. The decrease in mortgage rates was partially attributable to the 150 basis point decrease in the national federal funds rate during the year ended December 31, 2020 and remained in effect for 2021 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Gain on sale of SBA loans increased $5.9 million in 2021 from 2020. The increase in 2021 is primarily attributable to the continued growth in the Small Business Specialty Lending division. The increase of $1.9 million in interchange fees was a result of the perks program the Company offered from Discover® and the program becoming the Bank's primary program late in 2020.
Noninterest Expense
The components of noninterest expense were as follows:
Increases in salaries and employee benefits, acquisition related expenses, information technology expenses accounted for the majority of the increase in noninterest expense, offset by the writedown of the Thomaston building and FHLB prepayment penalties in 2020. The increase in salaries and employee benefits of $11.5 million in 2021 was primarily attributable to merit pay increases and salaries from the SouthCrest and insurance acquisitions completed in the last half of 2021, as well as commissions paid to mortgage employees due to an increase in volume. Information technology expenses increased $1.9 million primarily due to the Company's additional processing needs due to growth, as well as implementation of new software. Other noninterest expense increased due to increases in FDIC insurance from acquisition of SouthCrest and deposit charge-offs.
Sources and Uses of Funds
The following table illustrates, during the years presented, the mix of the Company’s funding sources and the assets in which those funds are invested as a percentage of the Company’s average total assets for the period indicated. Average assets totaled $2.1 billion in 2021 compared to $1.7 billion in 2020.
Deposits continue to be the Company’s primary source of funding. Over the comparable periods, interest-bearing deposits continues to be the largest component of the Company's mix of deposits. Average interest-bearing deposits totaled 75.3% in 2021 compared to 78.8%% of total average deposits in 2020.
The Company primarily invests funds in loans and securities. Loans continue to be the largest component of the Company’s mix of invested assets.
Loans
The following table presents the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio as of December 31 for the past five years.
Maturity and Repricing Opportunity
The following table presents total loans as of December 31, 2021 according to maturity distribution and/or repricing opportunity on adjustable rate loans.
Overview. Loans totaled $1.3 billion at December 31, 2021, up 26.3% from $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020. The majority of the Company’s loan portfolio is comprised of the real estate loans. Commercial and residential real estate which is primarily 1-4 family residential properties, nonfarm nonresidential properties and real estate construction loans made up 87.1% and 77.8% of total loans at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Commercial, financial, & agriculture represents another 11.5% of the population of the loans at December 31, 2021 down from 20.1% of the population at December 31, 2020. The reason for the decrease is primarily due to the PPP loan production during 2020. These loans were at gross $9.0 million at December 31, 2021 compared to a gross of $101.1 million at December 31, 2020. The PPP loans are included in our commercial, financial and agricultural loans.
Loan origination/risk management. In accordance with the Company’s decentralized banking model, loan decisions are made at the local bank level. The Company utilizes both an Executive Loan Committee and a Director Loan Committee to assist lenders with the decision making and underwriting process of larger loan requests. Due to the diverse economic markets served by the Company, evaluation and underwriting criterion may vary slightly by market. Overall, loans are extended after a review of the borrower’s repayment ability, collateral adequacy, and overall credit worthiness.
Commercial purpose, commercial real estate, and agricultural loans are underwritten similarly to how other loans are underwritten throughout the Company. The properties securing the Company’s commercial real estate portfolio are diverse in terms of type and geographic location. In addition, the Company restricts total loans to $10 million per borrower, subject to exception and approval by the Director Loan Committee. This diversity helps reduce the Company’s exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single market or industry. Management monitors and evaluates commercial real estate loans monthly based on collateral, geography, and risk grade criteria. The Company also utilizes information provided by third-party agencies to provide additional insight and guidance about economic conditions and trends affecting the markets it serves.
The Company extends loans to builders and developers that are secured by non-owner occupied properties. In such cases, the Company reviews the overall economic conditions and trends for each market to determine the desirability of loans to be extended for residential construction and development. Sources of repayment for these types of loans may be pre-committed permanent loans from approved long-term lenders, sales of developed property or an interim mini-perm loan commitment from the Company until permanent financing is obtained. In some cases, loans are extended for residential loan construction for speculative purposes and are based on the perceived present and future demand for housing in a particular market served by the Company. These loans are monitored by on-site inspections and are considered to have higher risks than other real estate loans due to their ultimate repayment being sensitive to interest rate changes, general economic conditions and trends, the demand for the properties, and the availability of long-term financing.
The Company originates consumer loans at the bank level. Due to the diverse economic markets served by the Company, underwriting criterion may vary slightly by market. The Company is committed to serving the borrowing needs of all markets served and, in some cases, adjusts certain evaluation methods to meet the overall credit demographics of each market. Consumer loans represent relatively small loan amounts that are spread across many individual borrowers to help minimize risk. Additionally, consumer trends and outlook reports are reviewed by management on a regular basis.
The Company utilizes an independent third party company for loan review and validation of the credit risk program on an ongoing quarterly basis. Results of these reviews are presented to management and the audit committee. The loan review process complements and reinforces the risk identification and assessment decisions made by lenders and credit personnel, as well as the Company’s policies and procedures.
Commercial, financial and agricultural. Commercial and agricultural loans at December 31, 2021 decreased by $59.3 million, or 27.8% to $154.0 million from December 31, 2020 at $213.4 million. This decrease was primarily attributable to the PPP loans which was $101.1 million at December 31, 2020 versus $9.0 million at December 31, 2021, offset by growth from the SouthCrest acquisition. The Company’s commercial and agricultural loans are a diverse group of loans to small, medium and large businesses. The purpose of these loans varies from supporting seasonal working capital needs to term financing of equipment. These agricultural lines typically reduce in size at year end as crops are sold. While some short-term loans may be made on an unsecured basis, most are secured by the assets being financed with collateral margins that are consistent with the Company’s loan policy guidelines.
Construction, land and land development. Construction, land and land development loans increased by $44.4 million, or 36.6%, at December 31, 2021 to $165.4 million from $121.1 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to the acquisition of SouthCrest and the continued growth of the business during 2021.
Other commercial real estate. Other commercial real estate loans increased by $267.0 million, or 51.3%, at December 31, 2021 to $787.4 million from $520.4 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable due to the acquisition of SouthCrest and the continued growth of the business during 2021.
Residential Real Estate Loans. Residential real estate loans increased by $29.5 million or 16.1%, at December 31, 2021 to $212.5 million from $183.0 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable due to the acquisition of SouthCrest and the continued growth of the business during 2021. Residential real estate loans consist of revolving, open-end and closed-end loans as well as those secured by closed-end first and junior liens.
Consumer and other. Consumer and other loans include loans to individuals for personal and household purposes, including secured and unsecured installment loans and revolving lines of credit. Consumer and other loans at December 31, 2021 decreased $3.1 million or 14.1% to $18.6 million from $21.6 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to payoffs and amortization of the portfolio.
Industry concentrations. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no concentrations of loans within any single industry in excess of 10% of total loans, as segregated by Standard Industrial Classification code (“SIC code”). The SIC code is a federally designed standard industrial numbering system used by the Company to categorize loans by the borrower’s type of business. The Company has established industry-specific guidelines with respect to maximum loans permitted for each industry with which the Company does business.
Collateral concentrations. Concentrations of credit risk can exist in relation to individual borrowers or groups of borrowers, certain types of collateral, certain types of industries, or certain geographic regions. The Company has a concentration in real estate loans as well as a geographic concentration that could pose an adverse credit risk. At December 31, 2021, approximately 87.1% of the Company’s loan portfolio was concentrated in loans secured by real estate. A substantial portion of borrowers’ ability to honor their contractual obligations is dependent upon the viability of the real estate economic sector. In addition, a large portion of the Company’s foreclosed assets are also located in these same geographic markets, making the recovery of the carrying amount of foreclosed assets susceptible to changes in market conditions. Management continues to monitor these concentrations and has considered these concentrations in its allowance for loan loss analysis. In recent years, we have seen real estate values stabilizing in our markets. The stabilization of rates has resulted in a decrease in the number of loans being classified as impaired over the past several years.
Large credit relationships. The Company currently operates 31 branches in north, central, south and coastal Georgia and includes metropolitan markets in Forsyth, Fulton, Fayette, Dougherty, Lowndes, Houston, Chatham and Muscogee counties. As a result, the Company originates and maintains large credit relationships with several commercial customers in the ordinary course of business. The Company considers large credit relationships to be those with commitments equal to or in excess of $5.0 million prior to any portion being sold. Large relationships also include loan participations purchased if the credit relationship with the agent is equal to or in excess of $5.0 million. In addition to the Company’s normal policies and procedures related to the origination of large credits, the Company’s Executive Loan Committee and Director Loan Committee must approve all new and renewed credit facilities which are part of large credit relationships. At December 31, 2021, our largest 20 relationships consisted of loans and loan commitments, where the total committed balance was $203.6 million with $160.6 million outstanding. At December 31, 2020, our largest 20 relationships had total committed balance of $174.8 million with $156.2 million outstanding.
Maturities and sensitivities of loans to changes in interest rates. The following table presents the maturity distribution of the Company’s loans at December 31, 2021. The table also presents the portion of loans that have fixed interest rates or variable interest rates that fluctuate over the life of the loans in accordance with changes in an interest rate index such as the prime rate.
The Company may renew loans at maturity when requested by a customer whose financial strength appears to support such renewal or when such renewal appears to be in the Company’s best interest. In such instances, the Company generally requires payment of accrued interest and may adjust the rate of interest, require a principal reduction or modify other terms of the loan at the time of renewal.
Nonperforming Assets and Potential Problem Loans
Although asset quality experienced some recovery during the year December 31, 2021, the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will likely have an impact on our asset quality, but it is unknown to what extent at this point. Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, accruing loans contractually past due 90 days or more, repossessed personal property and other real estate owned ("OREO"). Nonaccrual loans totaled $5.4 million at December 31, 2021, a decrease of $3.68 million, or 40.3%, from $9.1 million at December 31, 2020. There were no loans contractually past due 90 days or more and still accruing for either period presented. At December 31, 2021, OREO totaled $281,000, a decrease of $725,000, or 72.1%, compared with $1.0 million at December 31, 2020. The change in OREO is a combination of sales of assets during 2020 offset by asset additions and additions from the acquisition of SouthCrest. At the end of the year ended December 31, 2021, total nonperforming assets as a percent of total assets decreased to 0.21% compared with 0.58% at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, 4.7% of the Company’s loan portfolio, or $62.9 million, is in the hotel sector which we expected to be the most sensitive to the COVID-19 pandemic, of which $5.5 million in loans are guaranteed. While our entire loan portfolio is being continuously assessed, enhanced monitoring for these sectors is ongoing. We are continuously working with these customers to evaluate how the current economic conditions are impacting, and will continue to impact, their business operations.
Year-end nonperforming assets and accruing past due loans were as follows:
(1) Loans granted payment deferrals related to the COVID-19 pandemic are not reported as past due or placed on nonaccrual status (provided the loans were not past due or on nonaccrual status prior to the deferral), there were no loans under these terms deemed past due or nonaccrual as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more, foreclosed real estate, repossessed assets and nonaccrual securities. Nonperforming assets at December 31, 2021 decreased 43.1% from December 31, 2020, as a result of the decrease in nonaccrual loans and the sale of other real estate owned property.
Generally, loans are placed on nonaccrual status if principal or interest payments become 90 days past due and/or management deems the collectability of the principal and/or interest to be in question, as well as when required by regulatory requirements. Loans to a customer whose financial condition has deteriorated are considered for nonaccrual status whether or not the loan is 90 days or more past due. For consumer loans, collectability and loss are generally determined before the loan reaches 90 days past due. Accordingly, losses on consumer loans are recorded at the time they are determined. Consumer loans that are 90 days or more past due are generally either in liquidation/payment status or bankruptcy awaiting confirmation of a plan. Once interest accruals are discontinued, accrued but uncollected interest is charged to current year operations. Subsequent receipts on nonaccrual loans are recorded as a reduction of principal, and interest income is recorded only after principal recovery is reasonably assured. Classification of a loan as nonaccrual does not preclude the ultimate collection of loan principal or interest.
The restructuring of a loan is considered a "troubled debt restructuring ("TDR")" if both (i) the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, and (ii) the Company has granted the borrower a concession that we would not consider otherwise. At December 31, 2021, TDRs totaled $7.3 million, a decrease from $12.3 million reported December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, all TDRs were performing according to their modified terms and were therefore not considered to be nonperforming assets.
Troubled debt restructured loans are loans on which, due to deterioration in the borrower’s financial condition, the original terms have been modified in favor of the borrower or either principal or interest has been forgiven.
Foreclosed assets represent property acquired as the result of borrower defaults on loans. Foreclosed assets are recorded at estimated fair value, less estimated selling costs, at the time of foreclosure. Write-downs occurring at foreclosure are charged against the allowance for loan losses. On an ongoing basis, properties are appraised as required by market indications and applicable regulations. Write-downs are provided for subsequent declines in value and are included in other non-interest expense along with other expenses related to maintaining the properties.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is a reserve established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense, which represents management’s best estimate of probable losses that have been incurred within the existing portfolio of loans. The allowance, in the judgment of management, is necessary to reserve for estimated loan losses and risks inherent in the loan portfolio. The allowance for loan losses includes allowance allocations calculated in accordance with current U.S. accounting standards. The level of the allowance reflects management’s continuing evaluation of industry concentrations, specific credit risks, loan loss experience, current loan portfolio quality, present economic, political and regulatory conditions and unidentified losses inherent in the current loan portfolio. Portions of the allowance may be allocated for specific credits; however, the entire allowance is available for any credit that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off. While management utilizes its best judgment and information available, the ultimate adequacy of the allowance is dependent upon a variety of factors beyond the Company’s control, including the performance of the Company’s loan portfolio, the economy, changes in interest rates and the view of the regulatory authorities toward loan classifications.
The Company’s allowance for loan losses consists of specific valuation allowances established for probable losses on specific loans and historical valuation allowances for other loans with similar risk characteristics. The allowances established for probable losses on specific loans are the result of management’s quarterly review of substandard loans with an outstanding balance of $250,000 or more and impaired troubled debt restructured loans. This review process usually involves the Chief Credit Officer and Director of Credit Administration along with local lending officers reviewing the loans for impairment. Specific valuation allowances are determined after considering the borrower’s financial condition, collateral deficiencies, and economic conditions affecting the borrower’s industry, among other things. In the case of collateral dependent loans, collateral shortfall is most often based upon local market real estate value estimates. This review process is performed at the subsidiary bank level and is reviewed at the parent Company level.
Once the loan becomes impaired, it is removed from the pool of loans covered by the general reserve and reviewed individually for exposure as described above. In cases where the individual review reveals no exposure, no reserve is recorded for that loan, either through an individual reserve or through a general reserve. If, however, the individual review of the loan does indicate some exposure, management often charges off this exposure, rather than recording a specific reserve. In these instances, a loan which becomes nonperforming could actually reduce the allowance for loan losses. Those loans deemed uncollectible are transferred to our problem loan department for workout, foreclosure and/or liquidation. The problem loan department obtains a current appraisal on the property in order to record the fair market value (less selling expenses) when the property is foreclosed on and moved into other real estate.
The allowances established for the remainder of the loan portfolio are based on historical loss factors, adjusted for certain qualitative factors, which are applied to groups of loans with similar risk characteristics. Loans are segregated into fifteen separate groups based on call codes. Most of the Company’s charge-offs during the past two years have been real estate dependent loans. The historical loss ratios applied to these groups of loans are updated quarterly based on actual charge-off experience. The historical loss ratios are further adjusted by qualitative factors.
Management evaluates the adequacy of the allowance for each of these components on a quarterly basis. Peer comparisons, industry comparisons, and regulatory guidelines are also used in the determination of the general valuation allowance. Loans identified as losses by management, internal loan review, and/or bank examiners are charged off. Additional information about the Company’s allowance for loan losses is provided in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for Allowance for Loan Losses.
The following table sets forth the breakdown of the allowance for loan losses by loan category for the periods indicated. The allocation of the allowance to each category is subjective and is not necessarily indicative of future losses and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in any other category.
(1) Percentage represents the loan balance in each category expressed as a percentage of total end of period loans.
The following table presents an analysis of the Company’s loan loss experience for the periods indicated.
The allowance for loan losses increased from $12.1 million or 1.14% of total loans at December 31, 2020 to $12.9 million, or 0.96% of total loans at December 31, 2021. Excluding outstanding PPP loans of $9.0 million and $101.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans was 0.96% and 1.27%, respectively. The allowance for loan losses allocated 0.10% of the balance to our PPP loan portfolio at December 31, 2020. The provision for loan losses reflects loan quality trends, including the level of net charge-offs or recoveries, among other factors.
Social and economic disruption in response to the COVID-19 pandemic continue to result in businesses closures and job losses during the year ended 2021. Net (recoveries)/charge-off’s continued to improve by $1.4 million from 2020 resulting in net recovery of $83,000. As such, additional qualitative measures were incorporated as part of the December 31, 2021 allowance for loan losses calculation for the economic uncertainties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which was the primary cause for the increase to the provision for loan losses during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period 2020. Additional reserves were also allocated to the non-owner occupied commercial real estate pools due to economic impacts in the retail and hospitality sectors.
Management believes the allowance for loan losses is adequate to provide for losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021. The continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic during 2021 leading to significant market changes, high levels of unemployment and increasing degrees of uncertainty in the U.S. economy, the impact on collectability is not currently known, and it is possible that additional provisions for credit losses could be needed in future periods.
Investment Portfolio
The following table presents carrying values of investment securities held by the Company as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
The following table represents expected maturities and weighted-average yields of investment securities held by the Company as of December 31, 2021 (mortgage-backed securities are based on the average life at the projected speed, while State and Political Subdivisions reflect anticipated calls being exercised).
Securities are classified as held to maturity and carried at amortized cost when management has the positive intent and ability to hold them to maturity. Securities are classified as available for sale when they might be sold before maturity. Securities available for sale are carried at fair value, with unrealized holding gains and losses reported in other comprehensive income. The Company has 100% of its portfolio classified as available for sale.
At December 31, 2021, there were no holdings of any one issuer, other than the U.S. government and its agencies, in an amount greater than 10% of the Company’s stockholders’ equity.
The average yield of the securities portfolio was 1.72% in 2021 and 2.04% in 2020. The decrease in the average yield from 2021 to 2020 was primarily attributed to the purchase of new securities which have a lower yield.
Deposits
The following table presents the average amount outstanding and the average rate paid on deposits by the Company for the years 2021, 2020, and 2019.
The following table presents the maturities of the Company’s time deposits as of December 31, 2021.
Average deposits increased $434.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in 2021 included $286.8 million or 36.4% in interest-bearing demand and savings deposits while, at the same time, noninterest bearing deposits increased $155.4 million, or 52.9% and time deposits decreased $7.7 million, or 2.5%. The growth in our deposits is due primarily to acquisition of SouthCrest, combination of government stimulus programs, PPP loan proceeds retained on deposits by corporate borrowers, and customer expense and savings habits in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company supplements deposit sources with brokered deposits. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $883,000, or 0.04% of total deposits, in brokered certificates of deposit attracted by external third parties. Additional information is provided in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for Deposits.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, our Bank has granted commitments to extend credit to approved customers. Generally, these commitments to extend credit have been granted on a temporary basis for seasonal or inventory requirements or for construction period financing and have been approved within the Bank’s credit guidelines. Our Bank has also granted commitments to approved customers for financial standby letters of credit. These commitments are recorded in the financial statements when funds are disbursed or the financial instruments become payable. The Bank uses the same credit policies for these off-balance-sheet commitments as it does for financial instruments that are recorded in the consolidated financial statements. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitment amounts expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements.
The following table summarizes commitments and contractual obligations outstanding at December 31, 2021.
In the ordinary course of business, the Company has entered into off-balance sheet financial instruments which are not reflected in the consolidated financial statements. These instruments include commitments to extend credit, standby letters of credit, performance letters of credit, guarantees and liability for assets held in trust.
Such financial instruments are recorded in the financial statements when funds are disbursed or the instruments become payable. The Company uses the same credit policies for these off-balance sheet financial instruments as they do for instruments that are recorded in the consolidated financial statements.
Loan Commitments. The Company enters into contractual commitments to extend credit, normally with fixed expiration dates or termination clauses, at specified rates and for specific purposes. Substantially all of the Company’s commitments to extend credit are contingent upon customers maintaining specific credit standards at the time of loan funding. The Company minimizes its exposure to loss under these commitments by subjecting them to credit approval and monitoring procedures. Management assesses the credit risk associated with certain commitments to extend credit in determining the level of the allowance for loan losses. Loan commitments outstanding at December 31, 2021 are included in the preceding table.
Standby Letters of Credit. Letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by the Company to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event the customer does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, the Company would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments the Company could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, the Company would be entitled to seek recovery from the customer. The Company’s policies generally require that standby letters of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants similar to those contained in loan agreements. Standby letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2021 are included in the preceding table.
Capital Requirements
The Bank is required under federal law to maintain certain minimum capital levels based on ratios of capital to total assets and capital to risk-weighted assets. The required capital ratios are minimums, and the federal banking agencies may determine that a banking organization, based on its size, complexity or risk profile, must maintain a higher level of capital in order to operate in a safe and sound manner. Risks such as concentration of credit risks and the risk arising from non-traditional activities, as well as the institution’s exposure to a decline in the economic value of its capital due to changes in interest rates, and an institution’s ability to manage those risks are important factors that are to be taken into account by the federal banking agencies in assessing an institution’s overall capital adequacy. For more information, see “Item 1. Business - Supervision and Regulation - Regulation of the Company - Capital Requirements.”
At December 31, 2021, shareholders’ equity totaled $217.7 million compared to $144.5 million at December 31, 2020. In addition to net income of $18.7 million, other significant changes in shareholders’ equity during 2020 included $71.4 million issuance of common stock from SouthCrest acquisition, and $4.5 million of dividends declared on common stock. The accumulated other comprehensive loss component of stockholders’ equity totaled $6.2 million at December 31, 2021 compared to accumulated other comprehensive income $6.8 million at December 31, 2020. This fluctuation was mostly related to the after-tax effect of changes in the fair value of securities available for sale. Under regulatory requirements, the unrealized gain or loss on securities available for sale does not increase or reduce regulatory capital and is not included in the calculation of risk-based capital and leverage ratios. Regulatory agencies for banks and bank holding companies utilize capital guidelines designed to measure Tier 1 and total capital and take into consideration the risk inherent in both on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet items.
Tier 1 capital consists of common stock and qualifying preferred securities less goodwill, intangibles and disallowed deferred tax assets. Tier 2 capital consists of certain convertible, subordinated and other qualifying debt and the allowance for loan losses up to 1.25% of risk-weighted assets. The Company has no Tier 2 capital other than the allowance for loan losses.
Using the capital requirements presently in effect, the Tier 1 ratio as of December 31, 2021 was 11.28% and total Tier 1 and 2 risk-based capital was 12.05%. Both of these measures compare favorably with the regulatory minimum of 6.0% for Tier 1 and 8% for total risk-based capital. The Company’s common equity Tier 1 ratio as of December 31, 2021 was 9.87%, which exceeds the regulatory minimum of 4.50%. The Company’s Tier 1 leverage ratio as of December 31, 2021 was 7.25%, which exceeds the required ratio standard of 4.0%.
The Bank participate in the PPP and the PPPLF to fund PPP Loans. In accordance with regulatory guidance, PPP loans pledged as collateral for PPPLF, and PPPLF advances, are excluded from leverage capital ratios. PPP loans will also carry a 0% risk-weight for risk-based capital rules.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, average capital was $176.0 million representing 8.4% of average assets for the year. This compares to average capital of $138.0 million, representing 8.2% of average assets for 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any material commitments for capital expenditures.
In 2021, the Company granted 187,600 restricted shares of common stock and these restricted shares vest over a three year period.
A cash dividend of $4.5 million and $3.8 million was paid for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Additional information is provided in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for Preferred Stock and Warrants.
Liquidity
The Company, primarily through the actions of its subsidiary bank, engages in liquidity management to ensure adequate cash flow for deposit withdrawals, credit commitments and repayments of borrowed funds. Needs are met through loan repayments, net interest and fee income and the sale or maturity of existing assets. In addition, liquidity is continuously provided through the acquisition of new deposits, the renewal of maturing deposits and external borrowings.
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $197.2 million and $183.5 million, respectively. Management believes the various funding sources discussed above are adequate to meet the Company’s liquidity needs in these unsettled times without any material adverse impact on our operating results.
Management monitors deposit flow and evaluates alternate pricing structures to retain and grow deposits. To the extent needed to fund loan demand, traditional local deposit funding sources are supplemented by the use of FHLB borrowings, brokered deposits and other wholesale deposit sources outside the immediate market area. Internal policies have been updated to monitor the use of various core and non-core funding sources, and to balance ready access with risk and cost. Through various asset/liability management strategies, a balance is maintained among goals of liquidity, safety and earnings potential. Internal policies that are consistent with regulatory liquidity guidelines are monitored and enforced by the Bank.
The investment portfolio provides a ready means to raise cash if liquidity needs arise. As of December 31, 2021, the available for sale bond portfolio totaled $938.2 million At December 31, 2020, the available for sale bond portfolio totaled $380.8 million. Only marketable investment grade bonds are purchased. Although approximately 26% of the Bank’s bond portfolio is encumbered as pledges to secure various public funds deposits, repurchase agreements, and for other purposes, management can restructure and free up investment securities for sale if required to meet liquidity needs.
Management continually monitors the relationship of loans to deposits as it primarily determines the Company’s liquidity posture. Colony had ratios of loans to deposits of 56.3% as of December 31, 2021 and 73.3% as of December 31, 2020. Management employs alternative funding sources when deposit balances will not meet loan demands. The ratios of loans to all funding sources (excluding Subordinated Debentures) at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were 54.9% and 71.5%, respectively. Management continues to emphasize programs to generate local core deposits as our Company’s primary funding sources. The stability of the Banks’ core deposit base is an important factor in Colony’s liquidity position. A heavy percentage of the deposit base is comprised of accounts of individuals and small businesses with comprehensive banking relationships and limited volatility. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Bank had $73.4 million and $34.9 million, respectively, in certificates of deposit of $250,000 or more. These larger deposits represented 3.1% and 2.4% of total deposits as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Management seeks to monitor and control the use of these larger certificates, which tend to be more volatile in nature, to ensure an adequate supply of funds as needed. Relative interest costs to attract local core relationships are compared to market rates of interest on various external deposit sources to help minimize the Company’s overall cost of funds.
The Company supplemented deposit sources with brokered deposits. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $883,000 or 0.1% of total deposits in CDARS. Additional information is provided in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements regarding these brokered deposits. Additionally, the Company uses external deposit listing services to obtain out-of-market certificates of deposit at competitive interest rates when funding is needed. The deposits obtained from listing services are often referred to as wholesale or internet CDs. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $99,000 in internet certificates of deposit obtained through deposit listing services.
To plan for contingent sources of funding not satisfied by both local and out-of-market deposit balances, Colony and its subsidiary have established multiple borrowing sources to augment their funds management. The Company has borrowing capacity through membership of the Federal Home Loan Bank program. The Bank has also established overnight borrowing for Federal Funds Purchased through various correspondent banks. Management believes the various funding sources discussed above are adequate to meet the Company’s liquidity needs in the future without any material adverse impact on operating results. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $51.7 million and $22.5 million, respectively, of outstanding advances from the FHLB. Based on the values of loans pledged as collateral, we had $574.7 million and $416.1 million of additional borrowing availability with the FHLB at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity measures the ability to meet current and future cash flow needs as they become due. The liquidity of a financial institution reflects its ability to meet loan requests, to accommodate possible outflows in deposits and to take advantage of interest rate market opportunities. The ability of a financial institution to meet its current financial obligations is a function of balance sheet structure, the ability to liquidate assets, and the availability of alternative sources of funds. The Company seeks to ensure its funding needs are met by maintaining a level of liquid funds through asset/liability management.
Asset liquidity is provided by liquid assets which are readily marketable or pledgeable or which will mature in the near future. Liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits in banks, securities available for sale and federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements.
Liability liquidity is provided by access to funding sources which include core deposits. Should the need arise, the Company also maintains relationships with the Federal Home Loan Bank, Federal Reserve Bank, two correspondent banks and repurchase agreement lines that can provide funds on short notice.
Since Colony is a bank holding Company and does not conduct operations, its primary sources of liquidity are dividends up streamed from the subsidiary bank and borrowings from outside sources.
The liquidity position of the Company is continuously monitored and adjustments are made to the balance between sources and uses of funds as deemed appropriate. Management is not aware of any events that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company’s liquidity, capital resources or operations. In addition, management is not aware of any regulatory recommendations regarding liquidity, which if implemented, would have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company’s financial statements included herein have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). GAAP presently requires the Company to measure financial position and operating results primarily in terms of historic dollars. Changes in the relative value of money due to inflation or recession are generally not considered. The primary effect of inflation on the operations of the Company is reflected in increased operating costs, though given recent economic conditions, the Company has not experienced any material effects of inflation during the last three fiscal years. In management’s opinion, changes in interest rates affect the financial condition of a financial institution to a far greater degree than changes in the inflation rate. While interest rates are greatly influenced by changes in the inflation rate, they do not necessarily change at the same rate or in the same magnitude as the inflation rate. Interest rates are highly sensitive to many factors that are beyond the control of the Company, including changes in the expected rate of inflation, the influence of general and local economic conditions and the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government, its agencies and various other governmental regulatory authorities, among other things, as further discussed in the next section.
Regulatory and Economic Policies
The Company’s business and earnings are affected by general and local economic conditions and by the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government, its agencies and various other governmental regulatory authorities, among other things. The Federal Reserve Board regulates the supply of money in order to influence general economic conditions. Among the instruments of monetary policy available to the Federal Reserve Board are (i) conducting open market operations in United States government obligations, (ii) changing the discount rate on financial institution borrowings, (iii) imposing or changing reserve requirements against financial institution deposits, and (iv) restricting certain borrowings and imposing or changing reserve requirements against certain borrowings by financial institutions and their affiliates. These methods are used in varying degrees and combinations to directly affect the availability of bank loans and deposits, as well as the interest rates charged on loans and paid on deposits. For that reason alone, the policies of the Federal Reserve Board have a material effect on the earnings of the Company.
Governmental policies have had a significant effect on the operating results of commercial banks in the past and are expected to continue to do so in the future; however, the Company cannot accurately predict the nature, timing or extent of any effect such policies may have on its future business and earnings.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Market Risk and Interest Rate Sensitivity
Our financial performance is impacted by, among other factors, interest rate risk and credit risk. We do not utilize derivatives to mitigate our credit risk, relying instead on an extensive loan review process and our allowance for loan losses.
Interest rate risk is the change in value due to changes in interest rates. The Company is exposed only to U.S. dollar interest rate changes and, accordingly, the Company manages exposure by considering the possible changes in the net interest margin. The Company does not have any trading instruments nor does it classify any portion of its investment portfolio as held for trading. The Company does not engage in any hedging activity or utilize any derivatives. The Company has no exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk, commodity price risk and other market risks. Interest rate risk is addressed by our Risk Management Committee which includes senior management representatives. The Risk Management Committee monitors interest rate risk by analyzing the potential impact to the net portfolio of equity value and net interest income from potential changes to interest rates and considers the impact of alternative strategies or changes in balance sheet structure.
Interest rates play a major part in the net interest income of financial institutions. The repricing of interest earnings assets and interest-bearing liabilities can influence the changes in net interest income. The timing of repriced assets and liabilities is Gap management and our Company has established its policy to maintain a Gap ratio in the one-year time horizon of .80 to 1.20.
Our exposure to interest rate risk is reviewed at least quarterly by our Board of Directors and by our Risk Management Committee. Interest rate risk exposure is measured using interest rate sensitivity analysis to determine our change in net portfolio value in the event of assumed changes in interest rates. In order to reduce the exposure to interest rate fluctuations, we have implemented strategies to more closely match our balance sheet composition. The Company has engaged FTN Financial to run a quarterly asset/liability model for interest rate risk analysis. We are generally focusing our investment activities on securities with terms or average lives in the 3 ½ - 5 ½ year range.
Market risk reflects the risk of economic loss resulting from adverse changes in market prices and interest rates. This risk of loss can be reflected in either reduced current market values or reduced current and potential net income. Colony’s most significant market risk is interest rate risk. This risk arises primarily from Colony’s extension of loans and acceptance of deposits.
Managing interest rate risk is a primary goal of the asset liability management function. Colony attempts to achieve stability in net interest income while limiting volatility arising from changes in interest rates. Colony seeks to achieve this goal by balancing the maturity and repricing characteristics of assets and liabilities. Colony manages its exposure to fluctuations in interest rates through policies established by the Risk Management Committee and approved by the Board of Directors. The Risk Management Committee meets at least quarterly and has responsibility for developing asset liability management policies, reviewing the interest rate sensitivity of Colony, and developing and implementing strategies to improve balance sheet structure and interest rate risk positioning.
Colony measures the sensitivity of net interest income to changes in market interest rates through the utilization of Asset/Liability simulation modeling. On at least a quarterly basis, the following twenty-four month time period is simulated to determine a baseline net interest income forecast and the sensitivity of this forecast to changes in interest rates. These simulations include all of Colony’s earning assets and liabilities. Forecasted balance sheet changes, primarily reflecting loan and deposit growth and forecasts, are included in the periods modeled. Projected rates for loans and deposits are based on management’s outlook and local market conditions.
The magnitude and velocity of rate changes among the various asset and liability groups exhibit different characteristics for each possible interest rate scenario; additionally, customer loan and deposit preferences can vary in response to changing interest rates. Simulation modeling enables Colony to capture the expected effect of these differences. Assumptions utilized in the model are updated on an ongoing basis and are reviewed and approved by the Risk Management Committee of the Board of Directors.
Colony has modeled its baseline net interest income forecast assuming a flat interest rate environment with the federal funds rate at the Federal Reserve's targeted range of 0.25% and the prime rate of 3.25% at December 31, 2021. Colony has modeled the impact of a gradual increase in short-term rates of 100 and 200 basis points and a decline of 100 basis points to determine the sensitivity of net interest income for the next twelve months. As illustrated in the table below, the net interest income sensitivity model indicates that, compared with a net interest income forecast assuming stable rates, net interest income is projected to increase by 6.83% and 13.80% if interest rates increased by 100 and 200 basis points, respectively. Net interest income is projected to decline by 3.18% if interest rates decreased by 100 basis points. These changes were within Colony’s policy limit of a maximum 15% negative change.
The measured interest rate sensitivity indicates an asset sensitive position over the next year, which could serve to improve net interest income in a rising interest rate environment. The actual realized change in net interest income would depend on several factors, some of which could serve to reduce or eliminate the asset sensitivity noted above. These factors include a higher than projected level of deposit customer migration to higher cost deposits, such as certificates of deposit, which would increase total interest expense and serve to reduce the realized level of asset sensitivity. Another factor which could impact the realized interest rate sensitivity in a rising rate environment is the repricing behavior of interest bearing non-maturity deposits. Assumptions for repricing are expressed as a beta relative to the change in the prime rate. For instance, a 25% beta would correspond to a deposit rate that would increase 0.25% for every 1% increase in the prime rate. Projected betas for interest bearing non-maturity deposit repricing are a key component of determining the Company's interest rate risk position. Should realized betas be higher than projected betas, the expected benefit from higher interest rates would be reduced.
Colony is also subject to market risk in certain of its fee income business lines. Mortgage banking income is subject to market risk. Mortgage loan originations are sensitive to levels of mortgage interest rates and therefore, mortgage banking income could be negatively impacted during a period of rising interest rates. The extension of commitments to customers to fund mortgage loans also subjects Colony to market risk. This risk is primarily created by the time period between making the commitment and closing and delivering the loan. Colony seeks to minimize this exposure by utilizing various risk management tools, the primary of which are forward sales commitments and best efforts commitments.