Item 7
. Management
’
s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
Some of the statements under in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Language Regarding Forward Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report for cautionary information regarding forward-looking statements. These statements appear throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K
and are statements regarding our current expectation, belief, or intent, primarily with respect to our operations and related industry developments. Examples of these statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our expectations with respect to the following: our business and scientific strategies; the progress of our product development programs, and the timing of results thereof; regulatory submissions and approvals; the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, including the emergence of COVID-19
variants such as the Delta and Omicron variants, on our company and operations; the anticipated benefits of our development financing agreement with Abingworth; our drug discovery technologies; our research and development expenses; protection of our intellectual property; sufficiency of our cash and capital resources and the need for additional capital; and our operations and legal risks. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Our actual
results and the timing of events may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements for many reasons. Factors that might cause such a difference include those discussed under the caption “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
These and many other factors could affect our future financial and operating results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this Annual Report.
Overview
CymaBay Therapeutics, Inc. is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and providing access to innovative therapies for patients with liver and other chronic diseases with high unmet medical need.
Our lead product candidate, seladelpar, is a potent and selective agonist of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor delta (PPARd
), a nuclear receptor that regulates genes directly or indirectly involved in the synthesis of bile acids/sterols, metabolism of lipids and glucose, inflammation, and fibrosis. We have been focused on developing seladelpar for the treatment of primary biliary cholangitis (PBC), an autoimmune disease that causes progressive destruction of the bile ducts in the liver resulting in impaired bile flow (cholestasis) and inflammation.
In late 2019, we terminated our ongoing PBC studies and other seladelpar-related studies that were ongoing at that time. Specifically, the decision to halt development of seladelpar was based on initial histological observations seen in our Phase 2b study of seladelpar in patients with NASH that were observed in the first blinded tranche of end-of-treatment
liver biopsies in that trial. Thereafter, in December 2019, we announced a restructuring plan to reduce our workforce by approximately 60% to control our operating costs, pending further investigation of the histological observations. In May 2020, an independent expert panel completed a review of the findings and unanimously concluded that the data in aggregate did not support liver injury related to seladelpar. We subsequently discussed the data, the panel’s conclusions, and other matters with the FDA and in July 2020, the FDA lifted the clinical hold, thereby permitting us to reinstate clinical development of seladelpar. Specifically, we made the strategic decision to refocus our strategy primarily on clinical development of seladelpar in PBC.
Seladelpar-Primary Biliary Cholangitis (PBC)
Following the decision to reinstate clinical development of seladelpar, in late 2020, we commenced startup and site feasibility activities for RESPONSE, a new global Phase 3 registration study to evaluate seladelpar in patients with PBC. The RESPONSE trial is actively recruiting and enrolling patients.
In addition to RESPONSE we also commenced startup activities in late 2020 for ASSURE, a new long-term safety study, which is open to patients who were eligible for our previous long-term extension study that was terminated early in late 2019, including those patients from our previously completed Phase 2 open label study and our Phase 3 ENHANCE study, as well as patients who complete treatment in RESPONSE in the future. The ASSURE trial is actively enrolling patients.
MBX-2982
MBX-2982
targets G protein-coupled receptor 119 (GPR119), a receptor that interacts with bioactive lipids known to stimulate glucose-dependent insulin secretion. In November 2020, we announced a study to evaluate the potential for MBX-2982
to stimulate the release of the hormone glucagon in response to hypoglycemia in patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D). The Phase 2a proof-of-pharmacology
study will assess whether MBX-2982
can enhance glucagon secretion during insulin-induced hypoglycemia in subjects with T1D. The study is actively enrolling patients. If successful, studies to evaluate MBX-2982
as a potential preventive therapy for hypoglycemia in patients with T1D may be warranted. The study is being led by the AdventHealth Translational
Research Institute in Orlando, Florida and is fully funded by The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust. CymaBay retains full commercial rights to MBX-2982.
We believe MBX-2982
may also have utility in various inflammatory diseases and we are currently exploring potential opportunities to advance development.
CB-0406
In 2020 we began to evaluate CB-0406,
the active metabolite of arhalofenate, a pro-drug
previously studied for chronic metabolic diseases, in a single and multiple ascending dose study in healthy subjects to establish its pharmacokinetics, safety and maximum tolerated dose. While the study showed CB-0406
had improved pharmacokinetics versus arhalofenate, CB-0406’s
safety profile did not support continued development as a result of the occurrence of a small number of reversible cases of thrombocytopenia at higher doses. Therefore, in mid-2021
we discontinued development of CB-0406.
COVID-19
Pandemic
As a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, we have experienced and may continue to experience disruptions that could impact aspects of our business, including our progress towards the initiation and completion of certain clinical studies, and other associated drug development activities. The emergence of COVID-19
variants, such as the Delta, and Omicron variants, have further disrupted, and may continue to disrupt, aspects of our business, in particular in regard to the initiation and operation of clinical trial sites in portions of the United States, in the U.K and in Europe. Possible future disruptions are currently difficult to foresee. We continue to monitor areas of potential risk which include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
Clinical trial and drug manufacturing operations-In collaboration with our clinical research organization partners, we sponsor clinical trials that take place at investigator sites in the U.S. and internationally. We also partner with contract manufacturing organizations to develop, manufacture, and distribute our product candidate drug supplies. To date, these collective research and development personnel and vendors have adapted to COVID-19
related travel restrictions and reduced access to work facilities through the use of remote working technologies and other measures as they continue to progress toward completion of our clinical trials. However, as we continue to enroll clinical trials and look to complete the clinical development of seladelpar and initiate other programs, our research and development employees and contractors may not be able to sufficiently access their applicable work facilities as a result of continued facility closure orders and the possibility that governmental authorities might further modify such restrictions. Furthermore, Although we and our contractors continue to plan for and develop pandemic-related risk mitigation strategies, it is uncertain whether these plans will continue to be sufficient to fully offset the potential impact COVID-19,
including the emergence of new COVID-19
variants, travel restrictions and/or facility access restrictions (or other unanticipated impediments) may have on our ability to execute our development activities in a timely and cost-effective manner.
•
Drug regulator interactions-The FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies may experience operational interruptions or delays, which could impact timelines for regulatory meetings, submissions, trial initiations, and regulatory approvals. For example, COVID-19
related regulatory submission issues have created an impediment to clinical site activation in the U.K.
•
Financial reporting and compliance-To date, there has been no adverse impact on our ability to maintain our established financial reporting functions and internal controls over financial reporting. However, our ability to prepare our financial results timely and accurately is partially dependent upon the availability of third-party information systems and other cloud-based services.
•
Remote workforce operations-To date, our workforce has adapted to remotely working to maintain operations. However, remote operations could increase our cyber-security risk, create data accessibility concerns, and make us more susceptible to communication disruptions, any of which could adversely
impact our business operations, or delay necessary interactions with regulators, contract manufacturers, contract research organizations, clinical trial sites, and other important agencies and contractors, which may result in increased costs to us.
Overall, we cannot at this time predict the specific extent, duration, or full impact that the continuing COVID-19
pandemic will have on our future consolidated financial condition and operations. The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our consolidated financial performance will depend on future developments, including emergence of COVID-19
variants, such as the Delta and Omicron variants, the duration and spread of the pandemic and related governmental advisories and restrictions, which could result in unexpected costs to us. These developments and the impact of COVID-19
on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results may be adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be materially reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources and evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may materially differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While we describe our significant accounting policies in more detail in Note 2-
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation and understanding of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses and Related Prepayments and Accruals
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in identifying, developing, and testing product candidates. These expenses consist primarily of costs for research and development personnel, including related stock-based compensation; contract research organizations (CRO) and other third parties that assist in managing, monitoring, and analyzing clinical trials; investigator and site fees; laboratory services; consultants; contract manufacturing services; non-clinical
studies, including materials; and allocated expenses, such as depreciation of assets, and facilities and information technology that support research and development activities. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred unless there is an alternative future use in other research and development projects.
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate certain research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts, reviewing the terms of our license agreements, communicating with our vendors and applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service either when we have prepaid or when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. Although certain of our vendors require us to prepay in advance of services rendered, the majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of prepayments to amortize or expenses to be accrued as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Such payments are evaluated for current or noncurrent classification based on when they will be realized. Additionally, if expectations change such that we do not expect goods to be
delivered or services to be rendered, such prepayments are charged to expense. Examples of estimated amortized or accrued research and development expenses include fees to:
•
contract research organizations and other service providers in connection with clinical studies;
•
contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial materials; and
•
vendors in connection with preclinical development activities.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows and expense recognition. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful screening and enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In either amortizing or accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the related prepayment or accrual accordingly. Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. Adjustments to prior period estimates have not been material for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Pre-funded Warrants
Pursuant to our public equity offering completed in November 2021, we issued pre-funded warrants to purchase 3,125,000 shares of common stock at a price of $3.9999 per share. These pre-funded warrants have an exercise price of $0.0001 per share, were fully exercisable upon issuance, and have no expiration date. We determined that the pre-funded warrants should be equity classified because they are freestanding financial instruments, are immediately exercisable, do not embody an obligation for us to repurchase its shares, permit the holders to receive a fixed number of shares of common stock upon exercise, are indexed to our common stock and meet the equity classification criteria. In addition, such pre-funded warrants do not provide any guarantee of value or return. Accordingly, the proceeds from the issuance of the warrants were recorded as additional paid-in capital on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
Development Financing Agreement
We account for the Financing Agreement (see Note 6) as a debt instrument. Accordingly, we have recorded payments received under the Financing Agreement as part of a development financing liability in our consolidated balance sheet. The liability is recorded at amortized cost and accreted to the contractual success fee amounts based on the estimated timing of regulatory approval and attainment of certain sales milestones using an imputed interest rate. Certain transaction fees incurred specifically to complete the Financing Agreement were capitalized and recorded as a reduction to the carrying amount of the development financing liability and are being amortized to interest expense using the effective interest rate method.
There are several factors that could affect the estimated timing of regulatory approval and attainment of sales milestones, some of which are not entirely within our control. Therefore, we periodically reassess the estimated timing of regulatory approval and attainment of sales milestones, and the expected contractual success fee payments due therefrom. If the timing and/or amount of such expected payments is materially different than original estimates, we will prospectively adjust the accretion of the development financing liability and the imputed interest rate.
We identified certain contingent repayment features in the Financing Agreement that are required to be bifurcated from the debt host instrument as embedded derivative liabilities; however, we determined the fair
value of these features, both individually and in aggregate, were immaterial at inception and as of December 31, 2021. The fair value of these features will be assessed at each subsequent reporting date and will be marked to market, if material. To determine the amount to record for the embedded derivative liability, we must assess the probability of occurrence of various potential future events that could affect the timing and/or amount of future cash flows related to the Financing Agreement.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the estimated fair-value of the awards, and we recognize the portion that we ultimately expect to vest as an expense over the related vesting periods, net of forfeitures. We estimate the grant-date fair value based of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize compensation expense over the service period using the straight-line attribution method and forfeitures are account for as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of certain assumptions. These variables include, but are not limited to, our stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. We determine our stock price volatility based on the sufficiency of our historical stock price data. Due to insufficient historical data of exercise behavior, we have used the “simplified method” to determine the expected life of stock options granted with a service condition. Management continually assesses the assumptions and methodologies used to calculate the estimated fair value of stock-based compensation and evaluates the need to make changes when and if necessary. Any such changes to our valuation assumptions and methodologies could materially impact our fair value determination and the resulting stock-based compensation expense.
Results of Operations
General
To date, we have not generated any income from operations. As of December 31, 2021, we have an accumulated deficit of $766.9 million, primarily as a result of expenditures for research and development and general and administrative expenses from inception to that date. All of our product candidates are at various
stages of development and will require additional work and regulatory approval before they can be licensed or commercialized. Accordingly, we expect to continue to incur substantial losses from operations for the foreseeable future and there can be no assurance that we will ever generate sufficient revenue to achieve and sustain profitability. Until we can generate sufficient product revenue, which we may never do, we will need to finance future cash needs through potential collaborative, partnering or other strategic arrangements, as well as through equity offerings, debt financings or a combination of the foregoing.
Operating Results
Our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are presented below (in thousands):
Research & Development Expenses
Conducting research and development is central to our business model. Research and development expenses increased $28.7 million to $64.5 million from $35.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was largely due to activities associated with the development of seladelpar focusing primarily on our late-stage PBC program. In 2020, expenses included costs associated with shutdown of certain clinical trials after the seladelpar program was placed on clinical hold in late 2019 pending further investigation. This investigation was concluded in the second quarter of 2020, the clinical hold was subsequently lifted in July 2020, and we made the decision to restart the seladelpar development program in July 2020. As we continue to progress late-stage development of seladelpar in PBC as well as development activities associated with other product candidates, we expect research and development costs to continue to increase in the future.
Research and development expenses are detailed further in the table below (in thousands):
Our project costs consist primarily of:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials and a substantial portion of our preclinical activities;
•
the cost of acquiring materials and manufacturing drug products for use in clinical trial and other research activities; and
•
other costs associated with development activities, including additional studies.
Internal research and development costs consist primarily of salaries and related fringe benefits costs for our employees (such as workers’ compensation and health insurance premiums), stock-based compensation charges, travel costs, consulting, other outside services and overhead expenses. Internal costs generally benefit multiple projects and are not separately tracked per project.
Total project costs increased by $20.8 million to $43.7 million from $22.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Project costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of seladelpar-related clinical trial expenses for PBC. These cost increases were driven primarily by an
expansion of our site activation, patient enrollment, and other clinical trial activities following our decision to restart development of the seladelpar program in July 2020 after the FDA lifted the clinical hold on seladelpar. Internal research and development costs increased by $7.8 million to $20.8 million from $13.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to higher employee compensation incurred in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as we hired additional research and development personnel to support the restart of our drug development activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, professional fees for legal, consulting, and accounting services, overhead expenses, and other general operating expenses not otherwise included in research and development. General and administrative expenses increased by $6.3 million to $23.0 million, from $16.7 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was driven primarily by the hiring of additional general and administrative personnel, consultant and other expenses in the second half of 2020 after we made the decision to restart our development activities. We expect general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in the future as we continue to add administrative personnel and expand our infrastructure in support of our drug development activities.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income consists of interest income from our marketable securities. Interest income decreased to $0.2 million from $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $1.4 million was due to lower prevailing interest rates and a reduced investment portfolio balance, on average, compared to prior year.
Interest expense is related to the accretion of the development financing liability recorded in connection with the July 2021 Abingworth Development Financing Agreement using the effective interest method, and totaled $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. No interest expense was incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of $522.7 million and state net operating loss carryforwards of $288.3 million to offset future taxable income, if any. In addition, we had federal research and development tax credit carryforwards of $10.2 million, federal orphan drug tax credit carryforwards of $24.8 million, and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $6.2 million. If not utilized, the federal net operating losses for the years beginning before January 1, 2018 of $255.7 million will expire beginning in 2024 through 2037, and the federal net operating losses for the tax years beginning after January 1, 2018 of $267.0 million will be carried forward indefinitely (subject to certain utilization limitations). The state net operating loss carryforwards will expire beginning in 2028 through 2041. The federal research and development and federal orphan drug tax credit carryforwards expire 2021 through 2041, and the state tax credit will carry forward indefinitely. Interest and penalties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were not material. Current federal and state tax laws include substantial restrictions on the utilization of net operating losses and tax credits in the event of an ownership change. Even if the carryforwards are available, they may be subject to annual limitations, lack of future taxable income, or future ownership changes that could result in the expiration of the carryforwards before they are utilized. At December 31, 2021, we recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets of approximately $173.9 million, as our management believes it is more likely than not that they will not be fully realized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities, licensing fees, issuance of debt and collaborations with third parties. As of December 31, 2021, cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $194.6 million, compared to $146.3 million at December 31, 2020.
Development Financing
On July 30, 2021, (the Effective Date) we entered into a Development Financing Agreement (the Financing Agreement) with Abingworth to obtain funding to support our development of seladelpar for the treatment of PBC. The Financing Agreement provides us up to $100.0 million in funding, of which $25 million was received in August 2021, $25 million was received in November 2021 and $25 million was subsequently received in January 2022. We also have an option to draw an additional $25 million (the Optional Funding) within approximately two months of the completion of enrollment of our Phase 3 RESPONSE clinical trial. The Optional Funding is subject to certain customary funding conditions. In return, we will pay to Abingworth fixed and variable success payments, as further described in Note 6-Development Financing Agreement
in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Development Financing Agreement also provides that we must raise additional funds in a public or private offering within nine months of the Effective Date of the agreement. This capital raise requirement was met following the completion of our public equity offering discussed below.
We were in compliance with all terms and covenants related to the Financing Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Sale of Common Stock and Pre-funded Warrants
On November 22, 2021, we sold 15,625,000 shares of common stock at $4.00 per share and pre-funded warrants to purchase 3,125,000 shares of common stock at $3.9999 per share in a public equity offering, for total gross offering proceeds of approximately $75 million, before deducting the underwriting commissions and other estimated offering expenses. We also granted the underwriters of the offering a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,812,500 shares of its common stock at the public offering price per share less underwriting commissions, which expired unexercised on December 22, 2021. The proceeds of the offering, net of offering expenses, were $70.5 million. We anticipate using the net proceeds from the offering to fund ongoing development of seladelpar and for working capital and general corporate purposes.
At-the-Market (ATM) Facility
In July 2020, we filed a $200.0 million registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC and entered into an at-the-market facility (ATM) to sell up to $75.0 million of common stock under the registration statement. To date, we have not sold any shares of common stock under the ATM.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods indicated below (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $24.7 million to $69.4 million as compared to $44.7 million in the prior year. The increase in cash used was primarily due to a
$39.0 million increase in our net loss to $90.0 million from $51.0 million in the prior year period as a result of our reinstatement of our seladelpar development program. This effect was also impacted to a lesser extent by changes in our working capital.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $48.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $48.0 million of cash used in the prior year, primarily due to the timing of our investments in marketable securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $118.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.1 million in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to net proceeds of $70.5 million received from the November 2021 public equity offering and net proceeds of $47.7 million from the Financing Agreement with Abingworth.
Capital Requirements
We have incurred operating losses since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $766.9 million at December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of approximately $194.6 million, which we believe is sufficient, together with committed capital, to fund our current operating plan through 2023.
We expect to continue to incur substantial expenses related to our development activities for the foreseeable future as we continue product development for seladelpar. Since product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later stage clinical trials, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase in the future. We will therefore continue to require additional financing to develop our products and fund future operating losses and will seek funds through equity financings, debt, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate sources, or through other sources of financing. It is unclear if or when any such financing transactions will occur, on satisfactory terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. If adequate funds are not available to us, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Contractual Obligations and Other Cash Requirements
Our long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 include primarily $1.3 million for our corporate office facility lease, which includes monthly rental payments that are payable through January 2024, the lease termination date. We are also obligated to reimburse the lessor for a prorated portion of monthly facility operating expenses during the lease term.
In addition, we rely on contract research organizations and other research support providers to perform clinical and preclinical studies for us and we contract with firms to supply our drug compounds for use in our development activities. Under the terms of our agreements with these organizations, we are obligated to make future payments as services are provided. However, these agreements are terminable by us upon written notice and we are generally only liable for actual effort expended or cost incurred by the organizations through the termination notice period.
We also have significant potential payment obligations under the Financing Agreement that are contingently payable by us to Abingworth upon regulatory approval of seladelpar in PBC and achievement of certain sales for seladelpar.
We also have certain potential in-license
obligations that are contingently payable by us to licensors upon our achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones for our product candidates.
Finally, in the normal course of business, we enter into various firm purchase commitments and other contractual obligations, which are cancelable within ninety days or less.