Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(Dollars in thousands, except per share data)
General
The following is management’s analysis of the Corporation’s financial condition and results of operations as of and for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. This discussion is designed to provide a more comprehensive review of the operating results and financial position than could be obtained from an examination of the financial statements alone. This analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related footnotes and the selected financial data included elsewhere in this report.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which are not statements of historical fact, constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The words “may,” “continue,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “seek,” “will,” “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements may involve risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict, may be beyond our control, and could cause actual results to differ materially from those described in such statements. Any such forward-looking statements are made only as of the date of this report or the respective dates of the relevant incorporated documents, as the case may be, and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances. Risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results for future periods to differ materially from those anticipated or projected include, but are not limited to:
●
changes in local, regional and national economic conditions becoming less favorable than we expect, resulting in a deterioration in asset credit quality or debtors being unable to meet their obligations because of high unemployment rates and inflationary pressures;
●
rapid fluctuations in market interest rates could result in changes in fair market valuations and a decline in net interest income;
●
changes in the level of non-performing assets and charge-offs;
●
unanticipated changes in our liquidity position, including, but not limited to, changes in the cost of liquidity and our ability to find alternative funding sources;
●
the effect of changes in laws and regulations (including laws and regulations concerning taxes, banking, securities, and insurance) with which we must comply;
●
the effects of, and changes in, trade, monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including interest rate policies of the Federal Reserve Board;
●
breaches of security or failures of our technology systems due to technological or other factors and cybersecurity threats;
●
changes in consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits;
●
declining asset values impacting the underlying value of collateral;
●
changes in accounting policies, rules and interpretations that may come as a result of COVID-19 or otherwise;
●
our ability to attract and retain qualified employees;
●
competitive pressures on product pricing and services; and
●
changes in the reliability of our vendors, internal control systems or information systems.
The risks and uncertainties identified above are not the only risks we face. Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to us or that we currently believe to be immaterial also may adversely affect us. Should any known or unknown risks and uncertainties develop into actual events, those developments could have material adverse effects on our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
Overview
Consumers Bancorp, Inc., a bank holding company incorporated under the laws of the State of Ohio, owns all the issued and outstanding capital stock of Consumers National Bank, a bank chartered under the laws of the United States of America. The Corporation’s activities have been limited primarily to holding the common stock of the Bank. The Bank’s business involves attracting deposits from businesses and individual customers and using such deposits to originate commercial, mortgage and consumer loans in its market area, consisting primarily of Carroll, Columbiana, Jefferson, Stark, Summit, and Wayne counties in Ohio. Its market includes these counties as well as the fourteen contiguous counties in northeast Ohio, western Pennsylvania, and northern West Virginia. The Bank also invests in securities consisting primarily of U.S. government-sponsored entities, municipal obligations, mortgage-backed and collateralized mortgage obligations issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae.
On July 16, 2021, the Corporation completed the branch acquisition and assumed $104,538 of branch deposits for a 1.75% deposit premium and purchased $15,602 in subordinated debt securities issued by unrelated financial institutions and $19,943 in loans. In relation to the branch acquisition, the Corporation recorded goodwill of $1,616. This transaction qualified as a business combination.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to COVID-19, management actively pursued multiple avenues to assist customers during these uncertain times. For commercial borrowers, the CARES Act included key SBA initiatives to assist small businesses. The PPP loans were designed to provide a direct incentive for small businesses to keep their workers on the payroll. The Bank originated a total of $113,367 of PPP loans during the first and second rounds of assistance. As of June 30, 2022, there were $179 of PPP loans outstanding.
Additionally, on March 22, 2020 the Corporation adopted a loan modification program to assist borrowers impacted by COVID-19. The program was available to most borrowers whose loan was not past due on March 22, 2020, the date this loan modification program was adopted. The program offered principal and interest payment deferrals for up to 90 days or interest only payments for up to 90 days. Interest was deferred but continued to accrue during the deferment period and the maturity date on amortizing loans was extended by the number of months the payment was deferred. Consistent with issued regulatory guidance, modifications made under this program in response to COVID-19 were not classified as troubled debt restructurings. As of June 30, 2022, there were no loans in payment deferral status under this loan modification program. This modification program ended as of April 26, 2022.
We have assisted and may continue to assist customers who are experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19 by waiving late charges, refunding NSF and overdraft fees, and waiving CD prepayment penalties. The consumer reserve personal line of credit, an unsecured line of credit that is linked to a personal checking account, has been redesigned to provide easier access and a lower initial rate.
Given the dynamic nature of the circumstances surrounding the pandemic, it is difficult to ascertain the full impact that the ongoing economic disruption will have on the Corporation. The Corporation has modified its business practices with a portion of employees working remotely from their homes to limit interruptions to operations as much as possible and to help reduce the risk of COVID-19 infecting entire departments. The branch lobbies were closed at various times throughout the pandemic but are now open for normal business. The Corporation is encouraging virtual meetings and conference calls in place of in-person meetings. The Corporation is promoting social distancing, frequent hand washing and thorough disinfection of all surfaces. The Corporation will continue to closely monitor situations arising from the pandemic and adjust operations accordingly.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021
Net Income. Net income was $11,192 for fiscal year 2022 compared with $8,988 for fiscal year 2021. The following key factors summarize our results of operations for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared with the same prior year period:
●
net interest income increased by $6,163, or 23.2%, in fiscal year 2022, primarily because of a $179,192, or 24.2%, increase in average interest-earning assets along with a reduction in the cost of funds;
●
a $735 provision for loan loss expense was recorded during fiscal year 2022 compared with $850 during fiscal year 2021;
●
total other income increased by $269, or 6.0%, in fiscal year 2022, primarily due to a $240, or 19.7%, increase in service charges on deposit accounts and a $178, or 9.4%, increase in debit card interchange income which were partially offset by a $121, or 16.1%, decline in mortgage banking activity; and
●
total other expenses increased by $3,854, or 19.9%, in fiscal year 2022 due to increases in salaries and employee benefits; occupancy and equipment expenses; and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) assessments that was primarily driven by the growth in the organization from the branch acquisition.
Return on average equity and return on average assets were 16.43% and 1.17%, respectively, for fiscal year 2022 compared with 13.36% and 1.16%, respectively, for the same period last year.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income, the difference between interest income earned on interest-earning assets and interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities, is the largest component of the Corporation’s earnings. Net interest income is affected by changes in the volumes, rates and composition of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. In addition, prevailing economic conditions, fiscal and monetary policies, and the policies of various regulatory agencies all affect market rates of interest and the availability and cost of credit, which, in turn, can significantly affect net interest income.
Net interest margin is calculated by dividing net interest income on a fully tax equivalent basis (FTE) by total interest-earning assets. FTE income includes tax-exempt income, restated to a pre-tax equivalent, based on the statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0%. All average balances are daily average balances. Non-accruing loans are included in average loan balances and average securities include unrealized gains and losses on securities available for sale, while yields are based on average amortized cost.
FTE net interest income for fiscal year 2022 was $33,259, an increase of $6,257 or 23.2%, from $27,002 in fiscal year 2021. The Corporation’s tax equivalent net interest margin was 3.60% for fiscal year 2022 and 3.67% for fiscal year 2021. FTE interest income for fiscal year 2022 was $34,673, an increase of $5,771, or 20.0%, from fiscal year 2021, primarily due to a $179,192, or 24.2%, increase in average interest-earning assets from fiscal year 2021. The growth in average interest-earning assets was primarily a result of a $112,149 increase in the average balance of available-for-sale securities and a $46,960, or 8.5%, increase in average loans. Interest income was positively impacted in both the current and prior year periods by the accretion of origination fees from PPP loans that were forgiven during those periods. The PPP loans had an average balance of $17,692 for fiscal year 2022, and during this same period, $2,612 of interest and fee income was recognized on the PPP loans. This compares with an average balance of $63,761 for fiscal year 2021, and the recognition of $2,549 of interest and fee income during fiscal year 2021. The Corporation’s yield on average interest-earning assets was 3.75% for the 2022 fiscal year compared with 3.93% for the same period last year.
Interest expense for fiscal year 2022 was $1,414, a decrease of $486, or 25.6%, from fiscal year 2021. The Corporation’s cost of funds was 0.22% for fiscal year 2022 compared with 0.38% for the same prior year period. The historically low market interest rates that were in place throughout much of fiscal year 2022 had an impact on the rates paid on interest-bearing deposit products. The cost of funds is expected to increase due to the recent increases in short-term market rates.
Average Balance Sheet and Net Interest Margin
(1)
Calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis utilizing a statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0%.
The following table presents the changes in the Corporation’s interest income and interest expense resulting from changes in interest rates and changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. Changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated in proportion to the changes due to rate and volume.
INTEREST RATES AND INTEREST DIFFERENTIAL
(1)
Nontaxable income is adjusted to a fully tax equivalent basis utilizing a statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0%.
(2)
Non-accrual loan balances are included for purposes of computing the rate and volume effects although interest on these balances has been excluded.
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses represents the charge to income necessary to adjust the allowance for loan losses to an amount that represents management’s assessment of the estimated probable credit losses in the Corporation’s loan portfolio that have been incurred at each balance sheet date. The amount of the provision is affected by loan charge-offs, recoveries and changes in specific and general allocations required for the allowance for loan losses. Management considers a number of factors that impact the provision for loan losses, such as historical loss experience, the present and prospective financial condition of borrowers, the current conditions within the markets where the Corporation originates loans, the status of nonperforming assets, the estimated underlying value of the collateral and other factors related to the ultimate collectability of the loan portfolio.
A provision for loan loss expense of $735 was recorded in fiscal year 2022 compared with $850 in fiscal year 2021. The loan loss provision expense recorded in fiscal year 2022 was primarily due to the organic growth within the loan portfolio. For fiscal year 2022, net charge offs of $46 were recorded compared with $57 for the same period last year. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans was 1.17% at June 30, 2022 and 1.14% at June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2021, the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans, excluding the PPP loans, was 1.25%. The decline in the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans excluding the PPP loans was due to the improvement in economic conditions that had been adversely impacted by the 2020 economic shutdown and restrictions in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. While vaccinations (including booster shots) have created optimism in the community, but some uncertainty remains due to the continued concern over increased infection rates from various variants of COVID-19.
Non-performing loans were $440 as of June 30, 2022 and represented 0.07% of total loans. This compared with $1,771, or 0.31% of total loans at June 30, 2021. Non-performing loans declined primarily due to the full payoff of three loans that had a balance of $949 as of June 30, 2021 that were on non-accrual for an extended period. Non-performing loans have been considered in management’s analysis of the appropriateness of the allowance for loan losses. Management and the Board of Directors closely monitor these loans and believe the prospect for recovery of principal, less identified specific reserves, are favorable.
Other Income. Total other income increased by $269, or 6.0%, to $4,735 for fiscal year 2022. Service charges on deposit accounts increased by $240, or 19.7% primarily due to an increase in the number of overdraft charges as overdrafts increased from the lows that were experienced during the pandemic as many eligible individuals received economic stimulus payments and consumers changed their spending habits in 2020 and 2021. Effective March 1, 2022, the Bank made a small reduction to the non-sufficient funds/overdraft fee and eliminated many internal account transfer fees. The Bank may make future reductions to the non-sufficient funds/overdraft fee in response to the industry wide trend of reducing overdraft fees as large banks have announced a reduction in these types of fees in response to regulatory pressure. As a result, service charges on deposit accounts may be negatively impacted in future periods. Debit card interchange income increased by $178, or 9.4%, in fiscal year 2022 to $2,069 primarily as a result of increased debit card usage and an increase in the number of cards issued. Mortgage banking activity decreased by $121, or 16.1%, in fiscal year 2022 because of a decrease in volume due to the increase in mortgage rates.
Other Expenses. Total other expenses were $23,215 for the year ended June 30, 2022; an increase of $3,854, or 19.9%, from $19,361 for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Salaries and employee benefit expenses increased by $2,408, or 22.2%, during fiscal year 2022 primarily due to the addition of staff at three new office locations, the addition of lending staff, and increases in health care costs.
Occupancy and equipment expenses increased by $440, or 17.0%, during fiscal year 2022 from the same period last year primarily due to investments in new technology and computer equipment as well as higher real estate taxes, custodial, building upkeep, maintenance, lease and utility expenses for the additional office locations.
Data processing expenses increased by $67, or 9.2% and FDIC assessments increased by $278, or 92.1%, for fiscal year 2022 from the same prior year period due to the growth in the organization.
Debit card processing expenses increased by $75, or 7.9% primarily as a result of increased debit card usage. The increase in debit card usage is also reflected in debit card interchange income which increased by $178, or 9.4% from the prior year.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense totaled $2,339 and $1,850 and the effective tax rates were 17.3% and 17.1% for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Income tax expense was calculated utilizing a statutory federal income tax rate of 21.0% in fiscal years 2022 and 2021. The effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory rate as a result of tax-exempt income from obligations of states and political subdivisions, loans and bank owned life insurance earnings.
Financial Condition
Total assets at June 30, 2022 were $977,313 compared with $833,804 at June 30, 2021, an increase of $143,509, or 17.2%. The growth in total assets is mainly attributable to an increase of $88,465, or 41.0%, in available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities and a $45,416, or 8.0%, increase in total loans. These increases were primarily funded by a $159,713, or 22.0%, increase in total deposits and include $104,538 of deposits acquired as part of the branch acquisition. Total shareholders’ equity declined to $53,970 as of June 30, 2022, from $69,900 as of June 30, 2021. The primary reason for the decline in shareholders’ equity was a $25,656 net decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income due to a shift in unrealized gains on the mark-to-market of available-for-sale securities to a net unrealized loss.
Securities. Total securities were $304,221 at June 30, 2022, of which $296,347 were classified as available-for-sale and $7,874 were classified as held-to-maturity. The securities portfolio is mainly comprised of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae, state and political subdivisions and government-sponsored enterprises.
The following tables summarize the amortized cost and fair value of available-for-sale securities at June 30, 2022 and 2021 and the corresponding amounts of gross unrealized gains and losses recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income or loss:
The following tables summarize the amortized cost and fair value of held-to-maturity securities at June 30, 2022 and 2021 and the corresponding gross unrecognized gains and losses:
The following tables summarize the amounts and distribution of the Corporation’s securities held and the weighted average yields as of June 30, 2022:
The weighted average interest rates are based on coupon rates for securities purchased at par value and on effective yields considering amortization or accretion if the securities were purchased at a premium or discount. The weighted average yield on tax-exempt obligations has been calculated on a tax equivalent basis. Average yields are based on amortized cost balances.
Loans. Loan receivables increased by $45,416 to $611,843 at June 30, 2022 compared to $566,427 at June 30, 2021. Excluding PPP and acquired loan balances, core organic loan growth was $81,194, or 15.7% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Commercial loans included PPP loans of $179 and $50,686 as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Consumer loans increased by $15,251, or 51.6%, primarily as a result of the expansion of indirect auto lending and an increase in direct auto loans due to successful marketing campaigns. Major classifications of loans, net of deferred loan fees and costs, were as follows as of June 30:
The following table shows the major classifications of loans, net of deferred fees and costs, which are based on the contractual terms for repayment of principal, that are due in the periods indicated as of June 30, 2022:
The following is a schedule of fixed and variable rate 1-4 family residential real estate construction, commercial and commercial real estate loans due after one year (variable rate loans are those loans with floating or adjustable interest rates) as of June 30, 2022:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses balance and the provision charged to expense are judgmentally determined by management based upon a periodic review of the loan portfolio for valuation purposes and to determine the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Management establishes allowances for estimated losses on loans based upon its evaluation of the pertinent factors underlying the types and quality of loans; historical loss experience based on volume and types of loans; trend in portfolio volume and composition; level and trend of nonperforming assets; detailed analysis of individual loans for which full collectability may not be assured; determination of the existence and realizable value of the collateral and guarantees securing such loans and the current economic conditions affecting the collectability of loans in the portfolio.
Failure to receive principal and interest payments when due on any loan results in efforts to restore such loan to a current status. Loans are classified as non-accrual when, in the opinion of management, full collection of principal and accrued interest is not expected. The loans must be brought and kept current for six sustained payments before being considered for removal from non-accrual status. Commercial and commercial real estate loans are classified as impaired if management determines that full collection of principal and interest, in accordance with the terms of the loan documents, is not probable. If a loan is impaired, a portion of the allowance is allocated so the loan is reported, net, at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s existing rate or at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected from the collateral. Loans are evaluated for impairment when payments are delayed, typically 90 days or more, or when it is probable that not all principal and interest amounts will be collected according to the original terms of the loan. As of June 30, 2022, impaired loans totaled $473, of which $431 are included in non-accrual loans. Continued unsuccessful collection efforts generally lead to initiation of foreclosure or other legal proceedings.
The following table summarizes non-accrual loans, non-performing assets, impaired and restructured loans, and associated ratios for the years ended June 30:
The non-performing loans are either in the process of foreclosure or efforts are being made to work with the borrower to bring the loan current. Properties and vehicles acquired by the Corporation as a result of foreclosure or repossession, or by deed in lieu of foreclosure, are classified as “other real estate and repossessed assets owned” until they are sold or otherwise disposed of.
The following table summarizes the Corporation’s loan loss experience, and provides a breakdown of the charge-off, recovery and other activity for the years ended June 30:
The following schedule is a breakdown of the allowance for loan losses allocated by type of loan and related ratios:
While management’s periodic analysis of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses may allocate portions of the allowance for specific problem loan situations, the entire allowance is available for any loan charge-off that may occur. While the Corporation has historically experienced strong trends in asset quality, due to the current economic concerns with high inflation and rising interest rates, uncertainty remains regarding future levels of criticized and classified loans, nonperforming loans and charge-offs. Management will continue to closely monitor changes in the loan portfolio and adjust the provision accordingly.
Goodwill: Goodwill was $2,452 as of June 30, 2022 and $836 as of June 30, 2021. In July 2021, goodwill of $1,616 was recorded from the branch acquisition. Goodwill represents the excess of the total purchase price paid for the acquisition over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired, net of the fair value of the liabilities assumed. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment at least annually and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Management evaluated goodwill and concluded that no impairment existed during the year ended June 30, 2022.
Funding Sources. Total deposits increased by $159,713, or 22.0%, from $726,849 at June 30, 2021 to $886,562 at June 30, 2022. Total deposits include $104,538 of deposits acquired as part of the branch acquisition. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased by $28,563, or 12.5%, interest-bearing demand deposits increased by $30,015, or 23.6%, savings and money market deposits increased by $86,293, or 30.5%, and certificates and other time deposits increased by $14,842, or 17.0% from the same prior year period. As current market rates rise, it is anticipated that customers may choose to move funds from savings and money market deposit products to higher yielding certificates of deposits.
The following is a schedule of average deposit amounts and average rates paid on each category for the periods included:
Uninsured deposits at June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $266,902 and $229,071, respectively. Uninsured deposits as of June 30, 2022 and 2021 are based on estimates and include portions of FDIC-insured deposit accounts that exceed the insurance limit of $250 thousand per separately insured depositor.
The following table summarizes time deposits issued in amounts of more than $250 thousand as of June 30, 2022 by time remaining until maturity:
Short-term borrowings increased by $9,092, or 74.5%, to $21,295 at June 30, 2022 from $12,203 at June 30, 2021. This increase was primarily associated with large new deposits from an existing local commercial customer in this sweep repurchase agreement product. See Note 8-Short-Term Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements, for information concerning short-term borrowings.
Capital Resources
Total shareholders’ equity decreased by $15,930 from $69,900 at June 30, 2021 to $53,970 at June 30, 2022. The primary reason for the decline in shareholders’ equity was a $25,656 net decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income due to a shift in unrealized gains on the mark-to-market of available-for-sale securities to a net unrealized loss and by cash dividends paid of $1,949. These reductions were partially offset by net income of $11,192 for the current fiscal year. For fiscal year 2022, the average equity to average total assets ratio was 7.10% and the dividend payout ratio was 17.4%. For fiscal year 2021, the average equity to average total assets ratio was 8.71% and the dividend payout ratio was 19.9%.
At June 30, 2022, management believes the Bank complied with all regulatory capital requirements. Based on the Bank’s computed regulatory capital ratios, the OCC has determined the Bank to be well capitalized under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act as of its latest exam date. The Bank’s actual and required capital amounts are disclosed in Note 13-Regulatory Matters to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Management is not aware of any matters occurring subsequent to that exam that would cause the Bank’s capital category to change.
At June 30, 2022, the Corporation had no unconsolidated, related special purpose entities, nor did the Corporation engage in hedging contracts, such as interest rate swaps, which may expose the Corporation to liabilities greater than the amounts recorded on the consolidated balance sheet. The Corporation’s investment policy prohibits engaging in derivative contracts for speculative trading purposes; however, in the future, the Corporation may pursue certain contracts, such as interest rate swaps, to execute a sound and defensive interest rate risk management policy.
Liquidity
Management considers the asset position of the Bank to be sufficiently liquid to meet normal operating needs and conditions. The Bank’s earning assets are divided primarily between loans and available-for-sale securities, with any excess funds placed in federal funds sold or interest-bearing deposit accounts with other financial institutions.
For fiscal year 2022, net cash inflows from operating activities were $14,947, net cash inflows from financing activities were $52,698 and net cash outflows from investing activities were $65,222. The major sources of cash were net cash received of $66,552 from the branch acquisition, $55,175 net increase in deposits, and a $34,306 increase from sales, maturities, or principal pay downs on available-for-sale securities. The major uses of cash were the $141,210 purchase of available-for-sale securities and a $25,602 net increase in loans. Total cash and cash equivalents were $20,952 as of June 30, 2022 compared to $18,529 at June 30, 2021.
The Bank groups its loan portfolio into four major categories: commercial loans; commercial real estate loans; 1-4 family residential real estate loans; and consumer loans. The Bank’s 1-4 family residential real estate loan portfolio primarily consists of fixed and variable rate mortgage loans for terms generally not longer than thirty years and variable rate home equity lines of credit. Commercial and commercial real estate loans are comprised of both variable rate notes subject to interest rate changes based on the prime rate or Treasury index, and fixed rate notes having maturities of generally not greater than twenty years. Consumer loans offered by the Bank are generally written for periods of up to seven years, based on the nature of the collateral. These may be either installment loans having regular monthly payments or demand type loans for short periods of time.
Funds not allocated to the Bank’s loan portfolio are invested in various securities having diverse maturity schedules. A majority of the Bank’s securities are held in obligations of U.S. Government-sponsored entities, mortgage-backed securities, and investments in tax-exempt municipal bonds.
The Bank offers several forms of deposit products to its customers. We believe the rates offered by the Bank and the fees charged for them are competitive with others currently available in the market area. While the Bank continues to be under competitive pressures in the Bank’s market area as financial institutions attempt to attract and keep new deposits, we believe many commercial and retail customers are turning to community banks. Compared to our peers, the Corporation’s core deposits consist of a larger percentage of noninterest-bearing demand deposits resulting in the cost of funds being at a low level of 0.22% for fiscal year 2022.
Jumbo time deposits (those with balances of $250 and over) were $18,164 and $18,488 at June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. These deposits are monitored closely by the Bank and typically priced on an individual basis. When these deposits are from a municipality, certain bank-owned securities are pledged to guarantee the safety of these public fund deposits as required by Ohio law. The Corporation has the option to use a fee paid broker to obtain deposits from outside its normal service area as an additional source of funding. However, these deposits are not relied upon as a primary source of funding and there were no brokered deposits as of June 30, 2022 or 2021.
Dividends from the Bank are the primary source of funds for payment of dividends to our shareholders. However, there are statutory limits on the amount of dividends the Bank can pay without regulatory approval. Under these regulations, the amount of dividends that may be paid in any calendar year is limited to the current year’s net profits, combined with the retained net profits of the preceding two years, subject to the capital requirements described above. Additionally, the Bank may not declare or pay any dividend if, after making the dividend, the Bank would be “undercapitalized,” as defined in the federal regulations. As of June 30, 2022, the Bank could, without prior approval, declare a dividend of approximately $14,695.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require the measurement of financial position and results of operations primarily in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of the Corporation are monetary in nature. Therefore, as a financial institution, interest rates have a more significant impact on the Corporation’s performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. The liquidity, maturity structure and quality of the Corporation’s assets and liabilities are critical to the maintenance of acceptable performance levels.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Significant Estimates
The financial condition and results of operations for the Corporation presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements, accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and management’s discussion and analysis are, to a large degree, dependent upon the Corporation’s accounting policies. The selection and application of these accounting policies involve judgments, estimates and uncertainties that are susceptible to change. The most significant accounting policies followed by the Corporation are presented in Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements. These policies, along with the disclosures presented in the other financial statement notes, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined.
Management views critical accounting policies to be those which are highly dependent on subjective or complex judgments, estimates and assumptions, and where changes in those estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on the financial statements. In the event different assumptions or conditions were to prevail, and depending upon the severity of such changes, the possibility of materially different financial condition or results of operations is a reasonable likelihood. Management has identified the following as critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The determination of the allowance for loan losses involves considerable subjective judgment and estimation by management. The allowance for loan losses is a reserve established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense, which represents management’s best estimate of probable losses that have been incurred within the existing portfolio of loans. The balance in the allowance for loan losses is determined based on management’s review and evaluation of the loan portfolio in relation to past loss experience, the size and composition of the portfolio, current economic events and conditions and other pertinent factors, including management’s assumptions as to future delinquencies, recoveries, and losses. All these factors may be susceptible to significant change. Among the many factors affecting the allowance for loan losses, some are quantitative while others require qualitative judgment. Although management believes its process for determining the allowance adequately considers all the potential factors that could potentially result in credit losses, the process includes subjective elements and may be susceptible to significant change. To the extent actual outcomes differ from management’s estimates, additional provisions for loan losses may be required that would adversely impact the Corporation’s financial condition or earnings in future periods.
Goodwill. The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. Accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition with any excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value recorded as goodwill. The Company performs an evaluation of goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The evaluation for impairment involves comparing the current estimated fair value of the Company to its carrying value. If the current estimated fair value exceeds the carrying value, no additional testing is required, and an impairment loss is not recorded. If the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value, further valuation procedures are performed that could result in impairment of goodwill being recorded. As of April 30, 2022, the measurement date, a qualitative assessment was performed to determine whether there is a more likely than not (greater than 50% likelihood) that the fair value of the Corporation was less than its carrying amount. The qualitative impairment test of goodwill indicated no impairment existed as of the measurement date. However, it is impossible to know the future impact of the evolving economic conditions. If for any future period it is determined that there has been impairment in the carrying value of our goodwill balances, the Corporation will record a charge to earnings, which could have a material adverse effect on net income, but not risk based capital ratios.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingent Liabilities
The following table presents, as of June 30, 2022, the Corporation’s significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations by payment date. The payment amounts represent those amounts contractually due to the recipient and do not include any unamortized premiums or discounts. Further discussion of the nature of each obligation is included in the referenced note to the consolidated financial statements.
Note 14-Commitments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk to the Consolidated Financial Statements discusses in greater detail other commitments and contingencies and the various obligations that exist under those agreements. These commitments and contingencies consist primarily of commitments to extend credit to borrowers under lines of credit.