Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Chain Bridge,” “our,” “us,” or “we” refer to Chain Bridge I. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10- K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus for its Initial Public Offering filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on January 21, 2021. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region for purposes of consummating an initial business combination, we intend to focus on partnering with a technology company that will advance U.S. national security and intelligence interests.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not yet commenced operations. All activity for the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, the Initial Public Offering, which is described below and, subsequent to the Initial Public Offering the search for a prospective business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
Our sponsor is Chain Bridge Group, a Cayman Islands exempted limited liability company. The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on November 9, 2021. On November 15, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 23,000,000 units, including 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $5.7 million, of which approximately $254,000 was for offering costs allocated to derivative warrant liabilities.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 10,550,000 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant to the sponsor and CB Co-Investment, generating proceeds of approximately $10.6 million (Note 4).
In addition, upon closing of the Initial Public Offering, CB Co-Investment loaned us approximately $1.2 million at no interest (the “CB Co-Investment Loan”). The CB Co-Investment Loan shall be repaid upon the closing of our initial business combination or converted into private placement warrants, at a conversion price of $1.00 per warrant, at CB Co-Investment’s discretion, provided that any such conversion may not occur until after January 8, 2022.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, $234.6 million ($10.20 per Unit) of net proceeds, including the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement and the proceeds from the convertible promissory note issued to CB Co-Investment, was placed in a trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $741,000 and working capital of approximately $1,451,000.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through the cash receipt of $25,000 from the sponsor and CB Co-Investment to cover for certain expenses on behalf of the Company in exchange for issuance of founder shares, and loan from the related party of approximately $244,000 under the Note (as defined herein). The Company repaid the Note in full on November 17, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, over-allotment, and the Private Placement held outside of the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan.
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, operating expenses, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Our management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our Initial Public Offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $5.0 million, which consisted of net gain from the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of approximately $5.3 million, net gain from the change in fair value of convertible note to related party of approximately $0.1 million and investment income on the trust account of approximately $19,000, partially offset by general and administrative expenses of approximately $0.2 million, general and administrative expenses to related party of $30,000, and offering costs allocated to derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $254,000.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights and Shareholder Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any shares of ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the working capital loans and upon conversion of the founder shares), as well as Franklin and their permitted transferees, were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $4.6 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, and forward purchase agreements, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, will be re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative warrant liabilities will be classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
The 22,050,000 warrants to be issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (including the 11,500,000 warrants included in the units and the 10,550,000 private placement warrants) and the 4,000,000 forward purchase securities, were recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognized the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities will be subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised. The fair value of the forward purchase securities, warrants and the private placement warrants were initially measured using a Monte Carlo simulation. The fair value of warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the forward purchase securities and the private placement warrants are measured using a Monte Carlo simulation, and the fair value of the convertible note is measured using Black-Scholes model.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of the closing of the Initial Public Offering, 23,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option), we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the over-allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 22,050,000 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the period from January 21, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
We have considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from weighted average number as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the interim period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying interim financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non- emerging growth companies. As a result, the interim financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.