Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) primarily reviews the financial condition and results of operations of the Company for the past two years, although in some circumstances a period longer than two years is covered in order to comply with SEC disclosure requirements or to more fully explain long-term trends. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes that appear on pages 70 through 133. All references in the discussion to the financial condition and results of operations refer to the consolidated position and results of the Company and its subsidiaries taken as a whole.
Unless otherwise noted, all earnings per share (“EPS”) figures disclosed in the MD&A refer to diluted EPS; interest income, net interest income, and net interest margin are presented on a fully tax-equivalent (“FTE”) basis, which is a non-GAAP measure. The term “this year” and equivalent terms refer to results in calendar year 2021, “last year” and equivalent terms refer to calendar year 2020, and all references to income statement results correspond to full-year activity unless otherwise noted.
This MD&A contains certain forward-looking statements with respect to the financial condition, results of operations, and business of the Company. These forward-looking statements involve certain risks and uncertainties. Factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements are set herein under the caption “Forward-Looking Statements” on page 64.
Critical Accounting Policies
As a result of the complex and dynamic nature of the Company’s business, management must exercise judgment in selecting and applying the most appropriate accounting policies for its various areas of operations. The policy decision process not only ensures compliance with the current accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), but also reflects management’s discretion with regard to choosing the most suitable methodology for reporting the Company’s financial performance. It is management’s opinion that the accounting estimates covering certain aspects of the business have more significance than others due to the relative importance of those areas to overall performance, or the level of subjectivity in the selection process. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as disclosures of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could meaningfully differ from these estimates. Management believes that the critical accounting estimates include the allowance for credit losses, actuarial assumptions associated with the pension, post-retirement and other employee benefit plans, the provision for income taxes, investment valuation, the carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets, and acquired loan valuations. A summary of the accounting policies used by management is disclosed in Note A, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, starting on page 76.
Supplemental Reporting of Non-GAAP Results of Operations
The Company also provides supplemental reporting of its results on an “operating,” “adjusted” or “tangible” basis, from which it excludes the after-tax effect of amortization of core deposit and other intangible assets (and the related goodwill, core deposit intangible and other intangible asset balances, net of applicable deferred tax amounts), accretion on non-PCD purchased loans, acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustments, the unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, net gain on sale of investments, litigation accrual expenses and the gain on debt extinguishment. Although these items are non-GAAP measures, the Company’s management believes this information helps investors and analysts measure underlying core performance and improves comparability to other organizations that have not engaged in acquisitions. In addition, the Company provides supplemental reporting for “adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenues,” which excludes the provision for credit losses, acquisition expenses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustments, net gain on sale of investments, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment and litigation accrual expenses from income before income taxes. Although adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue is a non-GAAP measure, the Company’s management believes this information helps investors and analysts measure and compare the Company’s performance through a credit cycle by excluding the volatility in the provision for credit losses associated with the adoption of CECL and the economic uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Diluted adjusted net earnings per share, a non-GAAP measure, were $3.64 in 2021, up $0.27, or 8.0%, from 2020 and up $0.20, or 5.8%, from 2019. Adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue per share, a non-GAAP measure, was $4.28 in 2021, up $0.02, or 0.5%, from 2020 and up $0.05, or 1.2%, from 2019. Reconciliations of GAAP amounts with corresponding non-GAAP amounts are presented in Table 16.
Executive Summary
The Company’s business philosophy is to operate as a diversified financial services enterprise providing a broad array of banking and other financial services to retail, commercial and municipal customers. The Company’s banking subsidiary is Community Bank, N.A. (the “Bank” or “CBNA”). The Company’s Benefit Plans Administrative Services, Inc. (“BPAS”) subsidiary is a leading provider of employee benefits administration, trust services, collective investment fund administration and actuarial consulting services to customers on a national scale. In addition, the Company offers comprehensive financial planning, insurance and wealth management services through its Community Bank Wealth Management Group and OneGroup NY, Inc. (“OneGroup”) operating units.
The Company’s core operating objectives are: (i) optimize the branch network and digital banking delivery systems, primarily through disciplined acquisition strategies and divestitures/consolidations, (ii) build profitable loan and deposit volume using both organic and acquisition strategies, (iii) manage an investment securities portfolio to complement the Company’s loan and deposit strategies and optimize interest rate risk, yield and liquidity, (iv) increase the noninterest component of total revenues through development of banking-related fee income, growth in existing financial services business units, and the acquisition of additional financial services and banking businesses, and (v) utilize technology to deliver customer-responsive products and services and improve efficiencies.
Significant factors reviewed by management to evaluate achievement of the Company’s operating objectives and its operating results and financial condition include, but are not limited to: net income and earnings per share; return on assets and equity; components of net interest margin; noninterest revenues; noninterest expenses; asset quality; loan and deposit growth; capital management; performance of individual banking and financial services units; performance of specific product lines and customers; liquidity and interest rate sensitivity; enhancements to customer products and services and their underlying performance characteristics; technology advancements; market share; peer comparisons; and the performance of recently acquired businesses.
On October 4, 2021, the Company announced that the Bank had entered into an agreement to acquire Elmira Savings Bank (“Elmira”), a twelve branch banking franchise headquartered in Elmira, New York, for $82.8 million in cash. The acquisition will enhance the Company’s presence in five counties in New York’s Southern Tier and Finger Lakes regions. Elmira had total assets of $632.2 million, total deposits of $541.0 million, and net loans of $458.6 million at December 31, 2021. The merger was approved by the shareholders of Elmira on December 14, 2021. The Company expects to complete the acquisition in the second quarter of 2022, subject to customary closing conditions, including required regulatory approval.
On August 2, 2021, the Company, through its subsidiary OneGroup, completed its acquisition of certain assets of Thomas Gregory Associates Insurance Brokers, Inc. (“TGA”), a specialty-lines insurance broker based in the Boston, Massachusetts area for $13.1 million, including $11.6 million in cash and contingent consideration valued at $1.5 million. The Company recorded a $10.9 million customer list intangible asset and $2.2 million of goodwill in conjunction with the acquisition.
On July 1, 2021, the Company, through its subsidiary Benefit Plans Administrative Services, LLC, completed its acquisition of Fringe Benefits Design of Minnesota, Inc. (“FBD”), a provider of retirement plan administration and benefit consulting services with offices in Minnesota and South Dakota, for $16.7 million, including $15.3 million in cash and contingent consideration valued at $1.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, the contingent consideration is valued at $1.6 million, resulting in a $0.2 million acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment recorded in the consolidated statements of income in 2021. The Company recorded a $14.0 million customer list intangible asset and $2.1 million of goodwill in conjunction with the acquisition.
On June 1, 2021, the Company, through its subsidiary OneGroup, completed its acquisition of certain assets of NuVantage Insurance Corp. (“NuVantage”), an insurance agency headquartered in Melbourne, Florida. The Company paid $2.9 million in cash and recorded a $1.4 million customer list intangible asset and $1.5 million of goodwill in conjunction with the acquisition.
On June 12, 2020, the Company completed its merger with Steuben Trust Corporation (“Steuben”), parent company of Steuben Trust Company, a New York State chartered bank headquartered in Hornell, New York, for $98.6 million in Company stock and cash, comprised of $21.6 million in cash and the issuance of 1.36 million shares of common stock. The merger extended the Company’s footprint into two new counties in Western New York State, and enhanced the Company’s presence in four Western New York State counties in which it had already operated. In connection with the merger, the Company added 11 full-service offices to its branch service network and acquired $607.8 million of assets, including $339.7 million of loans and $180.5 million of investment securities, as well as $516.3 million of deposits. Goodwill of $20.0 million, a $2.9 million core deposit intangible asset and a $1.2 million customer list intangible asset were recognized as a result of the merger.
On September 18, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary, Community Investment Services, Inc. (“CISI”), completed its acquisition of certain assets of a practice engaged in the financial services business headquartered in Syracuse, New York. The Company paid $0.5 million in cash to acquire a customer list, and recorded a $0.5 million customer list intangible asset in conjunction with the acquisition.
On July 12, 2019, the Company completed its merger with Kinderhook Bank Corp. (“Kinderhook”), parent company of The National Union Bank of Kinderhook, headquartered in Kinderhook, New York, for $93.4 million in cash. The merger added 11 branch locations across a five county area in the Capital District of Upstate New York. The merger resulted in the acquisition of $642.8 million of assets, including $479.9 million of loans and $39.8 million of investment securities, as well as $568.2 million of deposits. Goodwill of $40.0 million was recognized as a result of the merger.
On January 2, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary, CISI, completed its acquisition of certain assets of Wealth Resources Network, Inc. (“Wealth Resources”), a financial services business headquartered in Liverpool, New York. The Company paid $1.2 million in cash to acquire a customer list from Wealth Resources, and recorded a $1.2 million customer list intangible asset in conjunction with the acquisition.
The Company reported net income of $189.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 that was $25.0 million, or 15.2%, above the prior year, while earnings per share of $3.48 for the year was $0.40, or 13.0%, above the prior year. The increase in net income and earnings per share was due in part to the decrease in provision for credit losses, which included $3.1 million of acquisition-related provision for credit losses associated with the acquisition of Steuben in 2020, with the remaining decrease largely attributable to steady improvements in the economic outlook and the loan portfolio’s asset quality profile during 2021. Other factors resulting in the increases to net income and earnings per share were higher noninterest revenues, an increase in net interest income, a decrease in acquisition-related expenses and a decrease in litigation accrual expenses. Partially offsetting these items were higher noninterest expenses, including a full year of the expanded business activities from the Steuben acquisition completed in the second quarter of 2020 and the three financial services businesses acquired in 2021, an increase in income taxes, a decrease in gain on debt extinguishment and an increase in weighted average diluted shares outstanding attributable to the full year’s impact of shares issued in connection with the Steuben acquisition in 2020 and administration of the Company’s employee stock plans. Net income adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, litigation accrual, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, and acquired non-PCD loan accretion (“Adjusted Net Income”), a non-GAAP measure, increased $18.1 million, or 10.0%, compared to the prior year. Earnings per share adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, litigation accrual, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, and acquired non-PCD loan accretion (“Adjusted Earnings Per Share”), a non-GAAP measure, of $3.64 increased $0.27, or 8.0%, compared to the prior year. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
The Company experienced year-over-year growth in average interest-earning assets and average deposits, primarily reflective of large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs, the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan originations and the full year impact from the acquisition of Steuben in the second quarter of 2020. Average external borrowings in 2021 decreased from 2020 reflective of decreases in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts, average subordinated notes payable and average Federal Home Loan Bank of New York (“FHLB”) borrowings, partially offset by an increase in average securities sold under an agreement to repurchase (“customer repurchase agreements”). The decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts was primarily due to the redemption of $77.3 million of trust preferred subordinated debt held by Community Capital Trust IV (“CCT IV”), an unconsolidated subsidiary trust, during the first quarter of 2021. The decrease in average subordinated notes payable was primarily driven by the redemption of $10.4 million of subordinated notes payable acquired from the Kinderhook acquisition, during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Asset quality remained strong and generally improved throughout 2021, with the upgrade of several large business loans from nonaccrual to accruing status contributing to the nonperforming and delinquency ratios improving from 2020 levels. The full year net charge-off ratio was also favorable and improved from one year earlier.
Net Income and Profitability
Net income for 2021 was $189.7 million, an increase of $25.0 million, or 15.2%, from 2020’s net income. Earnings per share for 2021 was $3.48, up $0.40, or 13.0%, from 2020’s results. Net income and earnings per share for 2021 were impacted by $0.7 million of acquisition expenses related to the pending Elmira Savings Bank acquisition and the three financial services acquisitions completed in 2021, $0.2 million of acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment related to the FBD acquisition and a $0.1 million adjustment to litigation accrual expenses in 2021, while the Company incurred $4.9 million of acquisition expenses primarily related to the Steuben acquisition, $3.1 million of acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to the Steuben acquisition and $3.0 million of litigation accrual expenses in 2020. Adjusted Net Income, a non-GAAP measure, increased $18.1 million, or 10.0%, compared to the prior year, while adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue, a non-GAAP measure, increased $5.5 million, or 2.4%, compared to 2020. Diluted adjusted net earnings per share, a non-GAAP measure, of $3.64 increased $0.27, or 8.0%, compared to the prior year, while adjusted pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue per share, a non-GAAP measure, of $4.28 increased $0.02, or 0.5%, compared to 2020. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Net income for 2020 was $164.7 million, a decrease of $4.4 million, or 2.6%, from 2019’s earnings. Earnings per share for 2020 was $3.08, down $0.15, or 4.6%, from 2019’s results. Net income and earnings per share for 2020 were impacted by $4.9 million of acquisition expenses primarily related to the Steuben acquisition, $3.1 million of acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to the Steuben acquisition and $3.0 million of litigation accrual expenses, while the Company incurred $8.6 million of acquisition expenses in 2019 primarily related to the Kinderhook acquisition and recorded $4.9 million in net gains on the sales of investment securities in 2019. 2020 Adjusted Net Income, a non-GAAP measure, increased $0.2 million, or 0.1%, and Adjusted Earnings per share, a non-GAAP measure, of $3.37 decreased $0.07, or 2.0%, compared to the prior year, respectively. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Table 1: Condensed Income Statements
The Company operates in three business segments: Banking, Employee Benefit Services and All Other. The Banking segment provides a wide array of lending and depository-related products and services to individuals, businesses and municipal enterprises. In addition to these general intermediation services, the Banking segment provides treasury management solutions and payment processing services. Employee Benefit Services, consisting of BPAS and its subsidiaries, provides the following on a national basis: retirement plans, health & welfare plans, fund administration, institutional trust services, collective investment funds, VEBA/115 trusts, fiduciary services, actuarial & pension services, and healthcare consulting services. BPAS services more than 4,200 benefit plans with approximately 510,000 plan participants and holds more than $110 billion in employee benefit trust assets and $1.3 trillion in fund administration. In addition, BPAS employs 396 professionals serving clients in every U.S. state plus the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and occupies 13 offices located in New York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Texas, Minnesota, South Dakota and Puerto Rico. The All Other segment is comprised of wealth management and insurance services. Wealth management activities include trust services provided by the personal trust unit of CBNA, investment products and services provided by CISI, The Carta Group, Inc. (“Carta Group”) and OneGroup Wealth Partners, Inc. (“Wealth Partners”), as well as asset management provided by Nottingham Advisors, Inc. (“Nottingham”). The insurance services activities include the offerings of personal and commercial lines of insurance and other risk management products and services provided by OneGroup. For additional financial information on the Company’s segments, refer to Note U - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The primary factors explaining 2021 earnings performance are discussed in the remaining sections of this document and are summarized by segment as follows:
BANKING
• Net interest income increased $6.8 million, or 1.9%. This was the result of a $2.04 billion increase in average interest-earning assets and a 12 basis point decrease in the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by a 54 basis point decrease in the average yield on earning assets and a $1.21 billion increase in average interest-bearing liabilities. Average loans grew $51.2 million driven primarily by the origination of second draw PPP loans and net organic growth in the consumer portfolios, including consumer mortgage, consumer indirect, consumer direct and home equity loans, while the yield on loans decreased 12 basis points from the prior year. Also contributing to the growth in interest income was a $1.98 billion increase in the average book value of investments, including cash equivalents. The increase in the average book balance of investments was the net result of investment purchases of $1.96 billion during the year as well as a significant increase in cash equivalents primarily driven by large deposit inflows related to government stimulus and PPP programs, partially offset by $426.7 million in investment maturities, calls and principal payments. The average yield on investments, including cash equivalents, decreased 55 basis points from the prior year. Average interest-bearing deposits increased $1.25 billion due primarily to the aforementioned net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs. Borrowing interest expense decreased year-over-year as a result of a blended rate that was 79 basis points lower than the prior year and a decrease in average balances of $35.8 million.
• The net benefit in the provision for credit losses of $8.8 million decreased $23.0 million from the prior year’s $14.2 million provision for credit losses, reflective of the continued release of reserves in the first three quarters of 2021. The economic outlook and the loan portfolio’s asset quality profile both steadily improved during 2021 as compared to the adverse impact COVID-19 had on economic and business conditions within the Company’s markets in 2020. Net charge-offs of $2.8 million were $2.1 million less than 2020. This resulted in an annual net charge-off ratio (net charge-offs / total average loans) of 0.04%, which was three basis points lower than the prior year. Year-end nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans and nonperforming assets as a percentage of loans and other real estate owned both decreased 42 basis points as compared to December 31, 2020 levels. Additional information on trends and policy related to asset quality is provided in the asset quality section on pages 53 through 58.
• Banking noninterest revenue, excluding unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities and gain on debt extinguishment, of $67.9 million for 2021 decreased by $1.3 million from 2020’s level. The decrease was primarily driven by decreases in mortgage banking revenues as the Company is currently holding the majority of its new consumer mortgage production in portfolio due to a change in its strategy, and a decline in deposit service charges and fees and other banking revenues including decreases in overdraft fees in part due to the higher average deposit balances resulting from government stimulus program inflows. This was partially offset by an increase in debit interchange and ATM fees, reflective of increased transaction activity including the impact of a full year of activity resulting from the addition of new deposit relationships from the Steuben acquisition in 2020. The Company recognized $0.4 million in gain on debt extinguishment in 2020.
• Banking noninterest expenses, including acquisition and litigation accrual expenses, increased $4.5 million, or 1.7%, in 2021 reflective of an increase in merit and incentive-related employee wages, higher payroll taxes including increases in state-related unemployment taxes and higher employee benefit-related expenses including significant increases in employee medical benefit costs. Other factors included an increase in data processing and communications expenses due to the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems, along with a general increase in the level of business activities as compared to the low 2020 levels resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by the absence of the one-time litigation accrual expenses incurred in 2020 and a decline in acquisition expenses. Excluding acquisition and litigation accrual expenses, banking noninterest expenses increased $11.9 million, or 4.6%, reflective of a full year of business activity from the Steuben acquisition as well as the other factors discussed above.
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT SERVICES
● Employee benefit services noninterest revenue for 2021 of $116.6 million increased $13.2 million, or 12.7%, from the prior year level, primarily related to increases in employee benefit trust and custodial fees due in part to higher asset-based revenues, as well as incremental revenues from the acquisition of FBD during the third quarter of 2021.
● Employee benefit services noninterest expenses for 2021 totaled $70.7 million. This represented an increase from 2020 of $4.3 million, or 6.4%, and was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel costs associated with the aforementioned acquisition of FBD and the continued buildout of resources to support an expanding revenue base, along with a general increase in the level of business activities as compared to the diminished levels in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Excluding acquisition-related expenses, employee benefit services noninterest expenses increased $4.0 million, or 6.1%.
ALL OTHER (WEALTH MANAGEMENT AND INSURANCE SERVICES)
● Wealth management and insurance services noninterest revenue for 2021 was $68.8 million; an increase of $7.2 million, or 11.7%, from the prior year level. The increase was due to incremental revenues from the acquisitions of NuVantage and TGA in 2021, along with organic growth in both businesses.
● Wealth management and insurance services noninterest expenses of $53.7 million increased $3.8 million, or 7.5%, from 2020 primarily due to increased personnel costs associated with the aforementioned acquisitions and the continued buildout of resources to support an expanding revenue base, along with a general increase in the level of business activities as compared to the subdued levels in 2020 resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selected Profitability and Other Measures
Return on average assets, return on average equity, dividend payout and equity to asset ratios for the years indicated are as follows:
Table 2: Selected Ratios
As displayed in Table 2, the 2021 return on average assets ratio was consistent and the return on average equity ratio increased 106 basis points as compared to 2020. The stable return on average assets was the result of an increase in net income that was impacted by a $23.1 million decrease in provision for credit losses, offset by an increase in average assets, primarily related to continued net inflows of deposits, including those associated with additional stimulus payments and a second round of PPP lending. The return on average equity ratio increased in 2021 as net income increased impacted by the aforementioned provision for credit losses, while average equity increased at a lesser rate, primarily related to earnings retention and the full year impact of shares issued in connection with the Steuben acquisition in 2020, partially offset by decreases in the market value of the Company’s available-for-sale investments due to higher market interest rates. The return on average assets ratio in 2020 decreased 25 basis points, while the return on average equity ratio decreased 129 basis points as compared to 2019. The decrease in return on average assets was primarily the result of an increase in average assets, primarily related to large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs, PPP loan originations and the acquisitions of Kinderhook in the third quarter of 2019 and Steuben in the second quarter of 2020, and a decrease in net income that was impacted by a $5.8 million increase in provision for credit losses, a $4.9 million decrease in net gains on sales of investment securities and $3.0 million of litigation accrual expenses incurred in 2020. The return on average equity ratio decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 as average equity increased, primarily related to shares issued in connection with the Steuben acquisition and increases in the market value of the Company’s available-for-sale investments, while net income decreased impacted by the aforementioned provision for credit losses, litigation accrual expenses and lower security gains. The return on average assets adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustments, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, litigation accrual expenses and acquired non-PCD loan accretion (“adjusted return on average assets”), a non-GAAP measure, decreased six basis points to 1.34% in 2021, as compared to 1.40% in 2020. The return on average equity adjusted to exclude acquisition expenses, acquisition-related provision for credit losses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustments, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment, amortization of intangibles, litigation accrual expenses and acquired non-PCD loan accretion (“adjusted return on average equity”), a non-GAAP measure, increased 71 basis points to 9.60% in 2021, from 8.89% in 2020. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
The dividend payout ratio for 2021 of 48.3% decreased from 53.7% in 2020 as there was a 15.2% increase in net income and a 3.5% increase in dividends declared. The increase in dividends declared in 2021 was a result of a 2.4% increase in the dividends declared per share and the issuance of shares in connection with the administration of the Company’s employee stock plans. The dividend payout ratio for 2020 of 53.7% increased from 48.4% in 2019 as there was an 8.2% increase in dividends declared from 2019 and a 2.6% decrease in net income. The increase in dividends declared in 2020 was a result of a 5.1% increase in the dividends declared per share and the issuance of shares in connection with the Steuben acquisition and administration of the Company’s 401(k) plan and employee stock plan.
The average equity to average assets ratio decreased in 2021 as the growth in assets outpaced the growth in common shareholders’ equity. During 2021, average assets increased 15.0% while average equity increased a lesser 1.8%, in part due to a significant decline the after-tax market value adjustment on available-for-sale investments. In 2020, the average equity to average assets ratio decreased as average equity rose 12.9% and average assets grew 16.8% in comparison to 2019.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the amount by which interest and fees on earning assets (loans, investments and cash equivalents) exceeds the cost of funds, which consists primarily of interest paid to the Company's depositors and interest on borrowings. Net interest margin is the difference between the yield on interest earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities as a percentage of earning assets.
As disclosed in Table 3, net interest income (with nontaxable income converted to a fully tax-equivalent basis) totaled $377.8 million in 2021, an increase of $5.5 million, or 1.5%, from the prior year. The increase is a result of a $2.04 billion, or 17.9%, increase in average interest-earning assets and a 12 basis point decrease in the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by a 54 basis point decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets and a $1.21 billion increase in average interest-bearing liabilities. As reflected in Table 4, the favorable impact of the increase in interest-earning assets ($64.6 million) and decrease in the rate on interest-bearing liabilities ($10.8 million) was partially offset by the unfavorable impact of the decrease in the average yield on interest-earning assets ($67.0 million) and the increase in interest-bearing liabilities ($2.9 million).
The 2021 net interest margin decreased 46 basis points to 2.82% from 3.28% reported in 2020. The decrease was attributable to a 54 basis point decrease in the interest-earning asset yield partially offset by a 12 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2021 resulting from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 4.22% yield on loans in 2021 decreased 12 basis points as compared to 4.34% in 2020 primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2021 resulting from the aforementioned economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and a $1.5 million decrease in acquired loan accretion. Included in the loan yield was the impact of $18.7 million in PPP-related interest income, including the recognition of $15.8 million of deferred loan fees as compared to $9.5 million in PPP-related interest income, including the recognition of $6.0 million of deferred loan fees in 2020. The yield on investments, including cash equivalents, of 1.35% in 2021 was 55 basis points lower than 2020. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.15% during 2021 as compared to 0.27% for 2020. The decreased cost reflects the seven basis point decrease in the average rate paid on deposits and the 79 basis point lower average rate paid on borrowings in 2021.
The 2020 net interest margin decreased 48 basis points to 3.28% from 3.76% reported in 2019. The decrease was attributable to a 57 basis point decrease in the interest-earning asset yield partially offset by a 13 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2020 that were impacted by the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 4.34% yield on loans in 2020 decreased 39 basis points as compared to 4.73% in 2019, including the impact of acquired loan accretion, primarily due to the decline in market rates during 2020 resulting from the aforementioned economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The yield on investments, including cash equivalents, of 1.90% in 2020 was 68 basis points lower than 2019. The cost of interest-bearing liabilities was 0.27% during 2020 as compared to 0.40% for 2019. The decreased cost reflects the seven basis point decrease in the average rate paid on deposits and the 59 basis point lower average rate paid on borrowings in 2020.
As shown in Table 3, total FTE-basis interest income decreased by $2.4 million, or 0.6%, in 2021 in comparison to 2020. Table 4 indicates that a higher average interest-earning asset balance created $64.6 million of incremental interest income while the lower yield on earning assets had an unfavorable impact of $67.0 million on interest income. Average loans increased $51.2 million, or 0.7%, in 2021. This increase was driven by increases in the average balance of the consumer indirect, business lending and consumer mortgage portfolios, partially offset by decreases in the average balance of the consumer direct and home equity portfolios. FTE-basis loan interest income and fees decreased $6.6 million, or 2.1%, in 2021 as compared to 2020, attributable to a 12 basis point decrease in the loan yield primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2021, partially offset by the higher average loan balances and a $9.2 million increase in PPP-related interest income.
Investment interest income (FTE basis) in 2021 was $4.2 million, or 5.4%, higher than the prior year as a result of a $1.98 billion increase in the average book basis balance of investments, including a $1.08 billion increase in average cash equivalents, partially offset by a 55 basis point decrease in average investment yield. The lower average investment yield in 2021 was reflective of funding inflows from deposit growth and cash flows from higher rate maturing instruments in the investment portfolio being reinvested at lower market interest rates or being held in low-rate interest-earning cash.
Total FTE-basis interest income increased by $3.5 million, or 0.9%, in 2020 in comparison to 2019. Table 4 indicates that a higher average interest-earning asset balance created $63.0 million of incremental interest income and a lower yield on earning assets had an unfavorable impact of $59.5 million on interest income. Average loans increased $722.4 million, or 11.0%, in 2020. This increase was primarily due to the origination of PPP loans and acquired growth from the Steuben and Kinderhook acquisitions. FTE-basis loan interest income and fees increased $6.4 million, or 2.1%, in 2020 as compared to 2019, attributable to the higher average balances partially offset by a 39 basis point decrease in the loan yield primarily due to the impact of lower market rates during 2020. Investment interest income (FTE basis) in 2020 was $2.9 million, or 3.6%, lower than the prior year as a result of a 68 basis point decrease in average investment yield, partially offset by a $972.2 million increase in the average book basis balance of investments, including cash equivalents. The lower average investment yield in 2020 was reflective of deposit inflows and cash flows from higher rate maturing instruments in the investment portfolio being reinvested at lower market interest rates or held in low-rate interest-earning cash. The higher average investment book balance is inclusive of the $179.7 million of available-for-sale securities and $0.8 million of equity and other securities acquired with the Steuben transaction.
Total interest expense decreased by $7.9 million, or 37.7%, to $13.0 million in 2021 from $20.9 million in 2020. As shown in Table 4, lower interest rates on interest-bearing liabilities resulted in a decrease in interest expense of $10.8 million, while higher deposit balances resulted in a $2.9 million increase in interest expense. Interest expense as a percentage of average earning assets for 2021 decreased eight basis points to 0.10%. The rate on interest-bearing deposits of 0.14% was nine basis points lower than 2020, primarily due to a decrease in certain product rates in response to changes in market interest rates during the year. The rate on borrowings decreased 79 basis points to 0.48% in 2021, primarily due to the decrease in the proportion of subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts resulting from the redemption of $77.3 million of trust preferred subordinated debt carrying a floating rate of 3-month LIBOR plus 1.65% in the first quarter of 2021. Total average funding balances (deposits and borrowings) in 2021 increased $1.93 billion, or 18.1%. Average deposits increased $1.97 billion, driven by large net inflows of funds from government stimulus and PPP programs. Average non-time deposit balances increased $1.95 billion and accounted for 92.2% of total average deposits compared to 90.9% in 2020, due largely to the aforementioned net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs primarily being held in non-time accounts in the low interest rate environment. Average time deposits increased $21.6 million year-over-year and represented 7.8% of total average deposits for 2021 compared to 9.1% in 2020. Average external borrowings decreased $35.8 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, due to decreases in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts of $62.4 million, average subordinated notes payable of $9.2 million and average FHLB borrowings of $6.7 million, partially offset by an increase in average customer repurchase agreements of $42.5 million. The decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts was due to the redemption of $77.3 million of trust preferred subordinated debt as discussed previously and the decrease in average subordinated notes payable was due to the redemption of $10.4 million of subordinated notes payable assumed from the Kinderhook acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Total interest expense decreased by $5.7 million, or 21.4%, to $20.9 million in 2020 from $26.6 million in 2019. As shown in Table 4, lower interest rates on interest-bearing liabilities resulted in a decrease in interest expense of $9.2 million, while higher deposit balances resulted in a $3.5 million increase in interest expense. Interest expense as a percentage of average earning assets for 2020 decreased nine basis points to 0.18%. The rate on interest-bearing deposits of 0.23% was nine basis points lower than 2019, primarily due to a decrease in certain product rates in response to changes in market interest rates during the year. The rate on borrowings decreased 59 basis points to 1.27% in 2020, primarily due to the decrease in the average variable rate paid on subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts and customer repurchase agreements. Total average funding balances (deposits and borrowings) in 2020 increased $1.60 billion, or 17.6%. Average deposits increased $1.60 billion, driven by large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and acquired growth from the Steuben acquisition. Average non-time deposit balances increased $1.51 billion and accounted for 90.9% of total average deposits compared to 90.3% in 2019, due to the aforementioned net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and the addition of $419.8 million in non-time deposit balances with the Steuben acquisition. Average time deposits increased by $92.8 million year-over-year, including $96.4 million in time deposits from the Steuben acquisition. Average time deposits represented 9.1% of total average deposits for 2020 compared to 9.7% in 2019. Average external borrowings decreased $3.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to a decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts of $14.4 million, partially offset by an increase in average subordinated notes payable of $6.0 million, an increase in average customer repurchase agreements of $4.0 million and an increase in average FHLB borrowings of $1.2 million. The decrease in average subordinated debt held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts is due to the redemption of trust preferred debt held by MBVT Statutory Trust I and Kinderhook Capital Trust during the third quarter of 2019 for a total of $22.7 million, partially offset by a partial year of subordinated debt assumed with the Steuben acquisition. The Company assumed $6.0 million of FHLB borrowings and $2.1 million of subordinated notes held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts from the Steuben acquisition. The subordinated notes held by unconsolidated subsidiary trusts assumed from the Steuben acquisition were redeemed in the third quarter of 2020 and $10.4 million of subordinated notes payable assumed from the Kinderhook acquisition were redeemed in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The following table sets forth information related to average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and their associated yields and rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Interest income and yields are on a fully tax-equivalent basis using marginal income tax rates of 24.3% and 24.0% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Average balances are computed by totaling the daily ending balances in a period and dividing by the number of days in that period. Loan interest income and yields include loan fees and acquired loan accretion. Average loan balances include acquired loan purchase discounts and premiums, nonaccrual loans and loans held for sale.
Table 3: Average Balance Sheet
(1) Averages for investment securities are based on historical cost and the yields do not give effect to changes in fair value that is reflected as a component of noninterest-earning assets, shareholders’ equity and deferred taxes.
(2) Includes nonaccrual loans. The Company wrote off an immaterial amount of accrued interest on nonaccrual loans by reversing interest income in 2021.
(3) The fully-tax equivalent adjustment represents taxes that would have been paid had nontaxable investment securities and loans been taxable. The adjustment attempts to enhance the comparability of the performance of assets that have different tax liabilities.
As discussed above, the change in net interest income (fully tax-equivalent basis) may be analyzed by segregating the volume and rate components of the changes in interest income and interest expense for each underlying category.
Table 4: Rate/Volume
(1) The change in interest due to both rate and volume has been allocated to volume and rate changes in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of such change in each component.
(2) Changes due to volume and rate are computed from the respective changes in average balances and rates of the totals; they are not a summation of the changes of the components.
Exclusive of the impact of PPP loans, the Company expects its 2022 net interest margin to remain below pre-pandemic results due to the significant and precipitous drop in the overnight Federal Funds and Prime interest rates in early 2020 that have remained in effect in 2021. While the overnight Federal Funds and Prime interest rates are expected to begin to rise during 2022, in the near term expected decreases in average earning asset yields are unlikely to be fully offset by the deployment of excess cash and cash equivalents into investment securities and expected decreases in the average cost of funds. Although the stated interest rate on PPP loans is fixed at 1.00%, the Company’s recognition of the interest income on origination fees, net of deferred origination costs, on PPP loans will likely cause earning asset yield volatility as loans are forgiven by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The Company expects to recognize the majority of its remaining net deferred PPP fees totaling $3.1 million through interest income during the first and second quarters of 2022.
Noninterest Revenues
The Company’s sources of noninterest revenues are of four primary types: 1) general banking services related to loans, including mortgage banking, deposits and other core customer activities typically provided through the branch network and digital banking channels (performed by CBNA); 2) employee benefit trust, collective investment fund, transfer agency, actuarial and benefit plan administration services (performed by BPAS and its subsidiaries); 3) wealth management services, comprised of trust services (performed by the trust unit within CBNA), broker-dealer and investment advisory products and services (performed by CISI, Wealth Partners and Carta Group) and asset management services (performed by Nottingham); and 4) insurance and risk management products and services (performed by OneGroup). Additionally, the Company periodically generates noninterest revenues from investing and borrowing activities, including unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, realized gains or losses from the sale of investment securities and gains or losses on debt extinguishment.
Table 5: Noninterest Revenues
(1) For purposes of this ratio noninterest revenues excludes unrealized gain or loss on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment and net gain on sales of investment securities. Operating revenues, a non-GAAP measure, is defined as net interest income on a fully-tax equivalent basis, plus noninterest revenues, excluding unrealized gain or loss on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment, net gain on sales of investment securities and acquired non-PCD loan accretion. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP measures.
As displayed in Table 5, total noninterest revenues, excluding unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities and gain on debt extinguishment, increased $18.2 million, or 8.0%, to $246.2 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase was comprised of increases in employee benefit services revenues, wealth management and insurance services revenues, and debit interchange and ATM fees, partially offset by decreases in mortgage banking revenues, other banking revenues and deposit service charges and fees. Noninterest revenues, excluding unrealized gain on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment and gain on the sale of investment securities, increased by $2.3 million, or 1.0%, to $228.0 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase was comprised of an increase in mortgage banking revenues, growth in revenue from the Company’s employee benefit services businesses, an increase in wealth management and insurance services revenue and an increase in debit interchange and ATM fees, partially offset by a decrease in deposit service charges and fees and other banking revenues.
Noninterest revenues as a percent of operating revenues (FTE basis) were 39.7% in 2021, up from 38.3% in the prior year. The current year increase was due to an 8.0% increase in noninterest revenues mentioned above, while adjusted net interest income (FTE basis) increased 1.5% driven by significant earnings asset growth that was mostly offset by a lower net interest margin. The decrease in this ratio from 38.7% in 2019 to 38.3% in 2020 was driven by the 2.5% increase in adjusted net interest income (FTE basis) driven by significant earnings asset growth, while noninterest revenues increased by the 1.0% mentioned above.
A portion of the Company’s noninterest revenue is comprised of the wide variety of fees earned from general banking services provided through the branch network, digital banking channels, mortgage banking and other banking services, which totaled $64.7 million in 2021, a decrease of $1.8 million, or 2.7%, from the prior year. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in mortgage banking revenues as the Company is currently holding the majority of its new consumer mortgage production in portfolio due to a change in its strategy, and declines in deposit service charges and fees and other banking revenues including a reduction in overdraft fees in part due to the higher average deposit balances resulting from government stimulus program inflows. This was partially offset by an increase in debit interchange and ATM fees, reflective of increased transaction activity including the impact of a full year of activity resulting from the addition of new deposit relationships from the Steuben acquisition in 2020. Fees from general banking services were $66.4 million in 2020, a decrease of $4.1 million, or 5.8%, from 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by decreases in deposit services charges and fees and other banking revenues due to a precipitous drop in deposit transaction activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase in mortgage banking revenues, reflective of the Company’s decision to sell certain secondary market eligible residential mortgage loans during 2020 and the benefit derived from interest rate movements. In addition, debit interchange and ATM fees increased, reflective of the addition of new deposit relationships from the Kinderhook and Steuben acquisitions.
As disclosed in Table 5, noninterest revenue from financial services (revenues from employee benefit services, wealth management services and insurance services) increased $20.0 million, or 12.4%, in 2021 to $181.6 million. In 2021, financial services revenue accounted for 74% of total noninterest revenues, as compared to 71% in 2020. Employee benefit services generated revenue of $114.3 million in 2021 that reflected growth of $13.0 million, or 12.8%, primarily related to increases in employee benefit trust and custodial fees, as well as incremental revenues from the acquisition of FBD during the third quarter of 2021. Employee benefit services generated revenue of $101.3 million in 2020 that reflected growth of $4.2 million, or 4.3%, over 2019 revenues primarily due to organic increases in plan administration, recordkeeping and trustee fees.
Wealth management and insurance services revenues increased $7.0 million, or 11.6%, in 2021 due to a $5.4 million increase in wealth management services revenues primarily driven by increases in investment management and trust services revenues due to the addition of new relationships, higher equity market valuations and a $1.6 million increase in insurance services revenues attributable to incremental revenues from the acquisitions of TGA during the third quarter of 2021 and NuVantage during the second quarter of 2021 as well as organic expansion. Wealth management and insurance services revenues increased $2.2 million, or 3.8%, in 2020 from the prior year due to a $2.0 million increase in wealth management services revenues and a $0.2 million increase in insurance services revenues attributable to organic growth in both categories.
Employee benefit trust assets increased $13.4 billion to $120.3 billion for the employee benefit services segment in 2021 as compared to 2020 due primarily to organic growth in the collective investment trust business and market appreciation. Assets under management increased $887.6 million to $8.5 billion for the wealth management businesses at year end 2021 as compared to one year earlier due to organic growth and market appreciation. Trust assets within the Company’s employee benefit services segment increased $17.7 billion to $107.0 billion at the end of 2020 as compared to 2019 due primarily to organic growth in the collective investment trust business and market appreciation. Assets under management within the Company’s wealth management services segment increased to $7.7 billion at the end of 2020, up $1.1 billion from year-end 2019 due to organic growth and market appreciation.
The Company expects to re-evaluate its deposit offerings and associated deposit services charges and fees in 2022 and is uncertain to whether any resulting modifications will have a material impact to banking noninterest revenues. The pending Elmira acquisition is expected to provide incremental deposit service charges and fees revenue and debit interchange and ATM fees revenue once completed.
Noninterest Expenses
As shown in Table 6, noninterest expenses of $388.1 million in 2021 were $11.6 million, or 3.1%, higher than 2020, primarily reflective of an increase in salaries and employee benefits driven by increases in merit and incentive-related employee compensation, higher payroll taxes, including increases in state-related unemployment taxes, higher employee benefit-related expenses, including significant increases in employee medical benefit costs, and staffing increases due to recent acquisitions. Other factors included an increase in data processing and communications expenses associated with the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems, and an increase in other expenses due to the general increase in the level of business activities, including increases in professional fees and travel-related expenses, partially offset by a decrease in acquisition-related expenses and a decrease in litigation accrual expenses. Noninterest expenses in 2020 increased $4.5 million, or 1.2%, from 2019 to $376.5 million, primarily reflective of an increase in salaries and employee benefits driven by merit-related increases in employee wages and a net increase in full-time equivalent employees between the periods, an increase in data processing and communications expenses associated with the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems, the additional expenses associated with operating an expanded branch network subsequent to the Kinderhook and Steuben transactions and the $3.0 million in one-time litigation accrual expenses incurred in 2020, partially offset by lower acquisition-related expenses and a decline in other expenses due to the general decrease in the level of business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets) as a percent of average assets for 2021 was 2.52%, a decrease of 23 basis points from 2.75% in 2020 and 63 basis points lower than 3.15% in 2019. The decrease in this ratio for 2021 was due to a 5.3% increase in operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets), while average assets grew by 15.0% due primarily to large net inflows of funds related to government stimulus programs and PPP loan originations. The decrease in this ratio for 2020 from 2019 was due to a 2.0% increase in operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets), while average assets grew by 16.8% due primarily to large net inflows of funds related to government stimulus programs, PPP loan originations and the acquisitions of Steuben and Kinderhook.
The efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, a performance measurement tool widely used by banks, is defined by the Company as operating expenses (excluding acquisition expenses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, litigation accrual and amortization of intangible assets) divided by operating revenue (fully tax-equivalent net interest income plus noninterest revenue, excluding acquired non-PCD loan accretion, unrealized gain (loss) on equity securities, net gain on sales of investment securities and gain on debt extinguishment). Lower ratios correlate to higher operating efficiency. The 2021 efficiency ratio of 60.2% was 0.6% higher than the 2020 efficiency ratio of 59.6% as the 5.3% increase in operating expenses, as defined above, grew at a slightly faster pace than the 4.2% increase in operating revenue, comprised of a 1.5% increase in adjusted net interest income and an 8.0% increase in adjusted noninterest revenue. The 2020 efficiency ratio of 59.6% was consistent with 2019 as the 2.1% increase in operating revenue, comprised of a 2.8% increase in adjusted net interest income and a 1.0% increase in adjusted noninterest revenue, grew at a slightly faster pace than the 2.0% increase in operating expenses, as defined above. See Table 14 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Table 6: Noninterest Expenses
(1) Operating expenses are total noninterest expenses excluding acquisition expenses, acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment, litigation accrual, and amortization of intangible assets. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
(2) Efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, is calculated as operating expenses as defined in footnote (1) above divided by net interest income on a fully tax-equivalent basis excluding acquired non-PCD loan accretion plus noninterest revenues excluding unrealized gain or loss on equity securities, gain on debt extinguishment and net gain on sales of investment securities. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures.
Salaries and employee benefits increased $13.1 million, or 5.7%, in 2021, driven by increases in merit and incentive-related employee compensation, higher payroll taxes, including increases in state-related unemployment taxes and higher employee benefit-related expenses including significant increases in employee medical benefit costs. Salaries and employee benefits increased $8.5 million, or 3.9%, in 2020 from 2019, driven by merit-related increases in employee wages and a net increase in full-time equivalent employees between the periods, due to both the Kinderhook acquisition in early third quarter 2019 and the Steuben acquisition in the second quarter of 2020, but were partially offset by lower employee benefit expenses primarily associated with a decrease in employee medical expenses due to reduced provider utilization. Total full-time equivalent staff at the end of 2021 was 2,743 compared to 2,829 at December 31, 2020 and 2,763 at the end of 2019. See Note K to the financial statements for further information about the pension plan.
Total non-personnel, noninterest expenses, excluding one-time acquisition-related and litigation accrual expenses, increased $5.6 million, or 4.0%, in 2021, reflective of the general increase in the level of business activities. Increases in data processing and communications, occupancy and equipment, legal and professional fees and other expenses were partially offset by decreases in amortization of intangible assets and business development and marketing. The increase in data processing and communications expenses was primarily due to the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems. Occupancy and equipment increased due to the Steuben acquisition and inflationary pressures, partially offset by the effects of branch consolidations undertaken in 2021. Legal and professional fees and other expenses, including travel and entertainment, were up during 2021 as compared to 2020 as the general amount of business activities increased to levels more consistent with pre-pandemic conditions. Total non-personnel, noninterest expenses, excluding one-time acquisition and litigation accrual expenses, decreased $3.2 million, or 2.3%, in 2020 from 2019, reflective of the general decrease in the level of business activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Decreases in other expenses, business development and marketing, and amortization of intangible assets were partially offset by increases in data processing and communications, occupancy and equipment and legal and professional fees. Other expenses and business development and marketing decreased and were most heavily impacted by the diminished level of business activities that resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic, including travel and entertainment. The increase in data processing and communications expenses was due to the Steuben acquisition and the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems during 2020.
Acquisition-related expenses for 2021 totaled $0.9 million, including $0.6 million associated with the pending Elmira acquisition, $0.1 million associated with the financial services acquisitions completed in 2021 and a $0.2 million acquisition-related contingent consideration adjustment associated with the FBD acquisition. Acquisition expenses for 2020 totaled $4.9 million, including $4.7 million associated with the Steuben acquisition and $0.2 million associated with the Kinderhook acquisition. Acquisition expenses for 2019 totaled $8.6 million, including $8.0 million associated with the Kinderhook acquisition and $0.6 million associated with the Steuben acquisition.
The Company recorded $3.0 million in litigation accrual in 2020 related to a settlement of a purported class action lawsuit regarding the Bank’s deposit account terms and overdraft disclosures. The settlement was approved for $2.9 million which was paid in the third quarter of 2021, resulting in a $0.1 million adjustment to the Company’s litigation accrual in 2021.
While the Company remains focused on managing operating expense growth, the Company expects operating expenses to increase modestly in 2022 as compared to 2021 due to the continued resumption of certain marketing and business and employee development endeavors that were suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic, higher wage and benefit costs, inflationary pressures, continued investment in the implementation of new customer-facing digital technologies and back office systems, and incremental expenses associated with operating an expanded branch network as a result of the pending Elmira acquisition once completed.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates its income tax expense based on the amount it expects to owe the respective taxing authorities, plus the impact of deferred tax items. Taxes are discussed in more detail in Note I of the Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page 108. Accrued taxes represent the net estimated amount due or to be received from taxing authorities. In estimating accrued taxes, management assesses the relative merits and risks of the appropriate tax treatment of transactions, taking into account statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance in the context of the Company’s tax position. If the final resolution of taxes payable differs from its estimates due to regulatory determination or legislative or judicial actions, adjustments to tax expense may be required.
The effective tax rate for 2021 was 21.4%, compared to 20.1% in 2020 and 19.2% in 2019. The increase in the effective rate for 2021, compared to the effective tax rate for 2020, is primarily attributable to an increase in certain state income taxes that were enacted between the periods and a decrease in the proportion of tax-exempt revenues in relation to total revenues. The increase in the effective rate for 2020, compared to the effective tax rate for 2019, is primarily attributable to a decrease in tax benefits related to stock-based compensation activity and the impact of changes in state apportionment.
Shareholders’ Equity
Shareholders’ equity ended 2021 at $2.10 billion, down $3.3 million, or 0.2%, from the end of 2020. This decrease reflects a $112.7 million decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income, common stock dividends declared of $91.6 million and common stock repurchased of $4.8 million. These decreases were partially offset by net income of $189.7 million, $9.8 million from the issuance of shares through employee stock plans and $6.3 million from stock-based compensation. The change in accumulated other comprehensive income was comprised of a $126.1 million decrease due to changes in the unrealized gains and losses in the Company’s available-for-sale investment portfolio, partially offset by a positive $13.4 million adjustment in the overfunded status of the Company’s employee retirement plans. Excluding accumulated other comprehensive income in both 2021 and 2020, shareholders’ equity increased by $109.4 million, or 5.4%. Shares outstanding increased by 0.3 million during the year due to share issuances under the employee stock plans and deferred compensation arrangements, partially offset by 0.1 million shares repurchased during 2021.
Shareholders’ equity ended 2020 at $2.10 billion, up $248.9 million, or 13.4%, from the end of 2019. This increase reflects net income of $164.7 million, $76.9 million from the issuance of shares as consideration for the Steuben acquisition, $15.8 million from the issuance of shares through the employee stock plans, $6.4 million from stock-based compensation, $1.1 million from the implementation of ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), also referred to as CECL, on January 1, 2020, $0.1 million for treasury stock issued to the Company’s 401(k) plan and a $72.3 million increase in accumulated other comprehensive income. These increases were partially offset by common stock dividends declared of $88.5 million. The change in accumulated other comprehensive income was comprised of a $66.3 million increase due to changes in the unrealized gains and losses in the Company’s available-for-sale investment portfolio and a positive $6.0 million adjustment in the overfunded status of the Company’s employee retirement plans. Excluding accumulated other comprehensive income in both 2020 and 2019, shareholders’ equity increased by $176.6 million, or 9.5%. Shares outstanding increased by 1.8 million during the year due to the issuance of 1.4 million shares of common stock as consideration for the Steuben acquisition and share issuances under the employee stock plan, deferred compensation arrangements and to the Company’s 401(k) plan.
The Company’s ratio of ending tier 1 capital to adjusted quarterly average assets (or tier 1 leverage ratio), a primary measure for which regulators have established a 5% minimum for an institution to be considered “well-capitalized,” decreased 1.07 percentage points from the prior year to end the year at 9.09%. This was the result of an increase of 13.1% in average adjusted net assets (excludes investment market value adjustment and intangible assets net of related deferred tax liabilities) driven by significant deposit inflows related to government stimulus programs, while tier 1 capital increased by 1.3% from the prior year, including the impact of the first quarter of 2021 redemption of $77.3 million of trust preferred subordinated debt held by Community Capital Trust IV, an unconsolidated subsidiary trust, which qualified as tier 1 capital. For additional financial information on the Company’s regulatory capital, refer to Note P - Regulatory Matters in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The tangible equity-to-tangible assets ratio, a non-GAAP measure, was 8.69% at the end of 2021 versus 9.92% one year earlier. See Table 16 for Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures. The decrease was due to tangible common shareholders’ equity decreasing by 1.6% from the prior year primarily due to a $126.1 million decline in the after-tax market value adjustment on the Company’s available-for-sale investment securities portfolio due to higher market interest rates, while tangible assets increased 12.2% from the prior year. The Company manages organic and acquired growth in a manner that enables it to continue to maintain and grow its capital base and maintain its ability to take advantage of future strategic growth opportunities.
Cash dividends declared on common stock in 2021 of $91.6 million represented an increase of 3.5% over the prior year. This growth was a result of a $0.04 increase in dividends per share for the year and the increase in outstanding shares as noted above. Dividends per share for 2021 of $1.70 represents a 2.4% increase from $1.66 in 2020, a result of quarterly dividends per share increasing from $0.41 to $0.42, or 2.4%, in the third quarter of 2020 and from $0.42 to $0.43, or 2.4%, in the third quarter of 2021. The 2021 increase in quarterly dividends marked the 29th consecutive year of dividend increases for the Company. The dividend payout ratio for this year was 48.3% compared to 53.7% in 2020, and 48.4% in 2019. The dividend payout ratio decreased during 2021 because net income increased 15.2% while dividends declared increased 3.5% from 2020.
Liquidity
Liquidity risk is a measure of the Company’s ability to raise cash when needed at a reasonable cost and minimize any loss. The Company maintains appropriate liquidity levels in both normal operating environments as well as stressed environments. The Company must be capable of meeting all obligations to its customers at any time and, therefore, the active management of its liquidity position remains an important management objective. The Bank has appointed the Asset Liability Committee (“ALCO”) to manage liquidity risk using policy guidelines and limits on indicators of potential liquidity risk. The indicators are monitored using a scorecard with three risk level limits. These risk indicators measure core liquidity and funding needs, capital at risk and change in available funding sources. The risk indicators are monitored using such metrics as the core basic surplus ratio, unencumbered securities to average assets, free loan collateral to average assets, loans to deposits, deposits to total funding and borrowings to total funding ratios.
Given the uncertain nature of the Company’s customers' demands, as well as the Company's desire to take advantage of earnings enhancement opportunities, the Company must have adequate sources of on and off-balance sheet funds available that can be utilized in time of need. Accordingly, in addition to the liquidity provided by balance sheet cash flows, liquidity must be supplemented with additional sources such as credit lines from correspondent banks and borrowings from the FHLB and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (“Federal Reserve”). Other funding alternatives may also be appropriate from time to time, including wholesale and retail repurchase agreements, large certificates of deposit and the brokered CD market. The primary source of non-deposit funds is FHLB overnight advances, of which there were no outstanding borrowings at December 31, 2021.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are its liquid assets, as well as unencumbered loans and securities that can be used to collateralize additional funding. At December 31, 2021, the Bank had $1.88 billion of cash and cash equivalents of which $1.72 billion are interest-earning deposits held at the Federal Reserve, FHLB and other correspondent banks. The Company also had $1.71 billion in unused FHLB borrowing capacity based on the Company’s quarter-end loan collateral levels and maintained $247.7 million of funding availability at the Federal Reserve’s discount window. Additionally, the Company has $2.80 billion of unencumbered securities that could be pledged at the FHLB or Federal Reserve to obtain additional funding. There was $25.0 million available in unsecured lines of credit with other correspondent banks at the end of 2021.
The Company’s primary approach to measuring short-term liquidity is known as the Basic Surplus/Deficit model. It is used to calculate liquidity over two time periods: first, the amount of cash that could be made available within 30 days (calculated as liquid assets less short-term liabilities as a percentage of average assets); and second, a projection of subsequent cash availability over an additional 60 days. As of December 31, 2021, this ratio was 26.6% for both 30 and 90 days, excluding the Company's capacity to borrow additional funds from the FHLB and other sources. This is considered to be a sufficient amount of liquidity based on the Company’s internal policy requirement of 7.5%.
A sources and uses statement is used by the Company to measure intermediate liquidity risk over the next twelve months. As of December 31, 2021, there is more than enough liquidity available during the next year to cover projected cash outflows. In addition, stress tests on the cash flows are performed in various scenarios ranging from high probability events with a low impact on the liquidity position to low probability events with a high impact on the liquidity position. The results of the stress tests as of December 31, 2021 indicate the Company has sufficient sources of funds for the next year in all simulated stressed scenarios.
To measure longer-term liquidity, a baseline projection of loan and deposit growth for five years is made to reflect how liquidity levels could change over time. This five-year measure reflects ample liquidity for loan and other asset growth over the next five years.
Though remote, the possibility of a funding crisis exists at all financial institutions. Accordingly, management has addressed this issue by formulating a Liquidity Contingency Plan, which has been reviewed and approved by both the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) and the Company’s ALCO. The plan addresses the actions that the Company would take in response to both a short-term and long-term funding crisis.
A short-term funding crisis would most likely result from a shock to the financial system, either internal or external, which disrupts orderly short-term funding operations. Such a crisis would likely be temporary in nature and would not involve a change in credit ratings. A long-term funding crisis would most likely be the result of drastic credit deterioration at the Company. Management believes that both potential circumstances have been fully addressed through detailed action plans and the establishment of trigger points for monitoring such events.
Intangible Assets
The changes in intangible assets by reporting segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 are summarized as follows:
Table 7: Intangible Assets
Intangible assets at the end of 2021 totaled $864.3 million, an increase of $17.7 million from the prior year due to the addition of $5.4 million of goodwill and $26.3 million of other intangibles arising from acquisition activity, partially offset by $14.0 million of amortization during the year. The additional goodwill and other intangibles recorded in 2021 resulted from the NuVantage, TGA and FBD acquisitions and a $0.3 million adjustment to goodwill from the Steuben acquisition that occurred in 2020. Goodwill represents the excess cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Goodwill at December 31, 2021 totaled $799.1 million, comprised of $689.9 million related to banking acquisitions and $109.2 million arising from the acquisition of financial services businesses. Goodwill is subject to periodic impairment analysis to determine whether the carrying value of the identified businesses exceeds their fair value, which would necessitate a write-down of goodwill. The Company completed its goodwill impairment analyses as of December 31, 2021 and no adjustments were necessary for the banking or financial services businesses. The impairment analyses were based upon discounted cash flow modeling techniques that require management to make estimates regarding the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. It also requires the selection of discount rates that reflect the current return characteristics of the market in relation to present risk-free interest rates, estimated equity market premiums and company-specific performance and risk indicators. Furthermore, during 2021 and 2020, the Company performed quarterly qualitative analyses of goodwill impairment and performed a quantitative assessment of its insurance subsidiary included in the All Other segment during the fourth quarter of 2020 and concluded no adjustments were necessary for the banking or financial services businesses. The qualitative analyses performed in 2021 and 2020 included assessments of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, other relevant entity-specific events and changes in share price. The Company expects to conduct qualitative and quantitative goodwill impairment analyses for all applicable business entities for the 2022 operating period. Management believes that there is a low probability of future impairment with regard to the goodwill associated with its whole-bank, branch and financial services business acquisitions.
Core deposit intangibles represent the value of acquired non-time deposits in excess of funding that could have been obtained in the capital markets. Core deposit intangibles are amortized on either an accelerated or straight-line basis over periods ranging from seven to twenty years. The recognition of customer relationship intangibles was determined based on a methodology that calculates the present value of the projected future net income derived from the acquired customer base. These customer relationship intangibles are being amortized on an accelerated basis over periods ranging from eight to twelve years.
Loans
Gross loans outstanding of $7.37 billion as of December 31, 2021 decreased $42.3 million, or 0.6%, compared to December 31, 2020, reflecting decreases in business lending, due primarily to forgiveness of PPP loans, and home equity portfolios, partially offset by increases in the consumer indirect, consumer mortgage, and consumer direct portfolios. Excluding PPP loans, gross loans outstanding increased $334.5 million, or 4.8%, compared to December 31, 2020. The non-PPP loan growth in the loan portfolio during 2021 was primarily attributable to the organic origination of consumer mortgages and consumer indirect loans. Gross loans outstanding of $7.42 billion as of December 31, 2020 increased $525.4 million, or 7.6%, compared to December 31, 2019, reflecting growth in the business lending and home equity portfolios, partially offset by decreases in the consumer indirect, consumer direct, and consumer mortgage portfolios. The growth in the loan portfolio during 2020 was primarily attributable to the origination of PPP loans and the Steuben acquisition. Excluding loans acquired from Steuben, loans increased $185.7 million, or 2.7%.
The compounded annual growth rate (“CAGR”) for the Company’s total loan portfolio between 2016 and 2021 was 8.3%. The greatest overall expansion occurred in business loans, which grew at a 15.6% CAGR driven mostly by acquisitions during the five year period and PPP loan originations in 2020 and 2021. The consumer mortgage portfolio grew at a compounded annual growth rate of 7.0% from 2016 to 2021. The consumer installment segment, including indirect and direct loans, grew at a CAGR of 1.7%. The home equity lending segment declined at a compounded annual growth rate of 0.2% from 2016 to 2021, including the impact from acquisitions.
The weighting of the components of the Company’s loan portfolio enables it to be highly diversified. Approximately 58% of loans outstanding at the end of 2021 were made to consumers borrowing on an installment, line of credit or residential mortgage loan basis. The business lending portfolio is also broadly diversified by industry type as demonstrated by the following distributions at year-end 2021: commercial real estate (45%), restaurant & lodging (10%), general services (9%), healthcare (6%), retail trade (6%), manufacturing (6%), construction (3%), agriculture (3%) and motor vehicle and parts dealers (3%). A variety of other industries with less than a 3% share of the total portfolio comprise the remaining 9%.
The combined total of general-purpose business lending to commercial, industrial, non-profit and municipal customers, mortgages on commercial property and vehicle dealer floor plan financing is characterized as the Company’s business lending activity. The business lending portfolio decreased $364.2 million, or 10.6%, in 2021 primarily due to the forgiveness of PPP loans by the SBA. Excluding PPP loans, the business lending portfolio increased $12.7 million, or 0.4%, between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021. The business lending portfolio increased $664.2 million, or 23.9%, between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 due to the origination of PPP loans and loans acquired in the Steuben transaction. Excluding loans from the Steuben acquisition, the portfolio increased $410.7 million, or 14.8%, in 2020. Highly competitive conditions for business lending continue to prevail in both the digital marketplace and geographic regions in which the Company operates. The Company strives to generate growth in its business portfolio in a manner that adheres to its goals of maintaining strong asset quality and producing profitable margins. The Company continues to invest in additional personnel, technology, and business development resources to further strengthen its capabilities in this important product category.
The following table shows the maturities and type of interest rates for loans as of December 31, 2021:
Table 8: Maturity Distribution of Loans (1)
(1) Scheduled repayments are reported in the maturity category in which the payment is due.
The Company participated in both rounds of the PPP, a specialized low-interest loan program funded by the U.S. Treasury Department and administered by the SBA, including lending pursuant to the 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Security Act’s (“CARES Act”), now known as first draw loans. In addition, the Company participated in the 2021 Consolidated Appropriations Act’s (“CAA”) PPP loan program, now known as second draw loans. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s business lending portfolio included 32 first draw PPP loans with a total balance of $10.7 million and 690 second draw PPP loans with a total balance of $77.2 million. This compares to 3,417 first draw PPP loans with a total balance of $470.7 million at December 31, 2020.
The consumer mortgage loans include no exposure to high-risk mortgage products and are comprised of fixed (99%) and adjustable rate (1%) residential lending. Consumer mortgages increased $154.6 million, or 6.4%, between the end of 2020 and 2021, driven by low market rates and strong housing demand and includes the impact of selling $20.1 million of consumer mortgage production to the secondary market. Consumer mortgages decreased $29.4 million, or 1.2%, between the end of 2019 and 2020, including $26.7 million of loans acquired with the Steuben acquisition and the impact of selling $79.7 million of consumer mortgage production to the secondary market. With the precipitous drop in mortgage interest rates during the latter half of the first quarter of 2020, coupled with strong housing prices and demand in the Company’s primary markets, the Company experienced large volumes of mortgage refinance and origination activity in 2021 and 2020 and intense competition in the marketplace to capture this business. Interest rate levels, secondary market premiums, expected duration and ALCO strategies continue to be the most significant factors in determining whether the Company chooses to retain, versus sell and service, portions of its new mortgage production. The Company is currently holding the majority of its new consumer mortgage production in portfolio due to current market conditions. Home equity loans decreased $1.8 million, or 0.4%, during 2021, while home equity loans increased $13.5 million, or 3.5%, during 2020, including $39.6 million of home equity loans acquired with the Steuben transaction. The Company continues to experience paydowns in its home equity portfolio due in part to some consumers using stimulus funds to reduce debt levels and balances being rolled into re-financed first lien consumer mortgages that offer attractive attributes to customers.
Consumer installment loans, both those originated directly in the branches (referred to as “consumer direct”) and indirectly in automobile, marine, and recreational vehicle dealerships (referred to as “consumer indirect”), increased $169.0 million, or 14.4%, from one year ago, including a $167.9 million increase in consumer indirect loans and $1.1 million increase in consumer direct loans, due in large part to increased demand driven by low market interest rates, competitive pricing offered by the Company and higher consumer disposable income because of government stimulus programs and tight labor markets. During 2020, consumer installment loans decreased $122.9 million, or 9.5%, including $19.9 million of consumer installment loans acquired with the Steuben transaction. Strained supplies in all categories, while not impactful enough thus far may stunt growth opportunities and continue to cause elevated collateral values in all indirect collateral categories. Although the consumer indirect loan market is highly competitive, the Company is focused on maintaining a profitable, in-market and contiguous market indirect portfolio, while continuing to pursue the expansion of its dealer network. Consumer direct loans provide attractive returns, and the Company is committed to providing competitive market offerings to its customers in this important loan category. Despite the strong competition the Company faces from the financing subsidiaries of vehicle manufacturers and other financial intermediaries, the Company will continue to strive to grow these key portfolios through varying market conditions over the long term.
The ultimate impact the COVID-19 pandemic will have on loan demand and the Company’s loan balances for 2022 remains uncertain at this time. The Company’s business lending balances will be unfavorably impacted as first draw and second draw PPP loans continue to be forgiven by the SBA. The Company anticipates assisting the majority of its PPP borrowers with forgiveness requests during the first and second quarters of 2022. The longer-term implications that COVID-19 will have on business lending loan demand are presently difficult to predict.
Asset Quality
The Company places a loan on nonaccrual status when the loan becomes 90 days past due, or sooner if management concludes collection of interest is doubtful, except when, in the opinion of management, it is well-collateralized and in the process of collection. Nonperforming loans, defined as nonaccruing loans and accruing loans 90 days or more past due, ended 2021 at $45.5 million. This represents a decrease of $31.4 million from the $76.9 million in nonperforming loans at the end of 2020. The decrease in nonperforming loans was driven by the upgrade of several large business loans from nonaccrual status to accruing status during the fourth quarter of 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2020, several commercial borrowers, which primarily operate in the hospitality, travel and entertainment industries, requested extended loan repayment forbearance due to the continued pandemic-related financial hardship they were experiencing. Although the Company’s management granted these forbearance requests, it also reclassified the majority of these loan relationships from accruing to nonaccrual status, unless the borrower clearly demonstrated current repayment capacity or sufficient cash reserves to service their pre-forbearance payment obligations. Several borrowers in this group successfully restored all past due payments to current status, resumed their pre-forbearance payment obligations for a period of at least six months and demonstrated sufficient repayment capacity and cash reserves to be reclassified to accruing status during the fourth quarter of 2021. The ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans at December 31, 2021 decreased 42 basis points from the prior year to 0.62%. The ratio of nonperforming assets (which includes other real estate owned, or “OREO”, in addition to nonperforming loans) to total loans plus OREO decreased to 0.63% at year-end 2021, down 42 basis points from one year earlier. At December 31, 2021, OREO consisted of two residential properties with a total value of $0.1 million and one commercial real estate property with a total value of $0.6 million. This compares to five residential properties with a total value of $0.3 million and one commercial real estate property with a total value of $0.6 million at December 31, 2020.
From a credit risk and lending perspective, the Company continues to take actions to assess and monitor its COVID-19 related credit exposures. No specific credit impairment has been identified within the Company’s investment securities portfolio, including the Company’s municipal securities portfolio since the onset of the pandemic. With respect to the Company’s lending activities, the Company continues to consider customer forbearance requests to assist borrowers that may be experiencing financial hardship due to COVID-19 related challenges, but such requests diminished significantly in 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had five borrowers in forbearance due to COVID-19 related financial hardship, representing $4.2 million in outstanding loan balances, or 0.1% of total loans outstanding. This compares to 74 borrowers and $66.5 million in outstanding loan balances, or 0.9%, of total loans outstanding in forbearance at December 31, 2020.
Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period. Borrowers that were delinquent in their payments to the Bank prior to requesting a COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferral were reviewed on a case-by-case basis for troubled debt restructure classification and nonperforming loan status.
Approximately 53% of the nonperforming loans at December 31, 2021 are related to the business lending portfolio, which is comprised of business loans broadly diversified by industry type. The level of nonperforming business loans decreased from the prior year due to the upgrade of several large business loans from nonaccrual status to accruing status during the fourth quarter of 2021, as described previously. Approximately 40% of nonperforming loans at December 31, 2021 are related to the consumer mortgage portfolio. Collateral values of residential properties within the Company’s market area have generally remained stable or have increased over the past several years. Additionally, strong economic conditions prior to COVID-19, including lower unemployment levels, positively impacted consumers and had resulted in more favorable nonperforming consumer mortgage ratios. While there was a modest increase in nonperforming loans in the consumer mortgage portfolio as compared to one year earlier, economic conditions impacted by COVID-19, including increased unemployment rates, travel restrictions and state government shutdowns of certain business activities, as well as COVID-19 related delays in foreclosure processes have improved over the past few quarters. The Company will continue to closely monitor the impact that economic conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic could have on its level of delinquent loans, nonperforming assets and ultimately credit-related losses, and proactively engage with our customers to strive to limit the potential losses. The remaining 7% of nonperforming loans relate to consumer installment and home equity loans, with home equity non-performing loan levels being driven by the same factors identified for consumer mortgages. Nonperforming loan levels in these categories have decreased slightly as compared to one year earlier. The allowance for credit losses to nonperforming loans ratio, a general measure of coverage adequacy, was 110% at the end of 2021 compared to 79% at year-end 2020 and 206% at December 31, 2019. The increase in this ratio from one year ago was primarily driven by the decrease in nonperforming business loans as mentioned previously.
The Company’s senior management, special asset officers and lenders review all delinquent and nonaccrual loans and OREO regularly in order to identify deteriorating situations, monitor known problem credits and discuss any needed changes to collection efforts, if warranted. Based on the group’s consensus, a relationship may be assigned a special assets officer or other senior lending officer to review the loan, meet with the borrowers, assess the collateral and recommend an action plan. This plan could include foreclosure, restructuring loans, issuing demand letters or other actions. The Company’s larger criticized credits are also reviewed on a quarterly basis by senior credit administration management, special assets officers and commercial lending management to monitor their status and discuss relationship management plans. Commercial lending management reviews the criticized business loan portfolio on a monthly basis.
Total delinquencies, defined as loans 30 days or more past due or in nonaccrual status, finished the current year at 1.00% of total loans outstanding, compared to 1.50% at the end of 2020. While there were decreases in the delinquent loan levels in all portfolios as compared to one year ago, the overall decrease was primarily driven by the aforementioned upgrade of several large business loans from nonaccrual status to accruing status during the fourth quarter of 2021. Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period and this arrangement expired for most deferrals in the third quarter of 2020. As of year-end 2021, delinquency ratios for business lending, consumer installment loans, consumer mortgages and home equity loans were 0.97%, 0.78%, 1.12%, and 1.15%, respectively. These ratios compare to the year-end 2020 delinquency rates for business lending, consumer installment loans, consumer mortgages and home equity loans of 1.76%, 1.24%, 1.30%, and 1.28%, respectively. The Company believes the decreases in delinquent loan levels has been partially attributable to the extraordinary Federal and State Government financial assistance provided to consumers throughout the pandemic, as well as the funding support to business customers who participated in PPP lending. Delinquency levels, particularly in the 30 to 89 days category, tend to be somewhat volatile due to their seasonal characteristics and measurement at a point in time, and therefore management believes that it is useful to evaluate this ratio over a longer time period. The average quarter-end delinquency ratio for total loans in 2021 was 1.20%, as compared to an average of 1.03% in 2020, and 0.89% in 2019, reflective of the adverse impact that COVID-19 had on certain customers in 2020 and 2021 and the reclassification of certain business loans from accrual to nonaccrual status in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Loans are considered modified in a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) when, due to a borrower’s financial difficulties, the Company makes one or more concessions to the borrower that it would not otherwise consider. These modifications primarily include, among others, an extension of the term of the loan or granting a period with reduced or no principal and/or interest payments, which can be recaptured through payments made over the remaining term of the loan or at maturity. Historically, the Company has created very few TDRs. Regulatory guidance by the OCC requires certain loans that have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy to be reported as TDRs. In accordance with this guidance, loans that have been discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy but not reaffirmed by the borrower are classified as TDRs, irrespective of payment history or delinquency status, even if the repayment terms for the loan have not been otherwise modified and the Company’s lien position against the underlying collateral remains unchanged. Pursuant to that guidance, the Company records a charge-off equal to any portion of the carrying value that exceeds the assessed net realizable value of the collateral. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 81 loans totaling $3.9 million considered to be nonaccruing TDRs and 151 loans totaling $4.3 million considered to be accruing TDRs. This compares to 73 loans totaling $3.2 million considered to be nonaccruing TDRs and 174 loans totaling $3.8 million considered to be accruing TDRs at December 31, 2020. Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were otherwise current on loan payments and granted COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferrals were reported as current loans throughout the first 180 days of the deferral period and were not classified as TDRs. Borrowers that were delinquent in their payments to the Bank prior to requesting a COVID-19 related financial hardship payment deferral were reviewed on a case-by-case basis for TDR classification and nonperforming loan status.
Prediction of future delinquency and credit loss performance is extremely difficult given the uncertainties centering around the evolution of the virus, the efficacy of vaccination programs, the related pace of the full resumption of business activities, and the trajectory of the economic recovery as government assistance programs are phased out. Due to the Company’s continued focus on maintaining safe and sound underwriting standards and the effective utilization of its collection capabilities, the Company expects that its credit performance will eventually return to levels consistent with its average long-term historical results once public health, government intervention and economic conditions return to a more normalized state.
Allowance for credit losses and loan net charge-off ratios for the past two years are as follows:
Table 9: Loan Ratios
Total net charge-offs in 2021 were $2.8 million, $2.1 million less than the prior year due to a decrease in net charge-offs in all four of the Company’s consumer portfolios, partially offset by an increase in net charge-offs in the business lending portfolio. Net charge-offs in 2020 were $2.8 million less than 2019 due to a decrease in net charge-offs in all five of the Company’s portfolios.
Due to the significant increases in average loan balances over time as a result of acquisitions and organic growth, management believes that net charge-offs as a percent of average loans (“net charge-off ratio”) offers the most meaningful representation of charge-off trends. The total net charge-off ratio of 0.04% for 2021 was three basis points lower than the 0.07% ratio from 2020, and eight basis points lower than the 0.12% ratio from 2019. Gross charge-offs as a percentage of average loans were 0.12% in 2021, as compared to 0.15% in 2020, and 0.21% in 2019, evidence of management’s continued focus on maintaining conservative underwriting standards. Recoveries were $6.1 million in 2021, representing 62% of average gross charge-offs for the latest two years, compared to 47% in 2020 and 41% in 2019, reflective of relatively strong price levels for real estate and automobiles in 2021 and the continued effectiveness of the Company’s repossession and disposition capabilities.
Business loan net charge-offs increased in 2021, totaling $1.1 million, or 0.03% of average business loans outstanding, compared to $0.8 million, or 0.02% of the average outstanding balance in 2020, but the business loan net charge-off amount and ratio in 2021 remained well below historical levels. Consumer installment loan net charge-offs decreased to $1.3 million this year from $3.3 million in 2020, with a net charge-off ratio of 0.10% in 2021 and 0.27% in 2020. The dollar amount of consumer mortgage net charge-offs decreased to $0.3 million in 2021 compared to $0.7 million in 2020, with a net charge-off ratio of 0.01% in 2021 compared to 0.03% in 2020. Home equity net charge-offs of $0.1 million decreased $0.1 million in 2021 and the net charge-off ratio decreased one basis point to 0.03%.
Management continually evaluates the credit quality of the Company’s loan portfolio and conducts a formal review of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses on a quarterly basis. The primary components of the loan review process that are used to determine proper allowance levels are collectively evaluated and individually assessed loan loss allocations. Measurement of individually assessed loan loss allocations is typically based on expected future cash flows, collateral values and other factors that may impact the borrower’s ability to repay. Loans with outstanding balances that are greater than $0.5 million are individually assessed for specific loan loss allocations. Consumer mortgages, consumer installment and home equity loans are considered smaller balance homogeneous loans and are evaluated collectively. The Company considers a loan to be individually assessed when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all principal and interest according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement or the loan is delinquent 90 days or more.
Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. Adjustments are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, acquired loans, delinquency levels, risk ratings or term of loans as well as changes in macroeconomic conditions, such as changes in unemployment rates, property values such as home prices, commercial real estate prices and automobile prices, gross domestic product, recession probability and other relevant factors. The segments of the Company’s loan portfolio are disaggregated into classes that allow management to monitor risk and performance. The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective (pool) basis when similar risk characteristics exist, including collateral type, credit ratings/scores, size, duration, interest rate structure, industry, geography, origination vintage and payment structure. In addition to these risk characteristics, the Company considers the portion of acquired loans to the overall segment balance, the change in the volume and terms of originations, differences between the losses incurred in the period used for quantitative modeling and a longer timeframe that includes the previous recession, as well as recent delinquency, charge-off and risk rating trends compared to historical time periods. The Company measures the allowance for credit losses using either the cumulative loss rate method, the line loss method, or the vintage loss rate method, dependent on the loan portfolio class. The allowance levels computed from the collectively evaluated and individually assessed loan loss allocation methods are combined with unallocated allowances, if any, to derive the required allowance for credit losses to be reflected on the consolidated statements of condition.
The provision for credit losses is calculated by subtracting the previous period allowance for credit losses, net of the interim period net charge-offs, from the current required allowance level. This provision is then recorded in the income statement for that period. Members of senior management and the Audit and Compliance Committee of the Board (“Audit Committee”) review the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses quarterly. Management is committed to continually improving the credit assessment and risk management capabilities of the Company and has dedicated the resources necessary to ensure advancement in this critical area of operations.
Acquired loans are reviewed at their acquisition date to determine whether they have experienced a more-than-insignificant credit deterioration since origination. Loans that meet that definition according to the Company’s policy are referred to as purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans. PCD loans are initially recorded at the amount paid. An allowance for credit losses is determined using the same methodology as other loans. The initial allowance for credit losses determined on a collective basis is allocated to individual loans. The sum of the loan’s purchase price and allowance for credit losses becomes its initial amortized cost basis. The difference between the initial amortized cost basis and the par value of the loan is a noncredit discount or premium, which is amortized into interest income over the life of the loan. Subsequent changes to the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit losses. During 2020, the Company recorded $0.7 million of initial allowance for credit losses on PCD loans from the Steuben acquisition.
For acquired loans that are not deemed PCD at acquisition (non-PCD), a fair value adjustment is recorded that includes both credit and interest rate considerations. A provision for credit losses is also recorded at acquisition for the credit considerations on non-PCD loans. Subsequent to the purchase date, the methods utilized to estimate the required allowance for credit losses for these loans are the same as originated loans and subsequent changes to the allowance for credit losses are recorded as provision for (or reversal of) credit losses. During 2020, the Company recorded $3.0 million of initial acquisition-related provision for credit losses related to loans from the Steuben acquisition.
As of December 31, 2021, the net purchase discount related to the $1.02 billion of remaining non-PCD loan balances acquired from Steuben Trust Company in 2020, The National Union Bank of Kinderhook in 2019, Merchants Bank in 2017, Oneida Savings Bank in 2015, HSBC Bank USA, N.A. in 2012, First Niagara Bank, N.A. in 2012, and Wilber National Bank in 2011 was approximately $8.0 million, or 0.78% of that portfolio.
The allowance for credit losses decreased to $49.9 million at the end of 2021 from $60.9 million as of year-end 2020. The $11.0 million decrease was driven by an $8.2 million non-acquisition-related net benefit in the provision for credit losses related to loans, $19.1 million lower than the prior year’s non-acquisition-related provision for credit losses of $10.9 million, reflective of the continued release of reserves in the first three quarters of 2021 as the economic outlook and the loan portfolio’s asset quality profile both steadily improved during that time, and $2.8 million of net charge-offs.
During the first three quarters of 2021, economic forecasts improved significantly due to the state of the post-vaccine economic recovery, which, in combination with elevated real estate and vehicle collateral values, significant declines in pandemic-related payment deferrals and improvements in the loan portfolio’s asset quality profile drove the Company to reduce its allowance for credit losses during the first three quarters of 2021, resulting in net benefits recorded in the provision for credit losses for the first three quarters of the year. Although economic forecasts remained generally stable during the fourth quarter of 2021 despite the rapid spread of the COVID Omicron variant, the Company’s allowance for credit losses increased $0.4 million, resulting in a $2.2 million provision for credit losses in the fourth quarter based in part on a $165.3 million increase in non-PPP loans outstanding during the quarter.
During the first two quarters of 2020, financial conditions deteriorated rapidly as state and local governments shut down a substantial portion of business activities in the Company’s markets and unemployment levels spiked. These conditions drove the Company to build its allowance for credit losses during the first two quarters of 2020 to account for expected life of loan losses in the loan portfolio. During the third quarter of 2020, the economic outlook remained unclear as markets were uncertain as to the efficacy, approval and roll-out of a COVID-19 vaccine and the Company continued to build its allowance for credit losses. During the fourth quarter of 2020, with a greater than anticipated decline in actual unemployment levels, as well as the Federal Government’s approval of a COVID-19 vaccine and Congress’ approval of additional federal stimulus funding, the near-term economic forecast improved significantly driving an improvement in the economic outlook and as a result, a reduction in the Company’s allowance for credit losses during the fourth quarter of 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a net benefit in the provision for credit losses driven by several factors, including a $2.0 million reversal of a previously recorded allowance for credit loss on a purchased credit deteriorated loan, a significant improvement in the economic outlook and a substantial decrease in loans under COVID-19 related forbearance agreements, offset, in part, by a substantial, but anticipated, increase in nonperforming assets and the related specific impairment reserves on a portion of those nonperforming assets.
The ratio of the allowance for credit losses to total loans of 0.68% for year-end 2021 decreased 14 basis points from the 0.82% ratio for year-end 2020, and was down four basis points from the 0.72% ratio for year-end 2019, due in part to the aforementioned steady improvement of the economic outlook and the loan portfolio’s asset quality during 2021, partially offset by non-PPP loan growth of $334.5 million, or 4.8%, during 2021. Management believes the year-end 2021 allowance for credit losses to be adequate. The provision for credit losses as a percentage of average loans was -0.12% in 2021 as compared to 0.20% in 2020 and 0.13% in 2019. The provision for credit losses was -310% of net charge-offs this year versus 286% in 2020 and 108% in 2019. These ratios in the current year were impacted by the $8.8 million net benefit recorded in the provision for credit losses during 2021.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for credit losses by loan category as of the end of the years indicated, as well as the proportional share of each category’s loan balance to total loans. This allocation is based on management’s assessment, as of a given point in time, of the risk characteristics of each of the component parts of the total loan portfolio and is subject to changes when the risk factors of each component part change. The allocation is not indicative of either the specific amounts of the loan categories in which future charge-offs may be taken, nor should it be taken as an indicator of future loss trends. The allocation of the allowance to each category does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in any category.
Table 10: Allowance for Credit Losses by Loan Type
As demonstrated in Table 10 above and discussed previously, business lending and consumer installment carry higher credit risk than residential real estate, and as a result these loans carry allowance for credit losses that cover a higher percentage of their total portfolio balances. The unallocated allowance is maintained for potential inherent losses in the specific portfolios that are not captured due to model imprecision. The unallocated allowance of $1.0 million at year-end 2021 was consistent with December 31, 2020. The changes in year-over-year allowance allocations reflect management’s continued refinement of its loss estimation techniques. However, given the inherent imprecision in the many estimates used in the determination of the allocated portion of the allowance, management remained conservative in the approaches used to establish the overall allowance for credit losses. Management considers the allocated and unallocated portions of the allowance for credit losses to be prudent and reasonable. Furthermore, the Company’s allowance for credit losses is general in nature and is available to absorb losses from any loan category.
Since the ultimate effect the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact of new variants, will have on the Company’s credit losses remains uncertain, the net benefit in the provision for credit losses during 2021 should not be interpreted as a trend or utilized to forecast the provision for, or reversal of, credit losses in future periods. Any improvements in the economic forecast may be offset by higher net charge-off levels, increases in delinquent and nonperforming loan balances, downward shifts of business risk ratings or other factors in future periods.
Funding Sources
The Company utilizes a variety of funding sources to support the interest-earning asset base as well as to achieve targeted growth objectives. Overall funding is comprised of three primary sources that possess a variety of maturity, stability, and price characteristics; deposits of individuals, partnerships and corporations (nonpublic deposits), municipal deposits that are collateralized for amounts not covered by FDIC insurance (public funds), and external borrowings. The average daily amount of deposits and the average rate paid on each of the following deposit categories are summarized below for the years indicated:
Table 11: Average Deposits
As displayed in Table 11, average total deposits in 2021 increased $1.97 billion, or 19.1%, from the prior year comprised of a $1.95 billion, or 20.7%, increase in non-time deposits, and a $21.6 million, or 2.3%, increase in time deposits. The increase in average deposits was primarily due to continued net inflows of deposits, including those associated with additional stimulus payments and a second round of PPP lending. The cost of deposits, including non-interest checking deposit balances, decreased seven basis points from 0.16% in 2020 to 0.09% in 2021.
Total average deposits for 2020 increased $1.60 billion, or 18.3%, from 2019 comprised of a $1.51 billion, or 19.1%, increase in non-time deposits, and a $92.8 million, or 11.0%, increase in time deposits. The increase in average deposits was primarily due to large net inflows of funds from government stimulus programs and the acquisition of Steuben. The Company acquired $516.3 million of deposits from the Steuben acquisition, including $96.5 million of time deposits and $419.8 million of non-time deposits. The cost of deposits, including non-interest checking deposit balances, decreased seven basis points from 0.23% in 2019 to 0.16% in 2020.
Nonpublic, non-time deposits are frequently considered to be a bank’s most attractive source of funding because they are generally stable, do not need to be collateralized, carry a relatively low rate, generate solid fee income, and provide a strong customer base for which a variety of loan, deposit and other financial service-related products can be cross-sold. The Company’s funding composition continues to benefit from a high level of nonpublic deposits, which reached an all-time high in 2021 with an average balance of $10.78 billion, an increase of $1.62 billion, or 17.6%, over the comparable 2020 period. The Company continues to focus on expanding its core deposit relationship base through its competitive product offerings and high quality customer service.
Full-year average public fund deposits increased $354.4 million, or 30.3%, during 2021 to $1.52 billion, impacted by federal and state stimulus program-related support to municipalities to cover COVID-19 expenditures and investments that cover multi-year timeframes. Public fund deposit balances tend to be more volatile than nonpublic deposits because they are heavily impacted by the seasonality of tax collection and fiscal spending patterns, as well as the longer-term financial position of the local government entities, which can change from year to year. However, the Company has many long-standing relationships with municipal entities throughout its markets and the diversified non-time deposits held by these customers have provided an attractive and comparatively stable funding source over an extended time period. The Company is required to collateralize certain local municipal deposits in excess of FDIC coverage with marketable securities from its investment portfolio. Due to this stipulation, as well as the competitive bidding nature of municipal time deposits, management considers this funding source to share some of the same attributes as borrowings.
The mix of average deposits was largely consistent with the prior year. Non-time deposits (noninterest checking, interest checking, savings and money markets) represented approximately 92% of the Company’s average deposit funding base versus 91% last year, while time deposits represent approximately 8% of total average deposits compared to 9% in 2020. The cost of interest-bearing deposits of 0.14% in 2021 was nine basis points lower than the 0.23% cost of interest-bearing deposits in 2020. The total cost of deposit funding, which includes noninterest-bearing deposits, was 0.09% in 2021, a seven basis point decrease from the prior year.
The Company is uncertain as to whether the relatively high levels of deposits in recent periods will be maintained, spent down, or increased further by additional inflows of funds associated with COVID-19 related government stimulus programs.
The remaining maturities of deposits in amounts of $250,000 or more (the FDIC insurance limit) outstanding as of December 31 are as follows:
Table 12: Maturity of Time Deposits $250,000 or More
The total amount of deposits that exceeded the $250,000 insured limit provided by the FDIC was approximately $4.31 billion and $3.41 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This estimate is based on the determination of known deposit account relationships of each depositor and the insurance guidelines provided by the FDIC.
Borrowing sources for the Company include the FHLB, Federal Reserve, other correspondent banks, as well as access to the brokered CD and repurchase markets through established relationships with business and municipal customers and primary market security dealers. The Company also had $3.3 million in fixed-rate subordinated notes acquired with the Kinderhook acquisition outstanding at the end of 2021.
As shown in Table 13, year-end 2021 borrowings totaled $329.9 million, a decrease of $41.4 million from the $371.3 million outstanding at the end of 2020 primarily due to the redemption of $77.3 million of trust preferred subordinated debt held by CCT IV, an unconsolidated subsidiary trust, during the first quarter of 2021 and a decrease in other FHLB borrowings of $4.8 million, partially offset by a $40.7 million increase in securities sold under an agreement to repurchase (“customer repurchase agreements”). Borrowings averaged $288.2 million, or 2.3% of total funding sources for 2021, as compared to $323.9 million, or 3.0% of total funding sources for 2020. At the end of 2021, the Company had $324.7 million, or 98% of contractual obligations, that had remaining terms of one year or less as compared to 69% of contractual obligations maturing within one year at December 31, 2020.
As displayed in Table 3 on page 40, the percentage of funding from deposits in 2021 was slightly higher than the level in 2020 primarily due to the continued net inflows of deposits, including those associated with additional stimulus payments and a second round of PPP lending. The percentage of average funding derived from deposits was 97.7% in 2021 as compared to 97.0% in 2020 and 96.4% in 2019. During 2021, average deposits increased 19.1%, while average borrowings decreased 11.0%.
The following table summarizes the outstanding balance of borrowings of the Company as of December 31:
Table 13: Borrowings
(1) Subordinated notes payable for 2021 and 2020 include $3.0 million in principal and $0.3 million related to a purchase accounting fair value adjustment.
Financial Instruments with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
The Company is a party to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments consist primarily of commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to customers, generally having fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses that may require payment of a fee. These commitments consist principally of unused commercial and consumer credit lines. Standby letters of credit generally are contingent upon the failure of the customer to perform according to the terms of an underlying contract with a third party. The credit risks associated with commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit are essentially the same as that involved with extending loans to customers and are subject to standard credit policies. Collateral may be required based on management’s assessment of the customer’s creditworthiness. The fair value of the standby letters of credit is considered immaterial for disclosure purposes.
Investments
The objective of the Company’s investment portfolio is to hold low-risk, high-quality earning assets that provide favorable returns and provide another effective tool to actively manage its earning asset/funding liability position in order to maximize future net interest income opportunities. This must be accomplished within the following constraints: (a) implementing certain interest rate risk management strategies which achieve a relatively stable level of net interest income; (b) providing both the regulatory and operational liquidity necessary to conduct day-to-day business activities; (c) considering investment risk-weights as determined by the regulatory risk-based capital guidelines; and (d) generating a favorable return without undue compromise of the other requirements.
The carrying value of the Company’s investment portfolio ended 2021 at $4.98 billion, an increase of $1.38 billion, or 38.5%, from the end of 2020. The book value (excluding unrealized gains and losses) of the portfolio increased $1.55 billion, or 44.6%, from December 31, 2020. The net unrealized loss on the portfolio was $44.9 million as of December 31, 2021. During 2021, the Company purchased $1.81 billion of U.S. Treasury and agency securities with an average yield of 1.32%, $109.6 million of government agency mortgage-backed securities with an average yield of 1.78%, $42.3 million of obligations of state and political subdivisions with an average yield of 2.42% and $5.0 million of corporate debt securities with an average yield of 3.25%. These additions were offset by $426.7 million of investment maturities, calls, and principal payments and net accretion on investment securities of $12.2 million in 2021. The effective duration of the securities portfolio was 7.5 years at the end of 2021, as compared to 7.7 years at year end 2020.
The carrying value of the Company’s investment portfolio increased $507.0 million, or 16.4%, during 2020 to end the year at $3.60 billion. The book value of the portfolio increased $419.8 million from December 31, 2019. The net unrealized gain on the portfolio was $121.1 million as of December 31, 2020. During 2020, the Company purchased $984.2 million of U.S. Treasury and agency securities with an average yield of 1.38%, $116.3 million of government agency mortgage-backed securities with an average yield of 1.97%, $11.3 million of obligations of state and political subdivisions with an average yield of 3.37% and $3.0 million of corporate debt securities with an average yield of 5.38%. The Company also acquired $179.7 million of available-for-sale securities and $0.8 million of equity and other securities as part of the Steuben transaction. These additions were offset by $886.1 million of investment maturities, calls, and principal payments and net accretion on investment securities of $7.2 million in 2020. The effective duration of the securities portfolio was 7.7 years at the end of 2020, as compared to 4.3 years at year end 2019.
The investment portfolio has limited credit risk due to the composition continuing to be heavily weighted towards U.S. Treasury debentures, U.S. Agency mortgage-backed pass-throughs (MBS), U.S. Agency collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) and municipal bonds. The U.S. Treasury debentures, U.S. Agency mortgage-backed pass-throughs and U.S. Agency CMOs are all rated AAA (highest possible rating) by Moody’s and AA+ by Standard and Poor’s. The majority of the municipal bonds are rated A or higher. The portfolio does not include any private label MBS or private label CMOs. The overall mix of securities within the portfolio over the last year has changed due to the significant investment purchases made during 2021, with an increase in the proportion of U.S. Treasury and agency securities, a small increase in the proportion of corporate debt securities, while the proportion of government agency MBS, obligations of state and political subdivisions, government agency CMOs and equity securities decreased.
The net unrealized market value loss on the investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 was $44.9 million, as compared to a net unrealized gain of $121.1 million one year earlier. This decrease is indicative of market interest rate increases over the period and changes in the composition of the portfolio.
The following table sets forth the fair value for the Company's investment securities portfolio:
Table 14: Investment Securities
The following table sets forth as of December 31, 2021 the weighted-average yield of investment debt securities by maturity date and investment type:
Table 15: Weighted-Average Yield of Investment Debt Securities (1)
(1) Weighted-average yields are an arithmetic computation of income (not fully tax-equivalent adjusted) divided by book balance; they may differ from the yield to maturity, which considers the time value of money.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on a financial institution's performance than the effect of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. Notwithstanding this, inflation can directly affect the value of loan collateral, real estate and automobiles in particular. Inflation can also impact the Company’s noninterest expense levels to some extent, and by extension the net income it generates and the earnings it retains as capital.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See “New Accounting Pronouncements” Section of Note A of the notes to the consolidated financial statements on page 88 for recently issued accounting pronouncements applicable to the Company that have not yet been adopted.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains comments or information that constitute forward-looking statements (within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995), which involve significant risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements often use words such as “anticipate,” “could,” “target,” “expect,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “goal,” “forecast,” “believe,” or other words of similar meaning. These statements are based on the current beliefs and expectations of the Company’s management and are subject to significant risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Moreover, the Company’s plans, objectives and intentions are subject to change based on various factors (some of which are beyond the Company’s control). Factors that could cause actual results to differ from those discussed in the forward-looking statements include: (1) the macroeconomic and other challenges and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, variants of COVID-19, and related vaccine rollout and efficacy, including the negative impacts and disruptions on public health, the Company’s corporate and consumer customers, the communities the Company serves, and the domestic and global economy, which may have an adverse effect on the Company’s business; (2) current and future economic and market conditions, including the effects of a decline in housing or vehicle prices, higher unemployment rates, labor shortages, supply chain disruption, inability to obtain raw materials and supplies, U.S. fiscal debt, budget and tax matters, geopolitical matters, and any slowdown in global economic growth; (3) changes to the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”), including to the rules under which the PPP is administered, with respect to the origination, servicing, or forgiveness of PPP loans, whether now existing or originated in the future, or the terms and conditions of any guaranteed payments due to the Company from the SBA with respect to PPP loans; (4) the effect of, and changes in, monetary and fiscal policies and laws, including future changes in Federal and state statutory income tax rates and interest rate and other policy actions of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; (5) the effect of changes in the level of checking or savings account deposits on the Company’s funding costs and net interest margin; (6) future provisions for credit losses on loans and debt securities; (7) changes in nonperforming assets; (8) the effect of a fall in stock market or bond prices on the Company’s fee income businesses, including its employee benefit services, wealth management, and insurance businesses; (9) risks related to credit quality; (10) inflation, interest rate, liquidity, market and monetary fluctuations; (11) the strength of the U.S. economy in general and the strength of the local economies where the Company conducts its business; (12) the timely development of new products and services and customer perception of the overall value thereof (including features, pricing and quality) compared to competing products and services; (13) changes in consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits; (14) technological changes and implementation and financial risks associated with transitioning to new technology-based systems involving large multi-year contracts; (15) the ability of the Company to maintain the security of its financial, accounting, technology, data processing and other operating systems and facilities; (16) effectiveness of the Company’s risk management processes and procedures, reliance on models which may be inaccurate or misinterpreted, the Company’s ability to manage its credit or interest rate risk, the sufficiency of its allowance for credit losses and the accuracy of the assumptions or estimates used in preparing the Company’s financial statements and disclosures; (17) failure of third parties to provide various services that are important to the Company’s operations; (18) any acquisitions or mergers that might be considered or consummated by the Company and the costs and factors associated therewith, including differences in the actual financial results of the acquisition or merger compared to expectations and the realization of anticipated cost savings and revenue enhancements; (19) the ability to maintain and increase market share and control expenses; (20) the nature, timing and effect of changes in banking regulations or other regulatory or legislative requirements affecting the respective businesses of the Company and its subsidiaries, including changes in laws and regulations concerning taxes, accounting, banking, service fees, risk management, securities and other aspects of the financial services industry, specifically the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 or those emanating from COVID-19; (21) changes in the Company’s organization, compensation and benefit plans and in the availability of, and compensation levels for, employees in its geographic markets; (22) the outcome of pending or future litigation and government proceedings; (23) other risk factors outlined in the Company’s filings with the SEC from time to time; and (24) the success of the Company at managing the risks of the foregoing.
The foregoing list of important factors is not all-inclusive. For more information about factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s expectations, refer to “Item 1A Risk Factors” above. Any forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made and the Company does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statement, whether written or oral, to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made. If the Company does update or correct one or more forward-looking statements, investors and others should not conclude that the Company will make additional updates or corrections with respect thereto or with respect to other forward-looking statements.
Reconciliation of GAAP to Non-GAAP Measures
Table 16: GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations