ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations relates to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks,
uncertainties and assumptions, which could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Please see the sections of this report entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.” This section generally discusses the results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. For discussion related to the results of operations and changes in financial conditions for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 as filed SEC on February 26, 2021.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Financial Year in Review - Revenue of $1,104.9 million in 2021 grew $141.0 million, or 14.6%, from revenue of $963.9 million in 2020. Same-unit revenue increased by $74.3 million, or 7.7%, while acquisitions, net of divestitures, contributed $66.7 million to revenue, or 6.9%. A detailed discussion of revenue by practice group is included under “Operating Practice Groups.” Income from continuing operations in 2021 decreased $7.4 million, or 9.5%, to $70.9 million from $78.3 million in 2020. Refer to “Results of Operations - Continuing Operations” for a detailed discussion of the components of income from continuing operations. Earnings per diluted share from continuing operations were $1.32 in 2021, compared to $1.42 in 2020, with a fully diluted weighted average share count of 53.7 million shares in 2021, compared to 55.4 million shares in 2020.
Strategic Use of Capital - Our first priority for the use of capital is to make strategic acquisitions. We completed the following six acquisitions in 2021:
◦Effective January 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all the assets of Middle Market Advisory Group (“MMA”). MMA, based in Englewood, Colorado, is a provider of tax compliance and consulting services to middle market companies and family groups in the real estate, automotive, technology and SAAS, construction, and manufacturing industries.
◦Effective April 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all the assets of Wright Retirement Services, LLC ("Wright"). Wright, located in Valdosta, Georgia, specializes in third party administration services for retirement plan sponsors.
◦Effective May 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the non-attest assets of Bernston Porter & Company, PLLC ("BP"). BP, based in Bellevue, Washington, is a provider of comprehensive accounting and financial consulting services including tax, forensic, economic and valuation services and transaction services to a wide range of industries with specialties including construction, real estate, hospitality, manufacturing and technology.
◦Effective June 1, 2021, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding membership interests of Schramm Health Partners, LLC dba Optumas ("Optumas"). Optumas, based in Scottsdale, Arizona, is a provider of actuarial services to state government health care agencies to assist in the administration of Medicaid programs.
◦Effective September 1, 2021, we acquired all of the non-attest assets of Shea Labagh Dobberstein ("SLD"). SLD, based in San Francisco, California, is a provider of professional accounting, tax and advisory services to privately held businesses, individuals and nonprofit organizations.
◦Effective December 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all the assets of Kenneth Weiss & Company, P.C. dba Weiss & Company (“Weiss”). Weiss, based in San Diego, California, is a provider of tax compliance and consulting services to family groups and individuals.
Refer to Note 18, Business Combinations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion on acquisitions.
We also have the financing flexibility and the capacity to actively repurchase shares of our common stock. We believe that repurchasing shares of our common stock is a prudent use of our financial resources, and that investing in our stock is an attractive use of capital and an efficient means to provide value to our shareholders. On February 10, 2022, the CBIZ Board of Directors authorized the purchase of up to 5.0 million shares of our common stock under our Share Repurchase Program (the “Share Repurchase Program”), which may be suspended or discontinued at any time and expires on March 31, 2023. The shares may be purchased (i) in the open market, (ii) in privately negotiated transactions, or (iii) under Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, which may include purchases from our
employees, officers and directors, in accordance with SEC rules. CBIZ management will determine the timing and amount of the transaction based on its evaluation of market conditions and other factors.
Pursuant to previously authorized share repurchase programs, we repurchased 3.0 million shares of our common stock in the open market at a total cost of approximately $96.4 million in 2021 and 2.3 million shares at a total cost of approximately $57.6 million in 2020. Refer to Note 13, Common Stock, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the Share Repurchase Program.
Recent Accomplishments and Other Events
Workplace Awards - In 2021, we were honored and recognized for 93 various national and local market awards. A sample of the awards won include:
•2021 America’s Best Midsize Employers by Forbes - This was the fourth time we have received this award. 50,000 Americans working for businesses with at least 1,000 employees were surveyed to rate, on a scale of zero to 10, how likely they would be to recommend their employer to others. They were also asked to nominate organizations in industries outside their own.
•Top Workplaces USA 2021 - This inaugural award celebrates nationally recognized companies that make the world a better place to work together by prioritizing a people-centered culture and giving employees a voice. This award is based entirely on feedback from our team members.
•Top Workplaces in the Financial Services Industry 2021 - CBIZ was named a winner among other Financial Services organizations that exceeded award criteria.
•Vault Accounting 50 - CBIZ ranked in the Top 10 based on survey results and feedback from those who are CPAs in Financial Services.
•Best Places to Work in Insurance - We were selected and honored for the seventh consecutive year as a “Best Places to Work in Insurance” by Business Insurance magazine based on our commitment to attracting, developing and retaining great talent through employee benefits and other programs. We were recognized for this award based on core focus areas such as leadership and planning, corporate culture, communications, work environment and overall engagement.
•2021 Best and Brightest Companies in the Nation Top 101 - For the sixth year in a row, we were honored as a “Best and Brightest Company” by National Association of Business Resources ("NABR") based on our commitment to human resource practices and employee enrichment.
•2021 Best and Brightness in Wellness - We were honored by NABR, for the fifth consecutive time, as an organization that promotes a culture of wellness.
•Top Workplaces Culture Excellence Awards 2021 for Appreciation, Clue-in Leaders, Employee Value Proposition, Employee Wellbeing, Empowering Employees, Formal Training, Professional Development, Work-Life Flexibility - These first-time awards recognize outstanding organizations across business-relevant culture categories.
•2021 U.S. Insurance Awards Community Outreach Project of the Year - CBIZ was named a finalist by Business Insurance based on engagement with Dress for Success. CBIZ is a key corporate partner for Dress for Success through the CBIZ Women’s Advantage program.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - CONTINUING OPERATIONS
We provide professional business services that help clients manage their finances and employees. We deliver our integrated services through the following three practice groups: Financial Services, Benefits and Insurance Services and National Practices. A description of these groups’ operating results and factors affecting their businesses is provided below.
Same-unit revenue represents total revenue adjusted to reflect comparable periods of activity for acquisitions and divestitures. For example, for a business acquired on July 1, 2020, revenue for the period January 1, 2021 through
June 30, 2021 would be reported as revenue from acquired businesses whereas revenue for the periods from July 1 through December 31 of both years would be reported as same-unit revenue. Divested operations represent operations that did not meet the criteria for treatment as discontinued operations. Those businesses that have met the requirements to be treated as a discontinued operation are eliminated from continuing operations for all periods presented below.
Revenue
The following table summarizes total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
A detailed discussion of same-unit revenue by practice group is included under “Operating Practice Groups.”
Non-qualified Deferred Compensation Plan - We sponsor a non-qualified deferred compensation plan ("NQDCP"), under which a CBIZ employee’s compensation deferral is held in a rabbi trust and invested accordingly as directed by the employee. Income and expenses related to the deferred compensation plan are included in “Operating expenses,” “Gross margin” and “Corporate General & Administrative expenses” and are directly offset by deferred compensation gains or losses in “Other income (expense), net” in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. The deferred compensation plan has no impact on “Income from continuing operations before income tax expense” or diluted earnings per share from continuing operations.
Income and expenses related to the deferred compensation plan for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Excluding the impact of the above-mentioned income and expenses related to the deferred compensation plan, the operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Expenses
The following table presents our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Our operating expenses increased by $120.3 million. Operating expense as a percentage of revenue remained unchanged at 85.6% of revenue in 2021 as compared to 85.6% of revenue for the prior year. The non-qualified deferred compensation plan increased operating expenses by $17.3 million and $13.8 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Excluding the impact of the non-qualified deferred compensation plan, which was recorded in "Corporate and Other" for segment reporting purposes, operating expenses would have been $928.3 million, or 84.0% of revenue, in 2021 compared to $811.5 million, or 84.2% of revenue, in 2020.
The majority of our operating expenses relate to personnel costs, which includes (i) salaries and benefits, (ii) commissions paid to producers (iii) incentive compensation and (iv) share-based compensation. Excluding the impact of non-qualified deferred compensation plan, which was recorded in "Corporate and Other" for segment reporting purposes, operating expense increased by approximately $116.8 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily driven by $100.2 million higher personnel cost, of which acquisitions contributed approximately $48.0 million to personnel costs increases, $4.0 million higher computer and facility related costs, $3.9 million higher depreciation and amortization expense, $2.0 million higher marketing expense, as well as $1.0 million higher professional fees, offset by $1.4 million lower bad debt expense. Other discretionary spending increased by approximately $7.1 million to support the growth in business activities. Personnel costs and other operating expenses are discussed in further detail under “Operating Practice Groups.”
Corporate General & Administrative Expenses
The following table presents our Corporate General & Administrative (“G&A”) expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Our G&A expenses increased by approximately $10.1 million, or 21.9%, in 2021 compared to 2020, and increased to 5.1% of revenue from 4.8% of revenue for the prior year. The non-qualified deferred compensation plan increased G&A expenses by $2.2 million in 2021, and by $1.6 million in 2020. Excluding the impact of the deferred compensation plan, which was recorded in "Corporate and Other" for segment reporting purposes, G&A expenses would have been $54.0 million, or 4.9% of revenue, in 2021 compared to $44.5 million, or 4.6% of revenue, in 2020. Excluding the impact of the non-qualified deferred compensation plan, which was recorded in "Corporate and Other" for segment purposes, G&A expense increased by $9.5 million in 2021 as compared to prior year, primarily attributable to $4.6 million higher personnel costs and $3.8 million higher professional fees in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Legal Settlement, net
On June 24, 2021, we reached a settlement agreement with University of Pittsburgh Medical Center pertaining a lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania. Under the terms of the settlement agreement, we paid a total settlement amount of $41.5 million and recorded a settlement loss of $30.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income, net
The following table presents our Other income, net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Other income, net includes a net gain of $19.5 million in 2021 and a net gain of $15.4 million in 2020, associated with the value of investments held in a rabbi trust related to the deferred compensation plan, which was recorded in "Corporate and Other" for segment reporting purposes. The adjustments to the investments held in a rabbi trust related to the deferred compensation plan are offset by a corresponding increase or decrease to compensation expense, which is recorded as “Operating expenses” and “G&A expenses” in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income. The deferred compensation plan has no impact on “Income from continuing operations before income tax expense” or diluted earnings per share from continuing operations.
Interest Expense - Our primary financing arrangement is the 2018 credit facility. Interest expense was $3.9 million in 2021, compared to $5.0 million in 2020. Our average debt balance and weighted average interest rate was $161.0 million and 1.88%, respectively, in 2021, compared to $152.3 million and 2.45%, respectively, in 2020. Our debt is further discussed in Note 9, Debt and Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Gain (loss) on Sale of Operations, net - We sold a small book of business and a business unit in the Benefit and Insurance practice group during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. Total proceeds from the sales were $9.7 million. Net gain from the sales were approximately $6.0 million. We sold a small book of business in the Benefit and Insurance practice group and two small accounting firms in the Financial Services practice group during 2020. The proceeds and net gain from such sales were immaterial.
Other Income, net - The majority of “Other income, net” consists of net gains and losses associated with the value of the non-qualified deferred compensation plan as discussed above, as well as net adjustments to the fair value of our contingent purchase price liability related to prior acquisitions. Other income of $18.2 million in 2021 included a $19.5 million net gain related to the deferred compensation plan, partially offset by $2.4 million net increase to the fair value of the contingent purchase price liability due to $1.8 million net present value adjustment and $0.5 million stock price adjustment. Other income of $16.5 million in 2020 consisted of a net gain of $15.4 million related to the deferred compensation plan as well as a $0.6 million net decrease to the fair value of the contingent purchase price liability.
Income Tax Expense
The following table presents our income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The decrease in income tax expense from 2020 to 2021 was primarily driven by lower pre-tax income. The decrease in the effective tax rate from 2020 to 2021 was primarily attributable to an increase in the tax benefit recognized in 2021 compared to 2020 related to stock-based compensation.
GAAP RECONCILIATION
Income from Continuing Operations to Non-GAAP Financial Measure (1)
(1)We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. This table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA, a Non-GAAP financial measure to the nearest GAAP financial measure, “Income from continuing operations.” Adjusted EBITDA is not defined by GAAP, is not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles, and should not be considered in isolation from, or regarded as an alternative or replacement to, any measurement of performance or cash flow under GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is commonly used by us, our shareholders, and debt holders to evaluate, assess, and benchmark our operating results and to provide an additional measure with respect to our ability to meet future debt obligations. Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered alongside our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP.
Operating Practice Groups
We deliver our integrated services through three practice groups: Financial Services, Benefits and Insurance Services and National Practices. A description of these groups’ operating results and factors affecting their businesses is provided below.
Financial Services
The Financial Services practice group revenue in 2021 grew by 16.6% to $734.0 million from $629.8 million in 2020. Same-unit revenue grew by $58.4 million, or 9.3%, across all service lines, primarily driven by a $34.3 million increase from those units that provide traditional accounting and tax-related services, and $20.0 million increase from those units that provide project-oriented advisory services, as well as $3.7 million increase in government healthcare compliance business. The impact of the acquired businesses, net of divestitures, contributed $45.8 million or 6.2%, of 2021 revenue. We provide a range of services to affiliated CPA firms under ASAs. Fees earned under the ASAs are recorded as revenue in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income and were $174.8 million and $159.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating expenses increased by $83.0 million in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily as a result of $75.5 million, or 17.1%, higher personnel costs, of which acquisitions contributed approximately $35.4 million to the increase. In addition, other operating expenses, including marketing, recruiting, professional services, technology, facilities, travel and entertainment, depreciation and amortization expenses increased by $7.9 million to support the business growth. The increase in personnel costs and other operating expenses was partially offset by approximately $3.4 million lower bad debt expense. In the first half of 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we recorded bad debt expense of $2.2 million, which did not recur in 2021. Operating expense as a percentage of revenue remained relatively flat at 82.9% in 2021 and 83.4% in 2020.
Benefits and Insurance Services
The Benefits and Insurance Services practice group revenue in 2021 grew by 11.6% to $332.3 million from $297.8 million in 2020, primarily driven by $20.9 million of incremental revenue from the acquisition of businesses, net of divestitures. Same-unit revenue increased by $13.7 million, or 4.6% in 2021 across almost all service lines, particularly in property and casualty services, employee benefit services, retirement services, and other project based services. Operating expenses increased by $23.3 million in 2021 primarily due to $16.5 million, or 8.5%, in higher personnel costs as result of acquisitions, which contributed approximately $12.6 million to the increase in 2021 as well as investment in new sales producers. Bad debt expense increased by $2.1 million as a result of direct write-off of certain commission receivables deemed uncollectible. In addition to the increases in personnel cost and bad debt expense, other operating expenses, including marketing, commission, technology, depreciation and amortization increased by approximately $4.5 million to support the increased business activities. Operating expense as a percentage of revenue decreased to 81.7% in 2021 from 83.4% in 2020.
National Practices
Revenue growth in this practice group was primarily driven by our cost-plus contract with a single client, which has existed since 1999. The cost-plus contract is a five year contract with the most recent renewal through
December 31, 2023. Revenues from this single client accounted for approximately 75% of the National Practice group’s revenue. Operating expenses have increased mainly due to an increase in salaries and benefits.
Corporate and Other
Corporate and Other are operating expenses that are not directly allocated to the individual business units. These expenses primarily consist of certain health care costs, gains or losses attributable to assets held in our non-qualified deferred compensation plan, stock-based compensation, consolidation and integration charges, certain professional fees, certain advertising costs and other various expenses.
Total operating expenses increased by $12.1 million, or 63.2% in 2021 as compared to 2020. The non-qualified deferred compensation plan increased operating expenses by $17.3 million in 2021, and by $13.8 million in 2020. Excluding the non-qualified deferred compensation expenses, operating expense increased by approximately $8.6 million, primarily driven by $7.7 million higher personnel costs and $1.2 million higher marketing costs to support business growth.
Total corporate general and administrative expenses increased by $10.1 million, or 21.9% in 2021, as compared to 2020. The non-qualified deferred compensation plan increased corporate general and administrative expenses by $2.2 million in 2021, and by $1.6 million in 2020. Excluding the non-qualified deferred compensation expenses, corporate general and administrative expense increased by approximately $9.5 million, primarily driven by higher personnel costs of $4.6 million and $3.3 million higher expenses for professional services incurred to support merger and acquisition activities. In addition, technology and other corporate general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.4 million compared to 2020 to support the business growth.
On June 24, 2021, we reached a settlement agreement with University of Pittsburgh Medical Center pertaining a lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania. Under the terms of the settlement agreement, we paid a total settlement amount of $41.5 million and recorded a settlement loss of $30.5 million in 2021.
Total other income, net increased by $2.2 million, or 19.7% in 2021, as compared to 2020. Total other income, net includes a net gain of $19.5 million and $15.4 million associated with the non-qualified deferred compensation plan in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Excluding the impact of the non-qualified deferred compensation plan, total other income, net would have been an expense of $6.2 million in 2021 and an expense of $4.3 million in 2020, an net increase in expense of approximately $1.9 million, primarily due to $3.0 million higher fair value adjustment related to the contingent purchase price considerations, offset by $1.1 million lower interest expense due to lower weighted average interest rates during 2021 as compared to 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table is derived from our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (in thousands):
We generate strong cash flows from operations and have access to a $400.0 million credit facility, which enables us to fund investments and operating projects that are designed to optimize shareholder return. Cash flows from operations and available capital resources allow us to make strategic acquisitions, repurchase shares of our common stock when accretive to shareholders, meet working capital needs, and service our debt. Generally, we maintain low levels of cash and apply any available cash to pay down our outstanding debt balance. Due to the seasonal nature of the Financial Services practice group’s accounting and tax services in the first four months of the fiscal year, we historically generate much of our cash flows during the last three quarters of the fiscal year.
Our working capital management primarily relates to trade accounts receivable, accounts payable, incentive-based compensation and other assets, which consists of other receivables and prepaid assets typically related to activities in the normal course of our business operations. At any specific point in time, working capital is subject to many variables, including seasonality and the timing of cash receipts and payments, most notably in the timing of insurance premiums to the carriers within our Benefits and Insurance practice group. We have restricted cash on deposit from clients in connection with the pass-through of insurance premiums to the carrier with the related liability for these funds recorded in “Accounts payable” in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Accounts receivable balances increase in response to the increase in revenue generated by the Financial Services practice group during the first four months of the year. A significant amount of this revenue is billed and collected in subsequent quarters. Days sales outstanding (“DSO”) from continuing operations represent accounts receivable and unbilled revenue (net of realization adjustments) at the end of the period, divided by trailing twelve months daily revenue. DSO was 71 days as of December 31, 2021 and 72 days as of December 31, 2020. We provide DSO data because such data is commonly used as a performance measure by analysts and investors and as a measure of our ability to collect on receivables in a timely manner.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
2021 compared to 2020 - Cash provided by operating activities was $131.2 million during 2021, primarily contributed to net income of $70.9 million and certain non-cash items, such as depreciation and amortization expense of $27.1 million, share-based compensation expense of $11.4 million, deferred income tax of $9.2 million, bad debt expense of $3.1 million, adjustment to the fair value of contingent purchase consideration of $2.4 million, as well as $13.3 million of cash generated from working capital management. The $15.7 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to a net decrease of $19.3 million in cash generated from working capital of which approximately $23.8 million was attributable to the increase in accounts receivable as a result of higher revenue, $10.6 million was attributable decrease in other liabilities as a result of payment of deferred FICA taxes, offset by approximately $16.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued personnel costs. In addition, the decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2021 as compared to 2020 was partially attributable to $7.4 million lower net income as a result, among other items, $30.5 million legal settlement loss.
Investing Activities
The majority of our investing activities relate to acquisitions, capital expenditures and net activity related to funds held for clients. Refer to Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 18, Business Combinations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion on our acquisitions and a further description of funds held for clients and client fund obligations.
2021 - Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 consisted primarily of $66.7 million related to business acquisitions and $9.0 million in capital expenditures, offset by $12.1 million net proceeds from sales and maturities of client funds.
2020 - Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of $71.4 million related to business acquisitions and $11.6 million in capital expenditures, offset by $34.0 million net proceeds from sales and maturities of client funds.
Financing Activities
The majority of our financing activities relate to our 2018 credit facility, share repurchases, net client fund obligation activity, as well as contingent consideration payments for prior acquisitions. Refer to Note 9, Debt and Financing Arrangements, and Note 13, Common Stock, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion on our 2018 credit facility and Share Repurchase Program.
2021 - Net cash used in financing activities in 2021 consisted primarily of $100.5 million of share repurchases, a net decrease of $8.9 million in client fund obligations, and $14.1 million of contingent consideration payments for prior acquisitions, partially offset by $7.3 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $47.3 million net proceeds from borrowings under our 2018 credit facility.
2020 - Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of $58.5 million of share repurchases, a net decrease of $13.7 million in client fund obligations, and $12.9 million of contingent consideration payments for prior acquisitions, partially offset by $6.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $2.5 million net proceeds from borrowings under our 2018 credit facility.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table presents our capital structure (in thousands):
Credit Facility - Our primary financing arrangement is the $400.0 million unsecured credit facility, by and among CBIZ Operations, Inc., CBIZ, Inc. and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent and bank, and other participating banks, which provides us with the capital necessary to meet our working capital needs as well as the flexibility to continue with our strategic initiatives, including business acquisitions and share repurchases and matures in 2023. At December 31, 2021, we had $155.3 million outstanding under the credit facility, as well as letters of credit and performance guarantees totaling $5.6 million. Available funds under the credit facility, based on the terms of the commitment, were approximately $234.5 million at December 31, 2021. The weighted average interest rate under the credit facility was 1.88% in 2021 and 2.45% in 2020. The credit facility allows for the allocation of funds for future strategic initiatives, including acquisitions and the repurchase of our common stock, subject to the terms and conditions of the credit facility.
Debt Covenant Compliance - We are required to meet certain financial covenants with respect to (i) total leverage ratio and (ii) a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio. We were in compliance with our covenants as of December 31, 2021. Our ability to service our debt and to fund future strategic initiatives will depend upon our ability to generate cash in the future. For further discussion regarding our credit facility, refer to Note 9, Debt and Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Use of Capital - Our first priority for the use of capital is to make strategic acquisitions. We completed six business acquisitions and one client list acquisition in 2021. Refer to Note 18, Business Combinations, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion on acquisitions. We also have the financing flexibility and the capacity to actively repurchase shares of our common stock in the open market. We believe that repurchasing shares of our common stock is a prudent use of our financial resources, and that investing in our stock is an attractive use of capital and an efficient means to provide value to our shareholders. We repurchased 3.0 million shares of our common stock in the open market at a total cost of approximately $96.4 million in 2021 and 2.3 million shares at a total cost of approximately $57.6 million in 2020. Refer to Note 13, Common Stock, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the Share Repurchase Program.
Cash Requirements for 2022 - Cash requirements for 2022 will include acquisitions, interest payments on debt, seasonal working capital requirements, contingent earnout payments for previous acquisitions, share repurchases and capital expenditures. We believe that cash provided by operations, as well as available funds under our credit facility will be sufficient to meet cash requirements for the next 12 months.
OBLIGATIONS AND COMMITMENTS
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements - We maintain ASAs with independent CPA firms (as described more fully under “Business - Financial Services” and in Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements), which qualify as variable interest entities. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not reflect the operations or accounts of variable interest entities as the impact is not material to the consolidated financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows of CBIZ.
We provide letters of credit for insurance needs as well as to landlords (lessors) of our leased premises in lieu of cash security deposits. Letters of credit totaled $3.4 million and $1.7 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition, we provide license bonds to various state agencies to meet certain licensing requirements. The amount of license bonds outstanding was $2.3 million and $2.2 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We have various agreements under which we may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect to certain matters. Generally, these indemnification clauses are included in contracts arising in the normal course of business under which we customarily agree to hold the other party harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations, warranties, covenants or agreements, related to matters such as title to assets sold and certain tax matters. Payment by us under such indemnification clauses are generally conditioned upon the other party making a claim. Such claims are typically subject to challenge by us and to dispute resolution procedures specified in the particular contract. Further, our obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or amount and, in some instances, we may have recourse against third parties for certain payments made by us. It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these indemnification agreements due to the conditional nature of our obligations and the unique facts of each particular agreement. Historically, we have not made any payments under these agreements that have been material individually or in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021, we were not aware of any obligations arising under indemnification agreements that would require material payments.
Interest Rate Risk Management - We do not purchase or hold any derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We utilize interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk exposure associated with our floating-rate debt under the credit facility. Under these interest rate swap contracts, we receive cash flows from counterparties at variable rates based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) and pay the counterparties a fixed rate. To mitigate counterparty credit risk, we only enter into contracts with selected major financial institutions with investment grade ratings and continually assess their creditworthiness. There are no credit risk-related contingent features in our interest rate swaps nor do the swaps contain provisions under which we would be required to post collateral.
As of December 31, 2021, the notional value of all of our interest rate swaps was $115.0 million, with maturity dates ranging from May, 2022 to December, 2026. For further details on our interest rate swaps, refer to Note 6, Financial Instruments, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
In connection with payroll services provided to clients, we collect funds from our clients’ accounts in advance of paying these client obligations. These funds held for clients are segregated and invested in accordance with our investment policy, which requires that all investments carry an investment grade rating at the time of initial investment. The interest income on these investments mitigates the interest rate risk for the borrowing costs of our credit facility, as the rates on both the investments and the outstanding borrowings against the credit facility are based on market conditions. Refer to Note 6, Financial Instruments, and Note 9, Debt and Financing Arrangements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding investments and our debt and financing arrangements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP is based on the selection and application of accounting policies that require us to make significant estimates and assumptions that in certain circumstances affect amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In preparing these financial statements, we have made our best estimates and judgments of certain amounts included in the consolidated financial statements, giving due consideration to materiality. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical to the understanding of our consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such difference could be material to our consolidated financial statements. Significant accounting policies, including Revenue Recognition, are described more fully in Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Accounts Receivable and Notes Receivable - We determine the net amount expected to be collected on our accounts receivable, both billed and unbilled, and notes receivable, based on a combination of factors, including but not limited to our historical incurred loss experience, credit-worthiness of our clients, the age of accounts receivable balance, current economic conditions that may affect a client's ability to pay, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Significant management judgments and estimates must be made and used in connection with establishing the allowance for doubtful accounts for each accounting period. Material differences may result if facts and circumstances change in relation to the original estimation.
Business Combinations - We recognize and measure identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date at fair value. Fair value measurements require extensive use of estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows to be generated by the acquired assets. In addition, we recognize and measure contingent consideration at fair value as of the acquisition date using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model. The fair value of contingent consideration obligations that are classified as liabilities are reassessed each reporting period. Any change in the fair value estimate is recorded in the earnings of that period.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets - Goodwill represents the difference between the purchase price of the acquired business and the related fair value of the net assets acquired. A significant portion of our assets in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets is goodwill. At December 31, 2021, the carrying value of goodwill totaled $740.7 million, compared to total assets of $1.6 billion and total shareholders’ equity of $704.5 million. Intangible assets consist of identifiable intangibles other than goodwill. Identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill include client lists and non-compete agreements, which require significant judgments in determining the fair value. We carry client lists and non-compete agreements at cost, less accumulated amortization, in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Goodwill is not amortized, but rather is tested for impairment annually during the fourth quarter. In addition to our annual goodwill test, on a periodic basis, we are required to consider whether it is more likely than not (defined as a likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value has fallen below its carrying value, thus requiring us to perform an interim goodwill impairment test. Intangible assets with definite lives, such as client lists and non-compete agreements, are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives (generally ranging from two to fifteen years). We review these assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate an asset’s carrying value may not be recoverable. Recoverability is assessed based on a comparison of the undiscounted cash flows to the recorded value of the asset. If impairment is indicated, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value based on a discounted cash flow analysis or market comparable method.
The goodwill impairment test is performed at a reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment of a business or one level below an operating segment. At December 31, 2021, we had five reporting units. We may use either a qualitative or quantitative approach when testing a reporting unit’s goodwill for impairment. Under the qualitative assessment, we are not required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless we determine that it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount. If under the quantitative assessment the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the amount of the impairment loss, if any, must be measured. Any such impairment charge would reduce earnings and could be material.
After considering changes to assumptions used in our most recent quantitative testing for each reporting unit, including the capital market environment, economic and market conditions, industry competition and trends, our weighted average cost of capital, changes in management and key personnel, the price of our common stock, changes in our results of operations, the magnitude of the excess of fair value over the carrying amount of each reporting unit as determined in our most recent quantitative testing, and other factors, we concluded that it was
more likely than not that the fair values of each of our reporting units were more than their respective carrying values and, therefore, did not perform a quantitative impairment analysis. For further information regarding our goodwill balances, refer to Note 5, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Loss Contingencies - Loss contingencies, including litigation claims, are recorded as liabilities when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable. Contingent liabilities are often resolved over long time periods. Estimating probable losses requires analysis that often depends on judgment about potential actions by third parties. Refer to Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Other Significant Policies - Other significant accounting policies, not involving the same level of management judgment and uncertainty as those discussed above, are also critical in understanding the consolidated financial statements. Those policies are described in Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements - Refer to Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, which is incorporated herein by reference.