Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements included herein. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factors” and “Risk Factors” as set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references to “CCC,” “we,” “us,” “our” and other similar terms refer to Cypress Holdings Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination and to CCC Intelligent Solutions Holdings Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries after giving effect to the Business Combination.
Business Overview
Founded in 1980, CCC is a leading provider of innovative cloud, mobile, telematics, hyperscale technologies and applications for the property and casualty (“P&C”) insurance economy. Our SaaS platform connects trading partners, facilitates commerce, and supports mission-critical, AI-enabled
digital workflows. Leveraging decades of deep domain experience, our industry-leading platform processes more than $100 billion in annual transaction value across this ecosystem, digitizing workflows and connecting more than 30,000 companies across the P&C insurance economy, including insurance carriers, collision repairers, parts suppliers, automotive manufacturers, financial institutions and others.
Our business has been built upon two foundational pillars: automotive insurance claims and automotive collision repair. For decades we have delivered leading software solutions to both the insurance and repair industries, including pioneering Direct Repair Programs (“DRP”) in the United States (“U.S.”) beginning in 1992. Direct Repair Programs connect auto insurers and collision repair shops to create business value for both parties, and require digital tools to facilitate interactions and manage partner programs. Insurer-to-shop
DRP connections have created a strong network effect for CCC’s platform, as insurers and repairers both benefit by joining the largest network to maximize opportunities. This has led to a virtuous cycle in which more insurers on the platform drives more value for the collision shops on the platform, and vice versa.
We believe we have become a leading insurance and repair SaaS provider in the U.S. by increasing the depth and breadth of our SaaS offerings over many years. Our insurance solutions help insurance carriers manage mission-critical workflows across the claims lifecycle, while building smart, dynamic experiences for their own customers. Our software integrates seamlessly with both legacy and modern systems alike and enables insurers to rapidly innovate on our platform. Our repair solutions help collision repair facilities achieve better performance throughout the collision repair cycle by digitizing processes to drive business growth, streamline operations, and improve repair quality. As of 2021, we have more than 300 insurers on our network, connecting with over 27,000 repair facilities through our multi-tenant cloud platform. We believe our software is the architectural backbone of insurance DRP programs and is the primary driver of material revenue for our collision shop customers and a source of material efficiencies for our insurance carrier customers.
Our platform is designed to solve the many-to-many
problem faced by the insurance economy. There are numerous internally and externally developed insurance software solutions in the market today, with the vast majority of applications focused on insurance-only use cases and not on serving the broader insurance ecosystem. We have prioritized building a leading network around our automotive insurance and collision repair pillars to further digitize interactions and maximize value for our customers. We have tens of thousands of companies on our platform that participate in the insurance economy, including insurers, repairers, parts suppliers, automotive manufacturers, and financial institutions. Our solutions create value for each of these parties by enabling them to connect to our vast network to collaborate with other companies, streamline operations, and reduce processing costs and dollars lost through claims management inefficiencies, or claims leakage. Expanding our platform has added new layers of network effects, further accelerating the adoption of our software solutions.
We have processed more than $1 trillion of historical data across our network, allowing us to build proprietary data assets that leverage insurance claims, vehicle repair, automotive parts and other vehicle-specific information. We believe we are uniquely positioned to provide data-driven insights, analytics, and AI-enhanced
workflows that strengthen our solutions and improve business outcomes for our customers. Our Smart Suite of AI solutions increases automation across existing insurance and repair processes including vehicle damage detection, claim triage, repair estimating, and intelligent claims review. We deliver real-world AI with more than 95 U.S. auto insurers actively using AI-powered
solutions in production environments. We have processed more than 9 million unique claims using CCC deep learning AI as of December 31, 2021, an increase of more than 80 percent over December 31, 2020.
One of the primary obstacles facing the P&C insurance economy is increasing complexity. Complexity in the P&C insurance economy is driven by technological advancements, Internet of Things (“IoT”) data, new business models, and changing customer expectations. We believe digitization plays a critical role in managing this growing complexity while meeting customer expectations. Our technology investments are focused on digitizing complex processes and interactions across our ecosystem, and we believe we are well positioned to power the P&C insurance economy of the future with our data, network, and platform.
While our position in the P&C insurance economy is grounded in the automotive insurance sector, the largest insurance sector in the U.S. representing nearly half of Direct Written Premiums (“DWP”), we believe our integrations and cloud platform are capable of driving innovation across the entire P&C insurance economy. Our customers are increasingly looking for CCC to expand its solutions to other parts of their business where they can benefit from our technology, service, and partnership. In response, we are investing in new solutions that we believe will enable us to digitize the entire automotive claims lifecycle, and over time expand into adjacencies including other insurance lines.
We have strong customer relationships in the end-markets
we serve, and these relationships are a key component of our success given the long-term nature of our contracts and the interconnectedness of our network. We have customer agreements with more than 300 insurers (including carriers, self-insurers and other entities processing insurance claims), including 18 of the top 20 automotive insurance carriers in the U.S. as of 2021 based on DWP, and hundreds of regional carriers. We have more than 30,000 total customers, including over 27,000 automotive collision repair facilities (including repairers and other entities that estimate damaged vehicles), thousands of automotive dealers, 12 of the top 15 automotive manufacturers as of 2021 based on new vehicle sales, and numerous other companies that participate in the P&C insurance economy.
We generate revenue through the sale of software subscriptions and other revenue, primarily from professional services. We generated $688.3 million of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of 9% from the prior year which included $34.7 million attributable to the portion of our casualty solution (specifically, the First Party Clinical Services) divested in fiscal year 2020. The divestiture of First Party Clinical Services had a (6%) impact on total revenue growth. Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $248.9 million, compared to a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $16.9 million, mainly due to $209.9 million of stock-based compensation expense recognized in conjunction with the Business Combination. Adjusted EBITDA increased 28.9% year-over-year to $261.4 million. See our reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA within the section titled “Non-GAAP
Financial Measures.”
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
include the accounts of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries and were prepared in accordance with GAAP. Intercompany transactions and balances are eliminated in consolidation. The consolidated financial statements include 100% of the accounts of wholly-owned and majority-owned subsidiaries and the ownership interest of the minority investor is recorded as a non-controlling
interest in a subsidiary.
The Company operates in one operating segment. The chief operating decision maker for the Company is the chief executive officer. The chief executive officer reviews financial information presented on a consolidated basis, accompanied by information about revenue by type of service and geographic region, for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating financial performance.
Effective January 1, 2021, the Company’s lease accounting policy follows the guidance from Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 842, Leases
, which requires companies to recognize on the balance sheet the assets and liabilities for the rights and obligations created by the leased asset. The Company adopted this standard using the modified retrospective approach for all leases entered into before the effective date. Prior to the adoption of ASC 842, the Company’s lease accounting recognition policy followed guidance from ASC 840, Leases
. Due to the adoption of this guidance, the Company recognized operating right-of-use
assets and operating lease liabilities of $47.1 million and $53.0 million, respectively, as of the date of adoption. The difference between the right-of-use
assets and lease liabilities on the accompanying consolidated balance sheet is primarily due to the accrual for lease payments as a result of straight-line lease expense and unamortized tenant incentive liability balances. See Note 2 and Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Performance Measures and Operating Metrics
In addition to our GAAP and non-GAAP
financial measures, we rely on Software Net Dollar Retention Rate (“Software NDR”) and Software Gross Dollar Retention Rate (“Software GDR”) to measure and evaluate our business to make strategic decisions. Software NDR and Software GDR may not be comparable to or calculated in the same way as other similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Software NDR
We believe that Software NDR provides our management and our investors with insight into our ability to retain and grow revenue from our existing customers, as well as their potential long-term value to us. We also believe the results shown by this metric reflect the stability of our revenue base, which is one of our core competitive strengths. We calculate Software NDR by dividing (a) annualized software revenue recorded in the last month of the measurement period, for example, December for a quarter ending December 31, for unique billing accounts that generated revenue during the corresponding month of the prior year by (b) annualized software revenue as of the corresponding month of the prior year. The calculation includes changes for these billing accounts, such as change in the solutions purchased, changes in pricing and transaction volume, but does not reflect revenue for new customers added. The calculation excludes: (a) changes in estimates related to the timing of one-time
revenue and other revenue, including professional services, and (b) annualized software revenue for smaller customers with annualized software revenue below the threshold of $100,000 for carriers and $4,000 for shops. The customers that do not meet the revenue threshold are small insurance carriers and collision repair shops that tend to have different buying behaviors, with a narrower solution focus, and different tenure compared to our core customers (excluded small carriers and shops represent less than 5% of total revenue within these sales channels). Our Software NDR includes carriers and shops who subscribe to our auto physical damage solutions, which account for most of the Company’s revenue, and excludes revenue from smaller emerging solutions with international subsidiaries or other ecosystem solutions, such as parts suppliers and other automotive manufacturers, and also excludes CCC Casualty which are largely usage and professional service based solutions.
Software GDR
We believe that Software GDR provides our management and our investors with insight into the value our solutions provide to our customers as represented by our ability to retain our existing customer base. We believe the results shown by this metric reflect the strength and stability of our revenue base, which is one of our core competitive strengths. We calculate Software GDR by dividing (a) annualized software revenue recorded in the last month of the measurement period in the prior year, reduced by annualized software revenue for unique billing accounts that are no longer customers as of the current period end by (b) annualized software revenue as of the corresponding month of the prior year. The calculation reflects only customer losses and does not reflect customer expansion or contraction for these billing accounts and does not reflect revenue for new customer billing accounts added. Our Software GDR calculation represents our
annualized software revenue that is retained from the prior year and demonstrates that the vast majority of our customers continue to use our solutions and renew their subscriptions. The calculation excludes: (a) changes in estimates related to the timing of one-time
revenue and other revenue, including professional services, and (b) annualized software revenue for smaller customers with annualized software revenue below the threshold of $100,000 for insurance carriers and $4,000 for collision repair shops. The customers that do not meet the revenue threshold are small carriers and shops that tend to have different buying behaviors, with a narrower solution focus, and different tenure compared to our core customers (excluded small carriers and shops which represent less than 5% of total revenue within these sales channels). Our Software GDR includes carriers and shops who subscribe to our auto physical damage solutions, which account for most of the Company’s revenue, and excludes revenue from smaller emerging solutions with international subsidiaries or other ecosystem solutions, such as parts suppliers and other automotive manufacturers, and excludes CCC Casualty which are largely usage and professional service based solutions.
Recent Developments
Business Combination
On July 30, 2021, we consummated the business combination transaction pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement dated February 2, 2021, as amended, between CCC and Dragoneer.
Upon the closing of the Business Combination, Dragoneer was renamed “CCC Intelligent Solutions Holdings Inc.” and the Company became a wholly owned subsidiary of CCC Intelligent Solutions Holdings Inc.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Dragoneer was treated as the acquired company for accounting purposes and the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Cypress Holdings, Inc. issuing stock for the net assets of Dragoneer, accompanied by a recapitalization.
The board of directors of Cypress Holdings, Inc. approved a modification that resulted in vesting of the performance-based awards with a market condition and the Phantom Shares upon Closing of the Business Combination. At the time of modification, the Company estimated a new fair value of the modified awards and the Company recognized $203.9 million of stock-based compensation expense based on the fair value of the performance-based awards with a market condition and $6.0 million of stock-based compensation expense based on the fair value of the Phantom Shares.
As a result of the Business Combination, we received net cash contributions from the Business Combination of $763.3 million from the Dragoneer trust account, funds received for issuance of common stock pursuant to forward purchase agreements and private investment in public equity investors.
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for additional information on the Business Combination.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the new strain of the coronavirus to be a pandemic. The COVID-19
pandemic is having widespread, rapidly evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global society, economies, financial markets, and business practices. The COVID-19
pandemic has resulted in Federal and state governments implementing various measures in an effort to contain the virus, including social distancing, travel restrictions, border closures, limitations on public gatherings, work from home, supply chain logistical changes, and closure of non-essential
businesses. To protect the health and well-being of its employees, suppliers, and customers, the Company has made substantial modifications to employee travel policies, implemented a hybrid working model of in-person
and remote work, and cancelled or shifted the majority of its conferences and other marketing events to virtual-only. The COVID-19
pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our business operations, including our employees, customers, partners, and communities, and there is substantial uncertainty in the nature and degree of its continued effects over time.
For additional information regarding the impact of COVID-19
on the Company, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors”, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
In July 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors adopted the CCC 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). Under the ESPP, employee purchases occur at the end of discrete offering periods. The first offering period began on January 1, 2022 and ends on June 30, 2022. Subsequent six-month
offering periods begin on July 1 and January 1 (or such other date determined by the Board of Directors) each year. Under the ESPP, eligible employees can acquire shares of the Company’s common stock by accumulating funds through payroll deductions. The purchase price for shares of common stock purchased under the ESPP is 85% of the lesser of the fair market value of the Company’s common stock on (i) the first day of the applicable offering period and (ii) the last day of the applicable offering period. As of December 31, 2021, 6,031,704 shares of common stock are reserved for sale under the ESPP.
Investment Sale
In February 2022, the Company received a cash payment of $3.9 million in exchange for its equity interest in an investee as a result of the acquisition of the investee. The Company had been accounting for its investment using the cost method and recognized a gain of $3.6 million upon receipt of the cash. The Company no longer has any ownership interest in the investee.
Business Acquisition
On February 8, 2022, the Company completed its acquisition of Safekeep, Inc. (“Safekeep”), a privately held company that applies AI to support the digitization of subrogation claims for insurers.
In exchange for all the outstanding shares of Safekeep, the Company paid total consideration of $31.9 million upon closing, subject to adjustment for certain post-closing indemnities.
As additional consideration for the shares, the acquisition agreement includes a contingent earn-out
for additional cash consideration based on the achievement of certain revenue targets during the year ending December 31, 2024. For additional information, see Note 29 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
The following are key factors affecting our operating results in the years ending December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
•
Conversion and implementation of new customers:
We focus significant resources on attracting and onboarding new customers across the various segments of the P&C insurance economy we serve. We have a strong track record of new customer conversion across all our markets. On average, customer implementations take less than three months to complete. A significant portion of our sales force is focused on converting new customer accounts across our industry, and this will continue to be a focus of our business for the foreseeable future.
•
Long-term customer relationships:
We have strong customer relationships in the end-markets
we serve, and these relationships are a key component of our success given the long-term nature of our contracts and the interconnectedness of our network. We generate revenue through the sale of software subscriptions and our average contract is approximately three to five years in duration. In 2021, our national carrier customers included 18 of the top 20 automotive insurers based on DWP, with average customer relationships spanning more than 10 years, as evidenced by our historical GDR of 98%, and numerous exclusive arrangements.
•
Expansion of solution adoption from existing customers:
A central part of our strategy is expanding solution adoption across our existing customer base. We have developed long-term relationships with our customers and have a proven track record of successfully cross-selling product offerings. We have the opportunity to realize incremental value by selling additional functionality to customers that do not currently utilize our full solution portfolio. As we innovate and bring new technology and solutions to market, we also have the opportunity to realize incremental value by selling new software solutions to our existing customer base. Capitalizing on this opportunity has been a significant driver of our revenue growth and net dollar retention in recent years and will remain a central go-to-market
priority.
•
Investment in R&D:
We have a strong track record of innovation and new solution delivery with our customers. We remain committed to delivering market-leading technology including AI solutions for the P&C insurance economy. We believe that maintaining our software solution leadership is imperative to our growth plan. As a result, we intend to continue making significant investments in research and development to improve and expand our software solutions. Our research and development expenses totaled $166.0 million, $109.5 million and $114.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2021, the increase in our R&D was primarily due to stock-based compensation related to the Business Combination transaction. We expect that research and development will remain a key investment area for the foreseeable future.
•
Investment in Platform, Privacy, and Security:
Our technology platform is imperative to our strategy as it enables successful customer implementations, new software delivery, and ongoing performance and delivery. In addition to our investments in R&D, we invest in platform infrastructure, maintenance, privacy, and security protocols to enable performance across our technology platform. We expect investment in these areas to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future.
•
Investment in Sales and Marketing:
Our sales and marketing efforts are a key component of our growth strategy. Our investments in this area have enabled us to build and sustain our customer base while creating long-term customer relationships. We plan to continue to invest in our sales and marketing efforts, including adding sales personnel and expanding marketing activities, to support our business growth. Our sales and marketing expenses totaled $148.9 million, $74.7 million and $82.1 million, in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2021, the increase in our sales and marketing was primarily due to stock-based compensation related to the Business Combination transaction. As the business continues to grow, we expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue is derived from the sale of software subscriptions and other revenue, primarily professional services. Software subscription revenues are comprised of fees from customers for the right to use the hosted software over the contract period without taking possession of the software. These revenues are billed on either a subscription or transactional basis with subscription revenue recognized ratably over the contract period and transactional revenue recognized when the transaction for the related service occurs. We generally invoice software subscription agreements monthly either in advance or in arrears, over the subscription period. Software subscription revenue accounted for $662.3 million, $573.6 million and $540.2 million or 96%, 91% and 88% of total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We continue to expect software subscription revenue to be a high percentage of total revenue as software subscription revenue continues to be a key strategic priority.
Revenues from professional services include fees from customers for the Company’s First Party Clinical Services and other non-software
services. First Party Clinical Services revenue and other non-software
services revenue is recognized in the period the service is performed.
In December 2020, we sold our First Party Clinical Services to a third-party buyer. First Party Clinical Services revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $0.0 million, $34.7 million and $46.0 million, respectively.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Revenue, exclusive of amortization and impairment of acquired technologies
These costs include costs of software subscription and professional services revenue. Our cost of software subscription revenue is primarily comprised of cloud infrastructure costs, information technology (“IT”) security costs, license and royalty fees paid to third parties and personnel-related expenses, including salaries, other direct personnel-related costs and stock-based compensation, and depreciation expense. We expect cost of revenue, exclusive of amortization and impairment of acquired intangibles, to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to hire personnel, require additional cloud infrastructure and incur royalty fees in support of our revenue growth.
Our cost of other revenue is primarily comprised of personnel-related expenses for our customer support teams and contractors, including salaries, direct personnel-related costs and stock-based compensation, and fees paid to third parties. We expect our cost of other revenue to increase in absolute dollars in support of our revenue growth.
In December 2020, we sold our First Party Clinical Services to a third-party buyer. First Party Clinical Services cost of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $0.0 million, $31.3 million and $39.9 million, respectively.
Amortization of Acquired Technologies
We amortize to cost of revenue the capitalized costs of technologies acquired in connection with historical acquisitions.
Impairment of Acquired Technologies
Impairment of acquired technologies consists of impairment charges of technologies acquired in connection with historical acquisitions.
Operating expenses
Operating expenses are categorized as follows:
Research and development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, and costs of external development resources involved in the engineering, design and development of new solutions, as well as expenses associated with significant ongoing improvements to existing solutions. Research and development expenses also include costs for certain IT expenses.
Research and development costs, other than software development costs qualifying for capitalization, are expensed as incurred. Capitalized software development costs consist primarily of personnel-related costs.
We expect research and development expenses, excluding stock-based compensation, to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to dedicate substantial resources to develop, improve and expand the functionality of our solutions. We also expect an increase in the rate of capitalization of our investments in research and development for the foreseeable future.
Selling and Marketing
Our selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for our sales and marketing functions, including sales commissions and stock-based compensation. Additionally, selling and marketing expenses include advertising costs, marketing costs and event costs, including the Company’s annual industry conference.
We expect our selling and marketing expenses, excluding stock-based compensation, to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to increase investments to support the growth of our business.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our executive management and administrative employees, including finance and accounting, human resources, information technology, facilities and legal functions. Additionally, general and administrative expenses include professional service fees, insurance premiums, and other corporate expenses that are not allocated to the above expense categories.
We expect our general and administrative expenses, excluding stock-based compensation, to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our operations, hire additional personnel, and incur costs as a public company.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Our amortization of intangible assets consists of the capitalized costs of customer relationships and favorable lease term in connection with historical acquisitions.
Impairment
Impairment consists of impairment charges recognized on goodwill and intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-operating
income (expense)
Non-operating
income (expense) is categorized as follows:
Interest Expense
Interest expense comprises interest expense accrued or paid on our indebtedness. We expect interest expense to vary each reporting period depending on the amount of outstanding indebtedness and prevailing interest rates.
Gain (Loss) on Change in Fair Value of Interest Rate Swaps
Gain (loss) on change in fair value of interest rate swaps comprises fair value adjustments of our interest rate swap agreements at the end of each reporting period.
In September 2021, we extinguished the interest rate swaps and do not expect to recognize any gain or loss on the change in fair value of interest rate swaps in subsequent periods.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities comprises fair value adjustments of the Public Warrants and Private Warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination. We expect the change in fair value of warrant liabilities to vary each reporting period depending on the fair value adjustments and number of exercises and redemptions of outstanding Public Warrants and Private Warrants during each reporting period. In December 2021, we redeemed all of our outstanding Public Warrants and as of December 31, 2021, the Company no longer has Public Warrants outstanding subject to fair value adjustments.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on early extinguishment of debt comprises the write-off
of deferred financing fees and original issue discount associated with the Company’s long-term debt at the time of extinguishment.
Other Income-Net
Other income-net
consists primarily of interest income on the Company’s cash balances and foreign currency transaction gains and losses related to the impact of transactions denominated in a foreign currency.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit consists of U.S. and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. Earnings from our non-U.S.
activities are subject to local country income tax and may be subject to current U.S. income tax. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets for our operations in foreign jurisdictions. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
NM-Not Meaningful
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
Revenues
Revenue increased by $55.2 million to $688.3 million, or 8.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily a result of a 10% growth from existing customer upgrades and expanding solution offerings to these existing customers as well as 4% growth from new customers and 1% increase in other transaction revenue, partially offset by a 6% impact in professional services revenues due to the divestiture of the First Party Clinical Services in December 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased by $13.1 million to $195.7 million, or 6.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Revenue, exclusive of amortization of acquired technologies
Cost of revenue, exclusive of amortization of acquired technologies, decreased $13.1 million to $169.3 million, or 7.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decline was due to a reduction of $31.3 million of costs related to the divestiture of First Party Clinical Services in December 2020 and a $2.2 million decrease in consulting costs, partially offset by a $13.2 million increase in stock-based compensation mainly from a vesting term modification of outstanding stock options completed in conjunction with the Business Combination, a $5.6 million increase in personnel costs and a $3.5 million increase in third party license and royalty fees.
Amortization of Acquired Technologies
Amortization of acquired technologies was $26.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased by $68.3 million to $492.6 million, or 16.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Our gross profit margin increased to 71.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 67.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit margin was due to increased software subscription revenues, economies of scale resulting from fixed cost arrangements and the divestment of our First Party Clinical Services in December 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $56.5 million to $166.0 million, or 51.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $39.5 million increase in stock-based compensation, mainly from a modification in the vesting terms of stock options completed in conjunction with the Business Combination, a $15.5 million increase in personnel-related costs and a $3.8 million increase in IT costs, partially offset by a $3.1 million increase in the amount of capitalized time on development projects.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expense increased by $74.2 million to $148.9 million, or 99.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $63.0 million increase in stock-based compensation mainly from a modification in the vesting terms of stock options completed in conjunction with the Business Combination, and a $9.9 million increase in personnel costs, including sales incentives.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $159.3 million to $250.1 million, or 175.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $135.0 million increase in stock-based compensation mainly from a vesting term modification of outstanding stock options completed in conjunction with the Business Combination, a $3.7 million increase in personnel costs, a $4.7 million increase in insurance costs and $10.1 million of expenses related to the business combination transaction. In addition, there was a $6.3 million increase in facilities costs due to the Company’s overlapping corporate headquarters leases and due to the acceleration of rent expense from the planned move from its current to its new headquarters in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets was $72.4 million and $72.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $18.0 million to $59.0 million, or 23.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the Company using a portion of its proceeds from the Business Combination to make a principal prepayment of $525.0 million in July 2021 and refinancing its long-term debt in September 2021, after which the Company’s long-term debt bore interest at a lower variable interest rate.
Gain (Loss) on Change in Fair Value of Interest Rate Swaps
The Company recognized a gain on change in fair value of interest rate swaps of $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss on change in fair value of interest rate swaps of $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the proximity of the maturity date prior to the extinguishment of the interest rate swaps in September 2021. The loss recognized in the prior period was mainly attributable to the decline in the forward yield curve during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $64.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The warrant liabilities were recorded as part of the Business Combination and therefore did not exist in the prior year. The expense was due to the increase in the estimated fair value of the Public Warrants and Private Warrants between July 30, 2021, the closing date of the Business Combination, the dates of redemption or exercise for all of the Public Warrants and December 31, 2021 for the Private Warrants.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $15.2 million due to the early repayments of the total balance outstanding under the Company’s First Lien Term Loan. Loss on early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8.6 million due to the early repayment of the total balance outstanding under the Company’s Second Lien Term Loan.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit increased by $21.3 million to $26.0 million, or 455.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Income tax benefit increased primarily due to higher pretax losses, mainly due to higher stock-based compensation expense.
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
NM-Not Meaningful
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
Revenues
Revenue increased by $17.0 million to $633.1 million, or 2.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily a result of existing customer upgrades and expanding solution offerings to these existing customers, as evidenced by our net dollar retention of 103%, as well as 3% growth from new customers, partially offset by 3% decline from other transactions, with 2% of that change from First Party Clinical services.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased by $16.9 million to $208.7 million, or 7.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of Revenue, exclusive of amortization and impairment of acquired technologies
Cost of revenue, exclusive of amortization and impairment of acquired technologies, decreased $9.5 million to $182.4 million, or 4.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cost of revenue was due to a decrease in third party fees for professional services of $9.4 million due to less professional services revenue and a $4.1 million decrease in royalties primarily due to transitioning from a third-party offering to an internally developed solution, partially offset by a $4.0 million increase in personnel-related costs, including share-based compensation, from increased headcount.
Amortization of Acquired Technologies
Amortization of acquired technologies decreased by $1.5 million to $26.3 million, or 5.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted from an impairment charge recognized in 2019.
Impairment of Acquired Technologies
There was no impairment charge recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. Impairment of acquired technologies was $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to an impairment charge recognized as a result of a downward revision of future projected earnings and cash flows at one of our reporting units.
Gross Profit
Gross profit margin increased by $33.9 million to $424.3 million, or 8.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Our gross margin percentage increased from 63.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 67.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in absolute dollars and percentage was primarily due to the increased software subscription revenue and economies of scale resulting from fixed cost arrangements, as well as a change in the mix of services provided during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expense decreased by $4.5 million to $109.5 million, or 3.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to a $10.1 million increase in the amount of capitalized time on development projects and a $1.5 million decrease in depreciation expense due to certain capital assets reaching the conclusion of their useful lives. These items were partially offset by a $5.2 million increase in personnel-related costs, including share-based compensation, from increased headcount and a $2.2 million increase in IT costs.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expense decreased by $7.4 million to $74.7 million, or 9.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to impacts from COVID-19
as we implemented safety measures for our employees, including a $6.1 million decrease in travel costs, a $1.9 million decrease in marketing and event costs, and a $1.0 million decrease in consulting costs, partially offset by a $2.5 million increase in personnel related costs, including sales incentives and share-based compensation.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $12.7 million to $90.8 million, or 16.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $7.4 million increase in personnel related costs, including share-based compensation, a $4.3 million increase in external legal fees and, a $3.8 million increase in consulting and third-party service costs, partially offset by a $3.8 million gain recognized on the divestiture of the Company’s First Party Clinical Services.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $9.0 million to $72.3 million, or 11.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of the impairment charge recognized in 2019.
Impairment
No impairment charges were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. Impairment was $201.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which included impairment charges of goodwill and intangibles assets of $25.8 million and $175.3 million, respectively, and was the result of lower forecasted earnings and cash flows for one of the Company’s reporting units. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $12.5 million to $77.0 million, or 13.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the Company refinancing its long-term debt in February 2020. As part of the refinancing, the Company used the proceeds from an incremental term loan of $375.0 million under its First Lien Credit Agreement to repay the total balance outstanding under the Company’s Second Lien Term Loan, which bore interest at a higher variable interest rate.
Loss on change in Fair Value of Interest Rate Swaps
Loss on change in fair value of interest rate swaps decreased by $9.2 million to $13.2 million, or 40.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributable to the proximity of the maturity date of the swap agreements.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
Loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8.6 million due to the early repayment of the total balance outstanding under the Company’s Second Lien Term Loan. There was no loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit decreased by $62.6 million to $4.7 million, or 93.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Income tax benefit decreased primarily due to lower pretax losses.
Non-GAAP
Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe that Adjusted Gross Margin, and Adjusted EBITDA, which are each non-GAAP
measures, are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use this non-GAAP
financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning, budgeting and forecasting purposes and for setting management bonus programs. We believe that non-GAAP
financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance and comparing our performance with competitors and other comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP
financial measures to investors. Our computation of these non-GAAP
measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate these measures in the same fashion. We endeavor to compensate for the limitation of the non-GAAP
measure presented by also providing the most directly comparable GAAP measure and a description of the reconciling items and adjustments to derive the non-GAAP
measure. These non-GAAP
measures should be considered in addition to results prepared in accordance with GAAP, but should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP
measures on a supplemental basis.
Adjusted Gross Profit
We believe that Adjusted Gross Profit, as defined below, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our performance by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our core business operating results. Adjusted Gross Profit is defined as gross profit, adjusted for the gross profit associated with First Party Clinical Services which was divested as of December 31, 2020, amortization and impairment of acquired technologies, business combination transaction costs, and stock-based compensation, which are not indicative of our core business operating results. The Adjusted Gross Margin percentage is defined as Adjusted Gross Profit divided by Revenue, less First Party Clinical Services divested revenue of $0, $34,742 and $46,042 for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively (amounts in thousands). Gross Profit is the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted Gross Profit, and you should review the reconciliation of Gross Profit to Adjusted Gross Profit below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles Gross Profit to Adjusted Gross Profit for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted Gross Profit increased $85.8 million or 19.2% while Adjusted Gross Margin increased 3% to 78%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Adjusted Gross Profit increased $29.1 million or 7.0% while Adjusted Gross Margin increased 2% to 75%. Each of these increases in Adjusted Gross Margin were primarily due to an increase in software subscription revenue and economies of scale resulting from fixed cost arrangements.
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, as defined below, is useful in evaluating our operational performance distinct and apart from financing costs, certain expenses and non-operational expenses. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss adjusted for interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, (gain) loss on change in fair value of interest rate swaps, change in fair value of warrant liabilities, asset impairment charges, stock-based compensation expense, loss on early extinguishment of debt, business combination transaction costs, lease abandonment charges, lease overlap costs for the incremental expenses associated with the Company’s new corporate headquarters prior to termination of its existing headquarters’ lease, net costs related to divestiture and less revenue and related cost of revenue associated with First Party Clinical Services, which was divested as of December 31, 2020. Net loss is the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted EBITDA, and you should review the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. You should be aware that when evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating this measure. In addition, our presentation of this measure should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items.
The following table reconciles net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Adjusted EBITDA increased $58.6 million, or 28.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA increased $32.4 million, or 19.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases were driven by increased software subscription revenues from expanding solution adoption among existing customers, existing customer upgrades and sales to new customers and economies of scale resulting from fixed cost arrangements.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share
We believe that Adjusted Net Income, as defined below, and Adjusted Earnings Per Share are useful in evaluating our operational performance distinct and apart from financing costs, certain expenses and non-operational
expenses. Adjusted Net Income is defined as net loss adjusted for the after-tax
effects of amortization, asset impairment charges, (gain) loss on change in fair value of interest rate swaps, change in fair value of warrant liabilities, stock-based compensation expense, loss on early extinguishment of debt, business combination transaction costs, lease abandonment charges, lease overlap costs for the incremental expenses associated with the Company’s new corporate headquarters prior to termination of its existing headquarters’ lease, net costs related to divestiture, less revenue and related cost of revenue associated with First Party Clinical Services, which was divested as of December 31, 2020. Net loss is the most directly comparable GAAP measure to Adjusted Net Income, and you should review the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted Net Income below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share are intended as supplemental measures of our performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. You should be aware that when evaluating Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring
items.
The following table reconciles net loss and GAAP basic and diluted earnings per share to Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Adjusted Net Income increased $50.9 million, or 64.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted Net Income increased $37.9 million, or 91.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. These increases were driven primarily by increased software subscription revenues from expanding solution adoption among existing customers, existing customer upgrades and sales to new customers and economies of scale resulting from fixed cost arrangements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations from cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $182.5 million and $162.1 million, respectively. The Company had a working capital surplus of $186.3 million at December 31, 2021 and had an accumulated deficit at December 31, 2021 totaling $746.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $800.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding on term loans.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, our cash flows from operating activities and our borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations, fund required long-term debt repayments and meet our commitments for capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months.
Other than the business acquisition discussed in the “Recent Developments” section of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, we are not currently a party to any material definitive agreement regarding potential investments in, or acquisitions of, complementary business, applications or technologies. However, we may enter into these types of arrangements, which could reduce our cash and cash equivalents or require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Additional funds from financing arrangements may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all. We may require additional borrowings under our credit arrangements and alternative forms of financings or investments to achieve our longer-term strategic plans.
Debt
On September 21, 2021, CCC Intelligent Solutions Inc., an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, together with certain of the Company’s subsidiaries acting as guarantors entered into the 2021 Credit Agreement, dated as of September 21, 2021.
The 2021 Credit Agreement replaced the Company’s First Lien Credit Agreement, dated as of April 27, 2017, as amended as of February 14, 2020.
The 2021 Credit Agreement consists of the Term B Loan for an aggregate principal amount of $800.0 million and the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility for an aggregate principal amount of $250.0 million. The Company received proceeds of $798.0 million, net of debt discount of $2.0 million, related to the Term B Loan.
Using proceeds from the Term B Loan, we repaid the outstanding borrowings under our First Lien Credit Agreement. The repayment was determined to be a debt extinguishment and we recognized a $9.2 million loss on early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Beginning with the quarter ending March 31, 2022, the Term B Loan requires quarterly principal payments of $2.0 million until June 30, 2028, with the remaining outstanding principal amount required to be paid on the maturity date, September 21, 2028. Beginning with fiscal year ending December 31, 2022, the Term B Loan requires a prepayment of principal, subject to certain exceptions, in connection with the receipt of proceeds from certain asset sales, casualty events, and debt issuances by the Company, and up to 50% of annual excess cash flow, as defined in and as further set forth in the 2021 Credit Agreement. When a principal prepayment is required, the prepayment offsets the future quarterly principal payments of the same amount. The Company is not subject to the annual excess cash flow calculation in fiscal year 2021 and no such principal prepayments are required.
As of December 31, 2021, the amount outstanding under the Term B Loan was $800.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued a standby letter of credit for $0.7 million which reduces the amount available to be borrowed under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility for so long as such standby letter of credit remains outstanding and at December 31, 2021, $249.3 million was available to be borrowed.
Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Facility bear interest at rates based on the ratio of the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ consolidated first lien net indebtedness to the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ consolidated EBITDA for applicable periods specified in the 2021 Credit Facility. The interest rate per annum applicable to the loans under the 2021 Credit Facility are based on a fluctuating rate of interest equal to the sum of an applicable rate and, at the Company’s election from time to time, either:
(1)
a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (a) the rate last quoted by the Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate,” (b) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, (c) one-month LIBOR plus 1.00% and (d) with respect to the Term B Loans, 1.50% and with respect to the Revolving Credit Facility, 1.00%, or
(2)
a Eurocurrency rate determined by reference to LIBOR (other than with respect to Euros, Euribor and with respect to British Pounds Sterling, SONIA) with a term as selected by the Company, of one, three or six months (subject to (x) in the case of term loans, a 0.50% per annum floor and (y) in the case of revolving loans, a 0.00% per annum floor).
A quarterly commitment fee of up to 0.50% per annum is payable on the unused portion of the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 the weighted-average interest rate on the outstanding borrowings under the Term B Loan was 3.0%. The Company made interest payments of $6.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement are guaranteed by Cypress Intermediate Holdings II, Inc. and certain of its U.S. subsidiaries. The 2021 Credit Agreement is secured by a first priority lien on the stock of CCC Intelligent Solutions Inc. and substantially all of its assets, subject to various limitations and exceptions.
The 2021 Credit Agreement contains representations and warranties, and affirmative and negative covenants, customary for a financing of this type. The Company was in compliance with all affirmative and negative covenants during the year ended December 31, 2021. The terms of the 2021 Credit Agreement include a financial covenant, which requires that, at the end of each fiscal quarter (commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022), if the aggregate amount of borrowings under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility exceeds 35% of the aggregate commitments of the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility, the Company’s first-lien leverage ratio cannot exceed 6.25 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was not subject to the financial covenant.
Prior to entering in to the 2021 Credit Agreement in September 2021, our long-term debt was provided through our First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement, each entered into in April 2017.
On February 14, 2020, we refinanced our long-term debt and entered into the First Lien Amendment. The First Lien Amendment provided an incremental term loan, amended the amount of commitments and the maturity dates of the First Lien Credit Agreement’s revolving credit facilities. The proceeds of the incremental term loan were used to repay all outstanding borrowings under the Second Lien Credit Agreement.
The repayment of outstanding borrowings under the Second Lien Credit Agreement was determined to be a debt extinguishment and we recognized an $8.6 million loss on early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2020.
First Lien Credit Agreement
. The First Lien Credit Agreement initially consisted of a $1.0 billion term loan (“First Lien Term Loan”), a $65.0 million Dollar revolving credit facility (“Dollar Revolver”), and a $35.0 million multicurrency revolving credit facility (“Multicurrency Revolver” and together with the Dollar Revolver, the “First Lien Revolvers”), with a sublimit of $30.0 million for letters of credit under the First Lien Revolver. We received proceeds of $997.5 million, net of debt discount of $2.5 million, related to the First Lien Term Loan.
The First Lien Amendment provided an incremental term loan in the amount of $375.0 million. We received proceeds from the incremental term loan of $373.1 million, net of debt discount of $1.9 million. The First Lien Amendment reduced the amount of commitments under each of the Dollar Revolver and the Multicurrency Revolver to $59.3 million and $32.0 million, respectively, and extended the maturity of a portion of the commitments under each revolving credit facility. Pursuant to the First Lien Amendment, the non-extended
Dollar Revolver and non-extended
Multicurrency Revolver consisted of commitments of $8.1 million and $4.4 million, respectively, which was scheduled to mature on April 27, 2022. The extended Dollar Revolver and extended Multicurrency Revolver consisted of commitments of $51.2 million and $27.6 million, respectively, which were scheduled to mature on October 27, 2023.
The First Lien Term Loan required quarterly principal payments of approximately $3.5 million until March 31, 2024, with the remaining outstanding principal amount required to be paid on April 27, 2024. The First Lien Term Loan required a prepayment of principal, subject to certain exceptions, in connection with the receipt of proceeds from certain asset sales, casualty events, and debt issuances by us, and up to 50% of annual excess cash flow, as defined in and as further set forth in the First Lien Credit Agreement. When a principal prepayment is required, the prepayment offsets the future quarterly principal payments of the same amount were required. The annual excess cash flow calculation for the year ended December 31, 2020 required a principal prepayment of $1.5 million, which was paid in April 2021. The annual excess cash flow calculation for the year ended December 31, 2019 did not require a principal prepayment.
In September 2021, using the proceeds from the Term B Loan provided in the 2021 Credit Agreement and cash on hand, the Company fully repaid $804.2 million of outstanding borrowings on the First Lien Term Loan.
The Company made a voluntary principal prepayment of $525.0 million on July 30, 2021. In conjunction with the prepayment, the Company recognized a loss on early extinguishment of debt for $6.0 million in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Outstanding borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan bore interest at a variable rate of LIBOR, plus up to 3.00% per annum based upon the Company’s first lien leverage ratio. A quarterly commitment fee of up to 0.50% based upon the Company’s first lien leverage ratio (as defined in and as further set forth in the First Lien Credit Agreement) was payable on the unused portion of the First Lien Revolver.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the weighted-average interest rate on the outstanding borrowings under the First Lien Term Loan was 4.1%, 4.2% and 5.2%, respectively. The Company made interest payments of $36.1 million, $53.6 million and $50.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The First Lien Credit Agreement contained representations and warranties, and affirmative and negative covenants, customary for a financing of this type. The Company was in compliance with all affirmative and negative covenants during the years ended December 2020 and 2019, and through the point of repayment in September 2021.
Second Lien Credit Agreement
. The Second Lien Credit Agreement consisted of a $375.0 million term loan (“Second Lien Term Loan”). We received proceeds of $372.2 million, net of discount of $2.8 million, related to the Second Lien Term Loan.
In February 2020, using the proceeds from the incremental term loan provided in the First Lien Amendment, we fully repaid the outstanding balance on the Second Lien Term Loan (see Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information).
Amounts outstanding under the Second Lien Term Loan during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 bore interest at a variable rate of LIBOR, plus 6.75%. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the weighted-average interest rate on the Second Lien Term Loan was 8.6% and 9.1%, respectively.
Interest Rate Swap Agreements.
In June 2017, we entered into three floating to fixed interest rate swap agreements (“Swap Agreements”) to reduce our exposure to the variability from future cash flows resulting from interest rate risk related to our floating rate long-term debt.
On September 21, 2021, the Company made an aggregate payment of $10.0 million to extinguish the Swap Agreements that were scheduled to expire in June 2022. The aggregate notional amount of the Swap Agreements totaled $864.9 million at December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2021, and the years in which these obligations are due:
(1)
Includes scheduled principal and interest payments at existing rates at December 31, 2021 and assumes no non-mandatory
prepayments. Obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at our option are reflected at their contractual maturity date. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(2)
Includes leases of facilities that expire at various dates through 2037. Rent expense for leased facilities of $13.7 million, $9.7 million and $9.5 million was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(3)
Includes long-term agreements with suppliers and other parties related to licensing data used in our services, outsourced data center, disaster recovery, and SaaS offerings. See Note 22 to our consolidated financial for additional information.
(4)
A licensing agreement with a third party to obtain a perpetual software license (“Licensing Agreement”) for a database structure, tools, and historical claims data used within the Company’s software. Payments include principal and imputed interest through the contract termination date in December 2031. See Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net cash provided by operating activities was $127.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by operating activities consists of net loss of $248.9 million, adjusted for $420.1 million of
non-cash items,
($4.5) million for changes in working capital and ($39.4) million for the effect of changes in other operating assets and liabilities.
Non-cash adjustments
include stock-based compensation expense of $262.0 million, depreciation and amortization of $123.1 million, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $64.5 million, a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $15.2 million, $6.3 million in
non-cash
lease expense, amortization of deferred financing fees and debt discount of $4.3 million, deferred income tax benefits of ($46.9) million and a change in fair value of interest rate swaps of ($8.4) million. The change in working capital was primarily a result of an increase in other current assets of $12.3 million due to timing of payments for prepaid and other deferred costs, an increase in accounts receivable of $4.7 million due to revenue growth and an increase in the current portion of deferred contract costs of $3.1 million due to higher employee sales incentives, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $8.3 million due to timing of payments, an increase in deferred revenue of $4.5 million due to revenue growth and timing of customer payments and an increase in income taxes of $3.8 million due to timing of payments. The change in other operating assets and liabilities was primarily a result of an increase in
non-current
other assets of $7.8 million due to timing of payments and other deferred costs, an increase in
non-current
deferred contract costs of $7.7 million due to higher employee sales incentives, a $10.2 million cash settlement of vested phantom stock, and a $10.0 million payment for the early extinguishment of the Company’s interest rate swap agreements
.
Net cash used in investing activities was $48.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash used in investing activities is primarily related to capitalized time on internally developed software projects and purchases of software, equipment and property of $38.3 million and an investment in a limited partnership of $10.2 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $58.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash used in financing activities was primarily related to principal payments of long-term debt of $1,336.2 million, dividends to shareholders prior to the Business Combination of $269.2 million and a deemed distribution to CCCIS option holders of $9.0 million, partially offset by borrowings from the Term B Loan, net of fees paid to the lender, of $789.9 million, and net proceeds from the Business Combination of $763.3 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $103.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by operating activities consists of net loss of $16.9 million, adjusted for non-cash items
and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments
include stock-based compensation expense of $11.3 million, depreciation and amortization of $116.4 million, deferred income tax benefits of ($11.1) million, amortization of deferred financing fees of $4.6 million, loss on early extinguishment of debt of $8.6 million, change in fair value of interest rate swaps of $13.2 million and a gain on divestiture of ($3.8) million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily a result of an increase in deferred contract costs of $3.0 million due to the payment of employee sales incentives, an increase in accounts receivable of $10.6 million due to timing of receipts of payments from customers, and an increase in prepayments and other assets of $15.7 million due to non-trade
receivables and timing of payments for prepaid and other deferred costs, partially offset by an increase in income taxes of $6.7 million due to timing of tax payments. Net changes in working capital used cash of ($12.1) million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $30.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities is primarily related to capitalized time on internally developed software projects and purchases of software, equipment and property of $30.1 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in financing activities was primarily related to principal repayments on long-term debt of $ 388.8 million, including the repayment of the Second Lien Term Loan of $375.0 million, partially offset by additional borrowings from the incremental term loan under the First Lien Credit Agreement, net of fees paid to the lender, of $369.8 million and $14.2 million of proceeds from the issuance of a non-controlling
interest in a subsidiary.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $66.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities consists of net loss of $210.3 million, adjusted for non-cash items
and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments
include stock-based compensation expense of $7.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $127.5 million, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets of $207.1 million, deferred income taxes of ($84.3) million, amortization of deferred financing fees of $4.8 million and change in fair value of interest rate swaps of $22.4 million. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily a result of an increase in deferred contract costs of $7.3 million due to the payment of employee sales incentives, an increase in accounts receivable of $4.5 million due to timing of receipts of payments from customers, and an increase in prepayments and other assets of $5.9 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $4.5 million due to timing of cash disbursements. Net changes in working capital used cash of ($6.1) million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in investing activities is primarily related to purchases of software, equipment and property of $20.5 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash used in financing activities is primarily related to principal payments on long term debt of $10.0 million partially offset by proceeds from company stock option exercises of $0.7 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, and expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience, trends and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
For information on our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our most significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
•
Revenue Recognition
•
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
•
Stock-based Compensation
•
Valuation of Warrant Liabilities
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition requires judgment and the use of estimates. The Company generates revenue from subscription-based contracts that are billed either on a subscription or transactional basis. Revenue is derived from the sale of software subscriptions, and other revenue, primarily professional services.
The estimates and assumptions requiring significant judgment under our revenue recognition policy in accordance with FASB ASC 606 are as follows:
Determine the transaction price
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for services to the customer. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that no significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will occur. The sale of our software subscriptions may include variable consideration related to usage-based contracts and provisions for additional fees when the volume of a customer’s transactions exceeds agreed upon maximums within defined reporting periods. We estimate variable consideration based on the most likely amount, to the extent that a significant revenue reversal is not probable to occur.
The Company may occasionally recognize an adjustment in revenue in the current period for performance obligations partially or fully satisfied in the previous periods resulting from changes in estimates for the transaction price, including any changes to the Company’s assessment of whether an estimate of variable consideration is constrained. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the impact on revenue recognized in the respective period, from performance obligations partially or fully satisfied in the previous period, was not significant.
Determine the amortizable life of contract assets
Sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for initial contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to generally be between three and five years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, our technology, and other factors. Most often with larger customers, a new contract or amended master agreement will not include a renewal period that requires assessment of whether the new business and renewal business commissions are commensurate. This is because the solutions and services offered as part of the new contract or amended agreement will be different from the original due to changes in technology and offerings. While the renewal period may be reached, most often a new multi-year agreement is signed that includes new services and features which will pay out a commission on the new services and features at the new business percentage and the renewal services and features at the renewal commission percentage. In situations when the renewal period is triggered, it is typically with smaller customers where the sales commission paid is insignificant. Thus, sales commissions are amortized on a systematic basis over three to five years which corresponds to the period and pattern in which revenue is recognized. Sales commissions for renewal contracts are deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contractual renewal period. Amortization expense is included in selling and marketing expenses on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We perform an annual assessment for impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets as of September 30 each fiscal year, or whenever events occur or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset is below its carrying value.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test, in which we compared the fair value of our reporting units, which we primarily determine using an income approach based on the present value of discounted cash flows, to the respective carrying value, which includes goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds their respective carrying value, the goodwill is not considered impaired. If the carrying value is higher than the fair value, the difference would be recognized as an impairment loss.
The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is subjective and requires significant judgment. In estimating the fair value of a reporting unit for the purposes of our annual or periodic impairment analyses, we make estimates and significant judgments about the future cash flows of that reporting unit. Our cash flow forecasts are based on assumptions that represent the highest and best use for our reporting units. Changes in judgment on these assumptions and estimates could result in goodwill impairment charges. We believe that the assumptions and estimates utilized are appropriate based on the information available to management.
No goodwill impairments were recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
.
Based on the results of our assessment performed as of September 30, 2019, which included downward revisions to future projected earnings and cash flows of one of our reporting units, it was determined that the carrying value of goodwill was impaired and the Company recorded an impairment charge to goodwill of $25.8 million.
Intangible assets with finite lives and software, equipment and property are amortized or depreciated over their estimated useful life on a straight-line basis. We monitor conditions related to these assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining amortization or depreciation period. We test these assets for potential impairment whenever our management concludes events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The original estimate of an asset’s useful life and the impact of an event or circumstance on either an asset’s useful life or carrying value involve significant judgment regarding estimates of the future cash flows associated with each asset.
There was no impairment charge recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an impairment charge to one of its reporting unit’s customer relationships and acquired technology intangible assets. The Company’s forecasted future revenue and expense cash flow streams indicated the carrying amounts of the intangible assets were not recoverable and therefore the Company recorded an impairment charge of $181.3 million.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation plans in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires the recognition of expense measured based on the grant date fair value of the stock-based compensation awards. Our stock-based awards include stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and phantom shares. Our stock-based awards have vesting terms that are service-based, performance-based or performance-based with a market condition.
The grant date fair value of our service-based awards, excluding RSUs, is determined using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of each service-based and performance-based RSU is determined using the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of each award with performance-based with a market condition vesting is determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
For stock-based awards with only service conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period only for the portion of awards expected to vest, based on an estimated forfeiture rate. For stock-based awards with only performance conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the explicit performance period when the performance targets are probable of being achieved. We recognize stock-based compensation expense on awards that are subject to performance-based vesting with a market condition when the performance targets are considered probable of being achieved. The determination of the grant date fair value for these awards is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the award, the risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the award and expected dividends. The market condition of these awards impacts the fair value at grant date and is the reason the Monte Carlo simulation is utilized to determine fair value.
Key assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model and Monte Carlo simulation method include:
•
Fair Value of Common Stock-Prior to the Business Combination, there was no public market for our common stock. For those periods included in our consolidated financial statements, fair values of the shares of common stock underlying our stock-based awards were estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. Our board of directors, with input from management considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock, which were prepared in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation as well as the Advent Transaction for grants in 2017.
•
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and, for time-based awards, is determined using the simplified method that uses the weighted average of the time-to-vesting
and the contractual life of the awards.
•
Expected Volatility-As we have limited trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of awards.
•
Expected Dividend Yield-Historically, we have not paid regular dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock on a regular basis. We do not have a dividend policy. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 20 to our consolidated financial statements for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo option pricing models to determine the estimated fair value of our stock-based awards with service vesting and performance vesting. Some of these assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Valuation of Warrant Liabilities
We account for our warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under
which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The fair value of the Public Warrants was determined using the quoted market price as of the valuation date. The fair value of the Private Warrants was determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of our Private Warrants. Some of these assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our warrant liabilities could be materially different.