Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion is intended to analyze major elements of our consolidated financial statements and provide insight into important areas of management’s focus. This section should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Statements in the following discussion may include forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” for additional discussion of these factors and risks.
Previously, our operations included our new unit sales business that consisted of the fabrication and sale of new standard and custom-designed, engineered compressor packages fabricated primarily at our facility in Midland, Texas. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we fully exited the new unit sales business. These operations were previously included in equipment sales revenues and are now reflected as discontinued operations for all periods presented.
On January 29, 2021, Spartan acquired from TETRA the Partnership’s general partner, IDRs and 10.95 million common units in the Partnership in the GP Sale. In connection with the GP Sale, on January 29, 2021, TETRA entered into the Transition Services Agreement with the Partnership, pursuant to which TETRA provided certain accounting, information technology and back office support services to the Partnership for a period of up to one year following closing. The Transition Services Agreement with TETRA expired on January 31, 2022.
On November 10, 2021, the Partnership entered into the Contribution Agreement with CSI Compressco GP, Spartan and Compressco Sub. Pursuant to the terms of the Contribution Agreement, Spartan contributed Spartan Treating to the Partnership. As the Partnership and Spartan Treating were under common control at the time of the Spartan Acquisition, the results of operations have been combined for the Partnership and Spartan Treating from the date common control began, January 29, 2021. See Note 4 - “Common Control Acquisition” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Business Overview
We provide services including natural gas compression and treating services. Natural gas compression equipment is used for natural gas and oil production, gathering, artificial lift, production enhancement, transmission, processing, and storage. We also provide a variety of natural gas treating services. Our compression business includes a fleet of approximately 4,800 compressor packages providing approximately 1.2 million in aggregate horsepower, utilizing a full spectrum of low-, medium-, and high-horsepower engines. Our treating fleet includes amine units, gas coolers, and related equipment. Our aftermarket business provides compressor package overhaul, repair, engineering and design, reconfiguration and maintenance services, as well as the sale of compressor package parts and components manufactured by third-party suppliers. Our customers operate throughout many of the onshore producing regions of the United States, as well as in a number of international locations, including Mexico, Canada, Argentina, Egypt and Chile.
Demand for our services is directly driven by the production of crude oil and associated natural gas from unconventional shale plays, production of natural gas from conventional plays and the transmission of natural gas to and within sales pipelines. Our fleet of compressors, ranging from 20 to 2,500 horsepower per unit, allows us to service our customers compression needs at the wellhead through high-horsepower compression needs at centralized gathering and gas lift facilities.
During 2020, macroeconomic uncertainty in the oil and natural gas industry drove steep declines in spending by oil and gas operators which led to a decline in our compression fleet utilization and impacted revenues and pricing. Oil prices began to stabilize during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and gained strength throughout 2021, reaching an average of $77 per barrel in the fourth quarter of 2021. This improvement in commodity prices, as well as the beginning of a recovery in the general economy and the energy sector, has resulted in an increase in activity levels from our contract services and aftermarket services customers. Revenue from contract services increased each quarter in 2021. In addition, we secured orders from key customers for high-horsepower and electric compressors that started generating revenues in the fourth quarter of 2021 and will continue to be deployed in the first half of 2022. Our customers continue to be focused on capital discipline; however, we continue to see improvement in the levels of quote activity and awards. As the market environment continues to evolve, competition for field employees has increased and inflationary pressures have driven certain costs higher. In addition, supply chain disruptions have impacted the availability of parts and supplies. In addition, war and other armed conflicts, including conflict related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and any resulting economic downturn could adversely affect our results of operations, impair our ability to raise capital or otherwise adversely impact our ability to realize certain business strategies. We will continue to monitor these risks and take the necessary actions to mitigate them.
We have and will continue to evaluate the sale of non-core assets, including our low-horsepower compression fleet. We can provide no assurance that we will consummate a future sale of our low-horsepower compression fleet.
In 2020, we took an aggressive approach towards cost management to improve our financial performance and liquidity. We implemented temporary and permanent cost reductions, including reductions in capital expenditures, workforce, and salaries. We also implemented furloughs, a reduction in the cash retainers for the directors of our general partner, the suspension of 401(k) matching contributions for our employees, targeted reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses, rationalization of our real estate facilities, and negotiated reductions in expenditures with many of our suppliers. In 2021, with the improvement in market conditions, we have reversed most of the cost-reduction actions taken in 2020 and have increased capital allocated to growth. With the rapidly changing market environment, we will continue to proactively manage our capital allocation strategies and monitor our expenses and financial performance.
While we are not able to predict how long the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact overall market conditions, the demand for oil and gas and the effect it will ultimately have on our business, we continued to see activity levels increase in the fourth quarter of 2021. We are encouraged by the strong oil and gas commodity prices and projections for demand recovery; however, the risk of additional strains of COVID-19, risk that developed vaccines may not be successful in preventing COVID-19 or its spread or the potential outbreak of a new or mutated virus, and the possibility of future lockdowns makes any forecast for improvement uncertain. In addition, continued capital discipline throughout the energy sector may limit production growth even when the economy recovers from the pandemic. Despite challenging and changing market conditions, we will continue to maintain our commitment to safety and service quality for our customers.
Results of Operations
The following data should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the associated Notes contained elsewhere in this document. On November 10, 2021, Spartan contributed Spartan Treating to the Partnership. As the Partnership and Spartan Treating were under common control at the time of the Spartan Acquisition, the results of operations have been combined for the Partnership and Spartan Treating from the date common control began which was January 29, 2021. See Note 4 - “Common Control Acquisition” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information. Previously, our equipment sales business included our new unit sales business that consisted of the fabrication and sale of new standard and custom-designed, engineered compressor packages fabricated primarily at our facility in Midland, Texas. We sold the Midland facility in July 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we fully exited the new unit sales business and we have reflected these operations as discontinued operations for all periods presented. See Note 10 - “Discontinued Operations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information. Used equipment sales revenue continues to be included in equipment sales revenue.
2021 Compared to 2020
Revenues
Contract services revenues increased by $6.9 million, or 3.0%, during 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to the Spartan Acquisition which generated $11.1 million of contract services revenue in 2021 from the date of common control. This increase in revenues was partially offset by a decrease in revenues resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on revenue in 2020 and 2021. The overall compression fleet horsepower utilization rate as of December 31, 2021 increased to 80.8% compared to 76.4% as of December 31, 2020. In addition, in 2021 we discontinued some of the pricing concessions given in 2020.
Aftermarket services revenues decreased $6.8 million, or 11.2%, during 2021 compared to the prior year partially due to decreased demand for parts and services as customers delayed re-starting maintenance programs on their owned equipment. Additionally, due to the increase in demand for our compression services, our facilities and workforce were consumed with make-ready and redeployment work limiting the availability for aftermarket services jobs. The contribution of Spartan Treating generated $0.7 million in aftermarket services revenue in 2021 from the date of common control.
Equipment rentals revenues increased $12.9 million, or 100.0%, during 2021 due to the Spartan Acquisition.
Equipment sales revenues decreased $10.5 million, or 79.3%, during 2021 compared to the prior year due to a decrease in used unit sales. In 2020, the Partnership increased efforts to sell non-core used compressors to strengthen liquidity during the market downturn.
Cost of revenues
Cost of contract services increased compared to the prior year consistent with increased revenues and includes the addition of Spartan Treating which had $6.3 million of cost in 2021 from the date of common control. Cost of contract services as a percentage of contract services revenues increased from 47.7% in 2020 to 50.5% in 2021. This increase was partially due to higher make-ready expenses and start-up costs in 2021 which contributed to higher revenues in the fourth quarter of 2021 and will continue to do so in 2022. In addition, inflationary pressures have resulted in increased costs in certain operating cost categories in 2021 including field labor costs and fuel costs.
Cost of aftermarket services decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 consistent with the decrease
in revenues. The addition of Spartan Treating added $0.4 million of costs in 2021 from the date of common control. The cost of aftermarket services was also impacted by inflation in 2021.
Cost of equipment rentals increased $1.1 million, or 100%, during 2021 due to the Spartan Acquisition.
Cost of equipment sales decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 consistent with the decrease in associated revenues.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense primarily consists of the depreciation of compressor packages in our service fleet. In addition, it includes the depreciation of other operating equipment and facilities and the amortization of intangibles. The contribution of Spartan Treating resulted in $4.3 million of depreciation and amortization in 2021. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased compared to the prior year primarily due to impairments recorded in 2020, reducing the cost basis of our compression fleet.
Impairments and other charges
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairments and other charges of $15.4 million primarily on non-core used compressor equipment-the low-horsepower class of our compression fleet and field inventory for compression and related services. There were no impairments recorded in the current year.
Insurance recoveries
Insurance recoveries relate to insurance claim proceeds received in 2020 associated with fleet compressor packages that were damaged during the prior year.
Selling, general, and administrative expense
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased during 2021 compared to 2020 largely due to increased employment expenses, including wages, incentives, benefits, and other employee-related expenses of $6.2 million, the addition of Spartan Treating, which added $3.7 million in expenses in 2021 from the date of common control, increased professional services fees of $0.2 million and increased general expenses such as
office, tax, and insurance expenses of $0.3 million. These increases were offset by decreased bad debt expenses of $1.2 million.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net increased to $54.8 million during 2021 compared to $54.5 million in 2020 due to higher interest rates associated with our Second Lien Notes following the June 2020 debt exchange.
Other (income) expense, net
Other (income) expense, net, was $3.9 million of expense during 2021 compared to $3.5 million of expense in 2020. This increase in expense is primarily due to $5.2 million of increased losses on disposal of assets and increased foreign currency losses of $1.2 million, partially offset by $4.8 million of decreased fees associated primarily with the unsecured debt exchange transaction in 2020.
Provision for income taxes
As a partnership, we are generally not subject to income taxes at the entity level, and our partners are separately taxed on their share of our taxable income. However, a portion of our business is conducted through taxable U.S. corporate subsidiaries. Accordingly, a U.S. federal and state income tax provision has been reflected in the accompanying statements of operations. Certain of our operations are located outside of the United States and the Partnership, through its foreign subsidiaries, is responsible for income taxes in these countries.
Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, was negative 11.1% primarily due to taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions and Texas gross margin taxes combined with losses generated in entities for which no related tax benefit has been recorded. Included in our deferred tax assets are net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits that are available to offset future income tax liabilities in the U.S. as well as in certain foreign jurisdictions.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax decreased from a $10.9 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a $0.6 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Partnership exited the new unit sales business during 2020, with final deliveries made in October. The prior year loss includes $36.8 million of new unit sales revenues and $0.8 million of other income, offset by $38.5 million of cost of sales, $5.5 million of impairments, and $3.9 million of selling, general, and administrative expenses.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Operating Expenses. We use operating expenses as a performance measure for our business. We track our operating expenses using month-to-month, quarter-to-quarter, year-to-date, and year-to-year comparisons and as compared to budget. This analysis is useful in identifying adverse cost trends and allows us to investigate the cause of these trends and implement remedial measures if possible. The most significant portions of our operating expenses are for our field labor, repair and maintenance of our equipment, and for the fuel and other supplies consumed while providing our services. The costs of other materials consumed while performing our services, ad valorem taxes, other labor costs, truck maintenance, rent on storage facilities, vehicle leases and insurance expenses comprise the significant remainder of our operating expenses. Our operating expenses generally fluctuate with our level of activity.
Our labor costs consist primarily of wages and benefits for our field personnel, as well as expenses related to their training and safety. Additional information regarding our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 is provided within the Results of Operations sections above.
Adjusted EBITDA. We view Adjusted EBITDA as one of our primary management tools, and we track it on a monthly basis, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenues (typically compared to the prior month, prior year period, and to budget). We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and before certain charges, including impairments, bad debt expense attributable to bankruptcy of customers, equity compensation, non-cash costs of compressors sold, gain on extinguishment of debt, write-off of
unamortized financing costs, severance and other non-recurring or unusual expenses or charges. Adjusted EBITDA is used as a supplemental financial measure by our management to:
•assess our ability to generate available cash sufficient to make distributions to our common unitholders and general partner;
•evaluate the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure, or historical cost basis;
•measure operating performance and return on capital as compared to those of our competitors; and
•determine our ability to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated:
Free Cash Flow. We define Free Cash Flow as cash from operations less capital expenditures, net of sales proceeds. Management primarily uses this metric to assess our ability to retire debt, evaluate our capacity to further invest and grow, and measure our performance as compared to our peers. The following table reconciles cash provided by operations, net, to Free Cash Flow for the periods indicated:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $40.0 million of revenues in excess of cash expenses partially offset by $12.9 million in working capital changes.
Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow are financial measures that are not in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered an alternative to net income, operating income, cash from operating activities, or any
other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These measures may not be comparable to similarly titled financial metrics of other entities, as other entities may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA or Free Cash Flow in the same manner as we do. Management compensates for the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow as analytical tools by reviewing the comparable U.S. GAAP measures, understanding the differences between the measures, and incorporating this knowledge into management’s decision-making processes. Adjusted EBITDA and Free Cash Flow should not be viewed as indicative of the actual amount of cash we have available for distributions or that we plan to distribute for a given period, nor should it be equated with “available cash” as defined in our partnership agreement.
Horsepower Utilization Rate of our Compressor Packages. We measure the horsepower utilization rate of our fleet of compressor packages as the amount of horsepower of compressor packages used to provide services as of a particular date, divided by the amount of horsepower of compressor packages in our services fleet as of such date. Management primarily uses this metric to determine our future need for additional compressor packages for our service fleet and to measure marketing effectiveness.
The following table sets forth the total horsepower in our compression fleet, our total horsepower in service and our horsepower utilization rate by each horsepower class of our compression fleet as of the dates shown.
The following table sets forth our horsepower utilization rates by each horsepower class of our compression fleet as of the dates shown.
The total horsepower utilization rate and the utilization rate for the medium and high-horsepower class each increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to an increase in customer activity levels. The market environment improved in 2021 resulting in an increase in total utilization of 4% compared to the utilization rate as of December 31, 2020, with meaningful gains in utilization in the medium and high-horsepower categories.
Net Increases/Decreases in Compression Fleet Horsepower. We measure the net increase (or decrease) in our compression fleet horsepower during a given period by taking the difference between the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages added to the fleet during the period, less the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages removed from the fleet during the period. We measure the net increase (or decrease) in our compression fleet horsepower in service during a given period by taking the difference between the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages placed into service during the period, less the aggregate horsepower of compressor packages removed from service during the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash requirements are for distributions, working capital requirements, debt service, normal operating expenses, and capital expenditures. Our potential sources of funds are our existing cash balances, cash generated from our operations, asset sales, and long-term and short-term borrowings, which we believe will be sufficient to meet our working capital and growth capital requirements during 2022. We have secured orders from
key customers for high-horsepower and electric compressors which will drive our investment in growth capital and consume liquidity in 2022.
Oil and natural gas commodity prices recovered in the second half of 2020 and throughout 2021 from their lows in the first half of 2020. During the beginning of 2022, commodity prices have continued to increase with the West Texas Intermediate price of oil rising to $119.26 per barrel as of March 7, 2022 and the Henry Hub price for natural gas rising to $4.61 per MMBtu as of March 8, 2022. Although uncertainty remains, the outlook for the energy sector has improved significantly. If oil and natural gas prices decrease from current levels, our businesses could be negatively impacted. Despite these uncertainties, we remain committed to a long-term growth strategy. Our near-term focus is to balance our investment in growth against our investment in maintaining our revenue-generating assets, while continuing to preserve and enhance liquidity through strategic operating and financial measures. We periodically evaluate engaging in strategic transactions and may consider divesting assets where our evaluation suggests such transactions are in the best interests of our business. We are subject to business and operational risks that could materially and adversely affect our cash flows and, when coupled with risks associated with current debt and equity market conditions, our ability or desire to issue securities. Please read “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
In November of 2021, in connection with the Spartan Acquisition, we closed a private placement of common units to certain investors for gross proceeds of $52.7 million (the “Private Placement”) and issued $10 million in aggregate principal amount of our 10.000%/10.750% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2026 (the “New Second Lient Notes”) pursuant to a securities purchase agreement (the “Second Lien Notes Sale”). The proceeds of the Private Placement and Second Lien Notes Sale were used for general Partnership purposes, including the redemption of all $80.7 million of our senior unsecured notes in December 2021. These and other transactions completed in the fourth quarter of 2021 improved our overall financial condition and liquidity position.
Following the redeployment of our idle assets, meeting increased demand for our contract services will require ongoing capital expenditure investment, which could be significant. We expect to fund any future capital expenditures, along with potential acquisitions, if any, with existing cash balances and cash flow generated from our operations. We may also seek to expand our compression fleet through finance leases with third parties.
The level of future growth capital expenditures depends on demand for our contract services, the level of cash available to fund these expenditures and our decisions whether to utilize available cash to fund increases in our quarterly common unit distribution, retire debt, or make capital expenditures. We expect capital expenditures in 2022 will range from $50.0 million to $60.0 million. These capital expenditures include approximately $18.0 million to $22.0 million of maintenance capital expenditures, approximately $24.0 million to $28.0 million of capital expenditures primarily associated with the expansion of our contract services fleet and $8.0 million to $10.0 million of capital expenditures related to investments in technology and other initiatives, which include the development and implementation of our new ERP system. The foregoing estimates were based on assumptions regarding current market conditions and the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect cash on hand and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet cash needs throughout 2022 without the need to incur additional debt or issue additional equity.
On January 20, 2022, our general partner declared a cash distribution attributable to the quarter ended December 31, 2021 of $0.01 per common unit. This distribution equates to a distribution of $0.04 per outstanding common unit on an annualized basis. This quarterly distribution was paid on February 14, 2022 to each of the holders of common units of record as of the close of business on January 31, 2022.
Cash Flows
A summary of our sources and uses of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $6.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 to $27.2 million compared to $20.8 million provided by operating activities in 2020. Our cash provided from operating activities was primarily generated from the provision of contract compression and treating services and, for the prior year, the sale of new compressor packages. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the contribution of Spartan Treating.
Cash provided from our foreign operations is subject to various uncertainties, including the volatility associated with interruptions caused by customer budgetary decisions, uncertainties regarding the renewal of our existing customer contracts, and other changes in contract arrangements, the timing of collection of our receivables, and the repatriation of cash generated by our international operations.
Investing Activities
Capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $28.7 million compared to 2020 due to increased activity levels and increasing demand for our compression services from our customers. In 2020, capital expenditures were largely offset by proceeds of $17.0 million from the sale of our Midland manufacturing facility. Total capital expenditures during 2021 were $47.0 million, offset by $3.4 million from compression units sold. Total capital expenditures for 2021 include $12.8 million of maintenance capital expenditures.
The level of growth capital expenditures depends on our ability to redeploy existing fleet equipment and demand for compression services. If the demand for compression services increases or decreases, the amount of planned expenditures on growth and expansion will be adjusted. We continue to review all capital expenditure plans carefully in an effort to conserve cash and fund our liquidity needs.
Financing Activities
Distributions
Beginning with the distribution to common unitholders during February 2019, we reduced our common unit distributions from $0.75 per unit per year (or $0.1875 per quarter) to $0.04 per unit per year (or $0.01 per quarter). Accordingly, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we distributed $1.9 million of cash distributions to our common unitholders and general partner.
Credit Agreement
As of December 31, 2021, and subject to compliance with the covenants, borrowing base, and other provisions of the agreements that may limit borrowings under the Credit Agreement, we had availability of $15.2 million. On January 29, 2021, the Partnership amended the Loan and Security Agreement dated June 29, 2018 (as amended, restated, amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides for maximum revolving credit commitments of $35.0 million and includes a $5.0 million reserve, which results in reduced borrowing availability. The Credit Agreement was amended on January 29, 2021 to temporarily increase the size of the reserve to $10.0 million and also required that Spartan backstop all of our outstanding letters of credit. These temporary restrictions expired on April 30, 2021. The Credit Agreement includes a $25.0 million sublimit for letters of credit.
The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is June 29, 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we had an outstanding balance of $0.8 million and had $2.1 million in letters of credit against our Credit Agreement. As of March 10, 2022, we had no balance outstanding under our Credit Agreement and $2.1 million in letters of credit, leaving availability under the Credit Agreement of $14.9 million. The amounts the Partnership may borrow under the Credit Agreement are based on the amounts of the Partnership’s accounts receivable and the value of certain inventory. Decreases in the amount of the Partnership’s accounts receivable and the value of its inventory would result in reduced borrowing availability under the Credit Agreement.
Spartan Credit Agreement
On November 10, 2021, certain unrestricted subsidiaries of the Partnership, Spartan Energy Services LLC, as borrower, and Treating Holdco, as new guarantor, entered into the First Amendment to Loan, Security and Guaranty Agreement (the “Spartan Amendment”) amending the Loan, Security and Guaranty Agreement dated January 29, 2021 (as amended, restated, amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Spartan Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A., in its capacity as agent, and the other lenders and loan parties party thereto. As of December 31, 2021, and subject to compliance with the covenants, borrowing base, and other provisions of the agreements that may limit borrowings under the Spartan Credit Agreement, we had availability of $10.9 million.
The maturity date of the Spartan Credit Agreement is January 29, 2024. As of December 31, 2021, we had a $59.0 million outstanding balance. As of March 10, 2022, we have $60.0 million balance outstanding under our Credit Agreement and no letters of credit, leaving availability under the Spartan Credit Agreement of $4.0 million. The amounts that may be borrowed under the agreement are based on the amounts of accounts receivable, the value of certain inventory, and fixed asset net book value. Decreases in the amount of accounts receivable and the value of its inventory and fixed assets would result in reduced borrowing availability under the Spartan Credit Agreement.
Notes
We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase certain amounts of our outstanding senior notes through cash purchases, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
7.25% Senior Notes due 2022
On November 10, 2021, the Partnership delivered a notice of redemption with respect to the 7.25% Senior Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) calling for redemption on December 13, 2021 of all of the outstanding 2022 Notes at a redemption price equal to 100.0% of the principal amount of the 2022 Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the 2022 Notes (the “Redemption”). The Redemption was financed with the net proceeds from the Private Placement and the issuance of the New Second Lien Notes, among other sources of cash.
7.50% First Lien Notes due 2025
As of December 31, 2021, our 7.50% First Lien Notes due 2025 (the “First Lien Notes”) had $399.8 million outstanding net of unamortized discounts, unamortized deferred financing costs and deferred restructuring gains. Interest on these notes is payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The First Lien Notes are secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all of the Partnership’s and its subsidiaries assets, subject to certain permitted encumbrances and exceptions, and are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Partnership’s U.S. restricted subsidiaries (other than Finance Corp, certain immaterial subsidiaries and certain other excluded U.S. subsidiaries).
10.000%/10.750% Second Lien Notes due 2026
As of December 31, 2021, our 10.000%/10.750% Second Lien Notes due 2026 (the “Second Lien Notes”) had $173.0 million outstanding, net of unamortized discounts, unamortized deferred financing costs and deferred restructuring gains. Interest on the Second Lien Notes is payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The Second Lien Notes are secured by a second-priority security interest in substantially all of the Partnership’s and its subsidiaries assets, subject to certain permitted encumbrances and exceptions, and are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Partnership’s U.S. restricted subsidiaries (other than Finance Corp, certain immaterial subsidiaries and certain other excluded U.S. subsidiaries). In connection with the payment of PIK Interest (as defined below), if any, in respect of the Second Lien Notes, the issuers will be entitled, to increase the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes or issue additional notes (“PIK notes”) under the Second Lien Notes indenture on the same terms and conditions as the already outstanding Second Lien Notes. Interest will accrue at (1) the annual rate of 7.250% payable in cash, plus (2) at the election of the Issuers (made by delivering a notice to the Second Lien Trustee not less than five business days prior to the record date), the annual rate of (i) 2.750% payable in cash (together with the annual rate set forth in clause (1), the “Cash Interest Rate”) or (ii) 3.500% payable by increasing the principal amount of the outstanding Second Lien Notes or by issuing additional PIK notes,
in each case rounding up to the nearest $1.00 (such increased principal amount or additional PIK notes, the “PIK Interest”).
In addition, the indentures governing our First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes contain customary covenants restricting our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to: (i) pay distributions on, purchase, or redeem our common units, make certain investments and other restricted payments, or purchase or redeem any subordinated debt; (ii) incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue certain kinds of preferred equity securities; (iii) create or incur certain liens securing indebtedness; (iv) sell assets, including dispositions of the collateral securing our First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes; (v) consolidate, merge, or transfer all or substantially all of our assets; (vi) enter into transactions with affiliates; and (vii) enter into agreements that restrict distributions or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us. Our Second Lien Notes indenture further restricts our ability to make distributions in respect of our common units in any amount exceeding $0.04 per common unit per year, unless such increased distribution is funded by proceeds from an equity offering. These covenants are subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions, including certain provisions permitting us, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, to transfer assets to certain of our unrestricted subsidiaries. The indentures also contain customary events of default and acceleration provisions relating to events of default, which provide that upon an event of default under the indentures, the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the then outstanding First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes may declare all of the First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes to be due and payable immediately. We are in compliance with all covenants of the First Lien Notes and Second Lien Notes indentures as of December 31, 2021.
Leases
We have operating leases for some of our office space, warehouse space, operating locations, and machinery and equipment. Our leases have remaining lease terms ranging from 1 to 10 years. Some of our leases have options to extend for various periods, while some have termination options with prior notice of generally 30 days or six months. See Note 6 - “Leases” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Other Financing
In December 2020, TETRA sold 15 high horsepower compressors to Spartan Energy Services LLC, a subsidiary of Spartan, which were subject to an existing lease with the Partnership. In connection with the GP sale, TETRA also assigned the leases for that compression services equipment with the Partnership to Spartan. As of December 31, 2020, all compression units pursuant to this arrangement were completed. See Note 8 - “Related Party Transactions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report for further information.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no “off balance sheet arrangements” that may have a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The $400.0 million and $172.7 million in aggregate principal amounts outstanding of the First Lien Notes and the Second Lien Notes, respectively, as of December 31, 2021 are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, subject to certain customary release provisions, on a joint and several senior secured basis, by the following U.S. restricted subsidiaries which are each a 100% owned subsidiary (each a “Guarantor Subsidiary” and collectively the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”):
CSI Compressco Field Services International LLC
CSI Compressco Holdings LLC
CSI Compressco International LLC
CSI Compressco Leasing LLC
CSI Compressco Operating LLC
CSI Compressco Sub, Inc.
CSI Compression Holdings, LLC
Rotary Compressor Systems, Inc.
As a result of these guarantees, we are presenting the following summarized financial information of the obligor group pursuant to Rule 1-02(bb) of Regulation S-X. These schedules are presented using the equity method of accounting for all periods presented. Under this method, investments in subsidiaries are recorded at cost and
adjusted for our share in the subsidiaries’ cumulative results of operations, capital contributions and distributions and other changes in equity. Elimination entries relate primarily to the elimination of investments in subsidiaries and associated intercompany balances and transactions. The Other Subsidiaries column includes financial information for those subsidiaries that do not guarantee the First Lien Notes or the Second Lien Notes. In addition to the financial information of the Partnership, financial information of the Issuers includes CSI Compressco Finance Inc., which had no assets or operations for any of the periods presented.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements. We prepared these financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. We base these estimates on historical experience, available information, and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically evaluate these estimates and judgments, which may change as new events occur, as new information is acquired, and with changes in our operating environment. Actual results are likely to differ from current estimates, and those differences may be material. The following critical accounting policy reflects the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Business Combinations
When we acquire a business from an entity under common control, whereby the companies are ultimately controlled by the same party both before and after the transaction, it is treated similar to the pooling of interests method of accounting, where the assets and liabilities are recorded at the transferring entity’s historical cost instead of reflecting the fair market value of assets and liabilities.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We conduct a determination of impairment of long-lived assets whenever indicators of impairment are present. If such indicators are present, the determination of the amount of impairment is based on our judgments as to the future operating cash flows to be generated from these assets throughout their estimated useful lives. If an impairment of a long-lived asset is warranted, we estimate the fair value of the asset based on a present value of these cash flows or the value that could be realized from disposing of the asset in a transaction between market participants. The estimation of future operating cash flows is inherently imprecise, and, if our estimates are materially incorrect, it could result in an overstatement or understatement of our financial position and results of operations. In particular, the oil and gas industry is cyclical, and estimates of the period over which future cash flows will be generated, as well as the predictability of these cash flows, can have an additional significant impact on the
carrying value of these assets and, particularly in periods of prolonged down cycles, may result in impairment charges. Historically, our business has not experienced significant impairments of its long-lived compression assets, as utilized compressor packages generate cash flows sufficient to support their carrying values. Unutilized assets are maintained and evaluated on a regular basis. Serviceable compressor packages that are currently unutilized are anticipated to be placed in service in future years as demand increases or as fully depreciated packages in service are replaced. Sales of compressor packages have historically been at selling prices in excess of asset cost. Intangible assets recognized as part of the CSI acquisition include trademark/tradename, customer relationships, and other intangible assets that are supported primarily by the estimated future cash flows of our operations. There were no impairments recorded in 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairments of $15.4 million on certain long-lived assets where the carrying values exceeded their respective fair values, including non-core used compressor equipment, the low-horsepower class of our compression fleet, certain classes of our compression fleet that are under-utilized due to market preferences, and field inventory for compression and related services. Impairments of our long-lived assets could occur in the future, particularly in the event of a significant and sustained deterioration of natural gas production or pricing.
Commitments and Contingencies
From time to time, we are involved in litigation relating to claims arising out of our operations in the normal course of business. While the outcome of these lawsuits or other proceedings against us cannot be predicted with certainty, management does not consider it reasonably possible that a loss resulting from such lawsuits or proceedings in excess of any amounts accrued has been incurred that is expected to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting pronouncements that may affect our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, New Accounting Pronouncements,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report.