ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes contained in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Clear Channel Outdoor Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The MD&A is organized as follows:
•Overview - Discussion of the nature, key developments and trends of our business in order to provide context for the remainder of the MD&A.
•Results of Operations - Analysis of our financial results of operations at the consolidated and segment levels.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources - Analysis of our short- and long-term liquidity and discussion of our material cash requirements and the anticipated source of funds needed to satisfy such requirements.
•Critical Accounting Estimates - Discussion of our material accounting estimates that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty, which we believe are most important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our consolidated financial statements.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties, and actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements” contained in Item 1A. Risk Factors within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Description of Our Business and Segments
Our revenue is derived from selling advertising space on the displays we own or operate in key markets worldwide. We have two reportable business segments, which we believe reflect how the Company is currently managed: Americas, which consists of operations primarily in the U.S., and Europe, which consists of operations in Europe and Singapore. Our remaining operating segments, which include Latin America and, for periods before its sale on April 28, 2020, China, do not meet the quantitative thresholds to qualify as reportable segments and are disclosed as “Other.” Each segment provides out-of-home advertising services in its respective geographic region using various digital and traditional display types.
Trends and Uncertainties
For a summary of macroeconomic indicators and the impact of seasonality on our business, refer to Item 1. Business within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In December 2021, our Board authorized a review of strategic alternatives for our European business, including a possible sale; however, there can be no assurance that the strategic review process will result in any transaction or particular outcome.
COVID-19 Update
COVID-19 has had a significant adverse impact on our results of operations. COVID-19 initially caused unprecedented worldwide lock-downs; significant travel and transportation restrictions in airports and transit systems; a significant reduction in time spent out-of-home by the general population, including consumers; reductions in consumer spending; and volatile economic conditions and business disruptions across the globe. As a result, starting in March 2020, we observed a significant decrease in out-of-home audience metrics indicating a reduction in consumer advertising display engagement and resulting in a sharp decline in customer bookings; an unprecedented level of requests to defer, revise or cancel sales contracts; and customers forced to close their businesses temporarily or permanently. As lock-downs and restrictions were lifted, the negative impacts of COVID-19 began to lessen, with the severity of these negative impacts on out-of-home metrics, travel patterns, consumer behavior and economic activity fluctuating throughout the remainder of 2020 based on the evolving nature of COVID-19 developments in each geographic region. As a result, our revenue for 2020 was significantly below historic norms in all our segments.
We continued to see revenues remain significantly below historic norms during the first quarter of 2021; however, we saw positive trends in revenue for each of our segments during the remainder of 2021 as the relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions and increased vaccination levels led to an increase in mobility and increased time spent out-of-home. Currently, the gap to normalized quarterly booking activity is narrowing as most business segment activity is approaching or exceeding historical seasonal levels; however, in certain instances we continue to experience customer advertising buying decisions later in the buying cycle, particularly in Europe.
Since the onset of the pandemic, we have taken various measures to increase our liquidity and preserve and strengthen our financial flexibility, including aggressive operating cost and capital expenditure savings initiatives, restructuring plans to reduce headcount and other targeted liquidity measures. As our operating performance improves, we continue to reassess and modify these actions accordingly, including ceasing certain temporary operating cost savings initiatives and increasing our investment in our business through additional capital expenditures; however, we continue to manage our cost base, including negotiating rent abatements in some of the markets most affected by COVID-19.
As the duration and severity of COVID-19 continue to evolve and remain uncertain, the extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact our results continues to depend on future developments, including mobility levels; vaccine distribution, acceptance and effectiveness; protective behaviors such as mask use; government mandates and responses to future outbreaks; the spread of variants; and global macro-economic consequences, including inflationary pressure. The curtailed customer demand we have experienced as a result of COVID-19 could once more materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. In that case, we will consider implementing additional cost savings initiatives in order to better align our operating expense base with revenues and to provide additional financial flexibility as circumstances warrant.
Executive Summary
The key developments in our business during the year ended December 31, 2021 are summarized below:
•Consolidated revenue increased 20.8% compared to 2020 as we continue to recover from the impacts of COVID-19.
•We recognized reductions of expense for negotiated rent abatements and European governmental support and wage subsidies of $98.5 million and $4.4 million, respectively.
•In February, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of CCOH 7.75% Senior Notes. In March, we used the net proceeds from this issuance to redeem $940.0 million aggregate principal amount of the CCWH Senior Notes.
•In April, we revised the Europe portion of our international restructuring plan, and upon termination of the impacted employees during the fourth quarter, actual costs were less than our previous estimates due to fewer employees being terminated than originally expected. During 2021, we incurred $30.8 million of costs pursuant to this plan, and remaining costs are not expected to be significant. We anticipate that the Europe portion of the international plan will result in pre-tax annual cost savings in excess of $28 million.
•In May, we entered into a second amendment to the Senior Secured Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the suspended springing financial covenant through December 31, 2021 and further delay the scheduled financial covenant step-down until September 30, 2022.
•In June, we issued $1.05 billion aggregate principal amount of CCOH 7.5% Senior Notes and used the net proceeds from this issuance to redeem the remaining outstanding CCWH Senior Notes. Additionally, a non-guarantor European subsidiary borrowed approximately $34.1 million, at current exchange rates, through a state-guaranteed loan program established in response to COVID-19.
•In October, we repaid the $130.0 million outstanding balance under the Revolving Credit Facility using cash on hand, resulting in a corresponding increase in excess availability under such facility.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion of our results of operations is presented on both a consolidated and segment basis.
•Our operating segment profit measure is Segment Adjusted EBITDA, which is calculated as revenue less direct operating expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses, excluding restructuring and other costs, which are defined as costs associated with cost-saving initiatives such as severance, consulting and termination costs and other special costs. The material components of Segment Adjusted EBITDA are discussed below on both a consolidated and segment basis.
•Corporate expenses, depreciation and amortization, impairment charges, other operating income and expense, all non-operating income and expenses, and income taxes are managed on a total company basis and are, therefore, included only in our discussion of consolidated results.
Revenue and expenses “excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates” in this MD&A are presented because management believes that viewing certain financial results without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates facilitates period-to-period comparisons of business performance and provides useful information to investors. Revenue and expenses “excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates” are calculated by converting the current year’s revenue and expenses in local currency to U.S. dollars using average foreign exchange rates for the prior year.
2021 Compared to 2020
Consolidated Results of Operations
The comparison of our historical results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(1)Excludes depreciation and amortization
Consolidated Revenue
Our revenue is derived from selling advertising space on the displays we own or operate, consisting primarily of billboards, street furniture and transit displays.
Consolidated revenue increased $386.5 million, or 20.8%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $33.9 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated revenue increased $352.6 million, or 19.0%. As we continue to recover from the adverse effects of COVID-19, we have seen increases in revenue across our portfolio. This increase in revenue was partially offset by the sale of the Clear Media business in China on April 28, 2020.
Consolidated Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses primarily consist of site lease expenses, which include rent expense on both lease and non-lease contracts, as well as direct production, maintenance and installation expenses.
•Our site lease expenses include payments for land or space used by our advertising displays, including minimum guaranteed payments and revenue-sharing arrangements.
•Our direct production, maintenance and installation expenses include costs for printing, transporting, changing and maintaining the advertising copy on our displays, as well as cleaning and maintaining street furniture.
Consolidated direct operating expenses increased $69.1 million, or 5.7%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $31.9 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated direct operating expenses increased $37.1 million, or 3.1%, largely driven by higher site lease expense as higher variable rent related to higher revenue was only partially offset by negotiated rent abatements. We also incurred higher production, maintenance and installation expenses mainly driven by higher revenue and prior year temporary cost savings initiatives, as well as higher charges for our restructuring plans to reduce headcount. These increases were partially offset by the sale of the Clear Media business.
The following table provides additional information about certain of the drivers of consolidated direct operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Includes rent subsidies of $0.8 million and $4.6 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Includes severance and related costs for our restructuring plans to reduce headcount of $14.3 million and $4.1 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Consolidated Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
SG&A expenses primarily consist of employee-related costs for our sales, marketing, segment leadership and support functions, as well as marketing costs, facilities and information technology costs, and other general costs.
Consolidated SG&A expenses increased $17.1 million, or 3.9%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $9.5 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, consolidated SG&A expenses increased $7.6 million, or 1.7%. Higher employee compensation costs, mainly driven by improvements in operating performance, and higher charges for our restructuring plans to reduce headcount were partially offset by lower credit loss expense related to our continued recovery from COVID-19 and the sale of the Clear Media business.
The following table provides additional information about certain of the drivers of consolidated SG&A expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Includes severance and related costs for our restructuring plans to reduce headcount of $16.5 million and $7.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses primarily consist of infrastructure and support costs related to our information technology, human resources, legal, finance, business services and administrative functions, as well as overall executive leadership.
Corporate expenses increased $18.9 million, or 13.8%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $3.3 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, corporate expenses increased $15.6 million, or 11.3%, during 2021, primarily driven by higher employee compensation costs mainly related to improvements in operating performance.
The following table provides additional information about certain of the drivers of corporate expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Includes severance and related costs for our restructuring plans to reduce headcount of $1.1 million and $2.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense includes depreciation of our advertising structures and other property, plant and equipment and amortization of our definite-lived intangible assets.
Depreciation and amortization decreased $16.3 million, or 6.0%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $3.6 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, depreciation and amortization decreased $19.9 million, or 7.4%, mainly driven by the sale of the Clear Media business.
Impairment Charges
We recognized impairment charges of $119.0 million and $150.4 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, driven by increases in the discount rate and reductions in projected cash flows related to the negative impacts of COVID-19, as follows:
•During 2021, we recognized impairment charges of $119.0 million related to our Americas indefinite-lived permits.
•During 2020, we recognized impairment charges of $140.7 million related to our Americas indefinite-lived permits and $9.7 million related to the goodwill allocated to our Latin America business.
Other Operating Income, Net
During 2021 and 2020, we recognized other operating income, net, of $0.6 million and $53.6 million, respectively. The income in 2020 was primarily driven by a gain on the sale of the Clear Media business of $75.2 million, partially offset by legal costs and consulting fees incurred related to the sale.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, decreased $9.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020. This decrease was mainly driven by lower interest on our Term Loan Facility due to a favorable change in the interest rate and the refinancing of the CCWH Senior Notes during the first half of 2021, partially offset by the issuance of the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes in August 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In 2021, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $102.8 million related to the redemption of the CCWH Senior Notes. In 2020, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.4 million related to the August repayment of the CCIBV Promissory Note.
Income Tax Benefit
The effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 7.4% and 8.8%, respectively. In both years, the benefit we received from reporting tax losses was partially offset by valuation allowances recorded against current period deferred tax assets in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions due to uncertainty regarding our ability to realize those assets in future periods. Additionally, we recorded $59.7 million of tax expense in 2020 as a result of selling our 50.91% stake in Clear Media. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to statutory rates and further explanation of our provision for taxes, refer to Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Americas Results of Operations
(1)Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Americas Revenue
Americas revenue increased $196.6 million, or 20.1%, during 2021 compared to 2020. As we continue to recover from the adverse effects of COVID-19, we have seen increases in revenue across all of our products, most notably digital and print billboards. Additionally, revenue from airport displays increased 29.5% to $160.3 million during 2021 compared to $123.8 million during 2020, driven by increased travel and our new advertising sponsorship contract with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Americas total digital revenue increased 39.0% during 2021 compared to 2020, as follows:
(1)Digital revenue from transit includes revenue from airport digital displays.
Revenue generated from national sales comprised 37.5% and 37.2% of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively, while the remainder of revenue was generated from local sales.
Americas Expenses
Americas direct operating expenses increased $2.6 million, or 0.6%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Higher production, maintenance and installation expenses driven by higher employee compensation costs and increased activity from higher revenue were partially offset by lower site lease expense, which decreased 1.6% to $375.6 million during 2021 compared to $381.7 million during 2020. Lower fixed rent due to negotiated rent abatements with landlords and municipalities was partially offset by higher variable rent related to higher revenue.
Americas SG&A expenses increased $9.1 million, or 4.8%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Higher employee compensation costs mainly driven by improvements in operating performance were partially offset by lower credit loss expense related to our continued recovery from COVID-19.
Europe Results of Operations
(1)Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
Europe Revenue
Europe revenue increased $204.5 million, or 25.4%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $33.9 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe revenue increased $170.6 million, or 21.2%. As we continue to recover from the adverse effects of COVID-19, we have seen increases in revenue across all of our products, most notably street furniture, and in all of the countries in which we operate, with the largest increases in the U.K. and France.
Europe digital revenue increased 42.8% during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe digital revenue increased 37.4%, as follows:
Europe Expenses
Europe direct operating expenses increased $104.6 million, or 16.0%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $32.0 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe direct operating expenses increased $72.6 million, or 11.1%, largely driven by higher site lease expense, which increased 15.1% to $433.3 million during 2021 compared to $376.6 million during 2020. Excluding the $17.5 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe site lease expense increased $39.1 million, or 10.4%, mainly driven by higher revenue and lower negotiated rent abatements. We also incurred higher production, maintenance and installation expenses driven by increased activity from higher revenue, prior year temporary cost savings initiatives and lower governmental wage subsidies, as well as higher charges for our restructuring plan to reduce headcount.
Europe SG&A expenses increased $21.1 million, or 9.8%, during 2021 compared to 2020. Excluding the $9.7 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Europe SG&A expenses increased $11.4 million, or 5.3%, driven by higher charges for our restructuring plan to reduce headcount and higher employee compensation costs due to improvements in operating performance and lower governmental wage subsidies, partially offset by lower professional fees.
Other Results of Operations
(1)Includes restructuring and other costs that are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
(2)Our Latin America business represented ($8.9) million of Other Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other revenue decreased $14.6 million, or 20.0%, during 2021 compared to 2020, driven by the sale of the Clear Media business. Revenue from our Latin America business was $58.6 million and $44.0 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the increase related to our continued recovery from COVID-19. Excluding the minimal impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other revenue decreased 19.9%.
Other direct operating expenses decreased $38.2 million, or 51.1%, during 2021 compared to 2020, driven by the sale of the Clear Media business. Direct operating expenses from our Latin America business were $36.5 million and $34.3 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the increase driven by higher site lease expense related to higher revenue. Excluding the minimal impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other direct operating expenses decreased 51.0%.
Other SG&A expenses decreased $13.1 million, or 37.1%, during 2021 compared to 2020, driven by the sale of the Clear Media business. SG&A expenses from our Latin America business were $22.3 million and $19.8 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the increase driven by higher employee compensation costs mainly due to improvements in operating performance. Excluding the $0.2 million impact of movements in foreign exchange rates, Other SG&A expenses decreased $12.9 million, or 36.5%.
2020 Compared to 2019
For a comparison of our historical results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity Analysis
Short-Term Liquidity
Our main cash requirements are for working capital used to fund the operations of the business, capital expenditures and debt service. We typically meet these requirements with cash on hand, internally-generated cash flow from operations and, if necessary, borrowings under our credit facilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $410.8 million, compared to $785.3 million as of December 31, 2020. The year-over-year decrease was primarily attributable to net cash used for operating activities of $133.5 million, capital expenditures of $148.0 million and repayment of the $130.0 million outstanding balance on our Revolving Credit Facility, partially offset by $50.1 million of net proceeds from other debt activity. As of December 31, 2021, we had $208.9 million of excess availability under our credit facilities. We believe that our current sources of funds will be sufficient to meet our cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Long-Term Liquidity
Our long-term future cash requirements will depend on many factors, including the growth of our business, the outcome of our restructuring plans, investments in new technologies and the pursuit and outcome of strategic transactions, including the outcome of the strategic review of our Europe business. In addition, we have long-term cash requirements related to the repayment of our outstanding debt, which is scheduled to mature over the next eight years. We believe that our sources of funds will be adequate to meet our cash requirements in the long-term.
However, our ability to meet these cash requirements through cash from operations will depend on our future operating results and financial performance, which are subject to significant uncertainty and may be affected by events beyond our control, including COVID-19 and prevailing economic, financial and industry conditions. Additionally, our significant interest payment obligations reduce our financial flexibility, make us more vulnerable to changes in operating performance and economic downturns generally, and reduce our liquidity over time.
We regularly consider, and enter into discussions with our lenders related to, potential financing alternatives. In the future, we may need to obtain supplemental liquidity through additional financing from banks or other lenders, public offerings or private placements of debt or equity, strategic relationships or other arrangements, or from a combination of these sources; however, there can be no assurance that financing alternatives will be available in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us in the future due to market conditions, our financial condition, our liquidity constraints or other factors, many of which are beyond our control, and even if financing alternatives are available to us, we may not find them suitable or at reasonable interest rates. In addition, the terms of our existing or future debt agreements may restrict us from securing financing on terms that are available to us at that time or at all.
If we are unable to generate sufficient cash through our operations or obtain sources of supplemental liquidity, we could face substantial liquidity problems, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and on our ability to meet our obligations.
Trends and Uncertainties
COVID-19's extensive impact on the global advertising market has had a significant negative impact on our results of operations in both our Americas and Europe segments. In response, starting in March 2020, we took a number of measures to increase our liquidity and preserve and strengthen our financial flexibility, including renegotiating contracts with landlords and municipalities, reducing compensation costs, obtaining European governmental support and wage subsidies, reducing discretionary expenses, and deferring capital expenditures and site lease payments. As our operating performance improves, we continue to reassess and modify these actions accordingly, including ceasing certain temporary operating cost savings initiatives and increasing our investment in our business through additional capital expenditures. If circumstances warrant, as the duration and severity of COVID-19 continue to evolve, we could consider implementing additional cost savings initiatives in order to provide additional financial flexibility.
We frequently evaluate strategic opportunities both within and outside our existing lines of business, and we expect from time to time to dispose of certain markets or businesses and may pursue acquisitions, which could be material. As we continue to focus on operational efficiencies that drive greater margin and cash flow, we will continue to review and consider opportunities to unlock shareholder value, which may include, among other things, potential asset or operational divestitures intended to deleverage and increase free cash flow.
Cash Requirements
Working Capital Needs
We utilize working capital to fund the operations of our business and have certain related contractual obligations, including commitments under site leases, other non-cancelable contracts and our restructuring plans.
Site Lease Expense
One of our largest cash requirements is for site lease costs, which includes payments for land or space used by our displays, including minimum guaranteed payments and revenue-sharing arrangements.
•We lease the majority of the land occupied by our advertising structures under long-term site leases that typically have initial terms of between 10 and 20 years, while most of our international street furniture display faces are operated through contracts with municipalities that typically have terms ranging from 1 to 15 years. Many of our lease agreements contain renewal options and annual rental escalation clauses.
•We also have minimum payments associated with non-cancelable contracts that enable us to display advertising on buses, trains, bus shelters and terminals. The majority of these contracts contain rent provisions that are calculated as the greater of a percentage of the relevant advertising revenue or a specified guaranteed minimum annual payment.
In 2021, 2020 and 2019, we incurred site lease expense of $832.5 million, $805.3 million and $974.3 million, respectively, which are included within direct operating expenses on our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss. As previously described, we have successfully renegotiated contracts with landlords and municipalities in both the U.S. and Europe in order to better align fixed site lease expenses with the reductions in revenue we experienced due to COVID-19 and have also deferred site lease payments when possible.
As of December 31, 2021, we had short-term future cash obligations related to site lease expense under non-cancelable operating leases and other non-cancelable contracts of $683.9 million to be paid in the next 12 months. Refer to Notes 7 and 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our total future cash obligations under these contracts, including schedules of future minimum payments.
Restructuring Plans
In 2020 we committed to restructuring plans to reduce headcount in each of our segments, primarily in response to the impact of COVID-19. We completed the Latin America portion of our international plan and our Americas plan in 2020 and, in the fourth quarter of 2021, terminated the impacted employees in the Europe portion of our international plan. Actual costs were less than our previous estimates due to fewer employees being terminated than originally expected, and remaining costs are not expected to be significant.
During 2021 and 2020, we made cash expenditures for these restructuring plans of $13.4 million and $8.8 million, respectively, and as of December 31, 2021, we had $24.3 million of related future cash obligations. We expect to pay this liability in 2022, although payments may be made through the end of the second quarter of 2023 in accordance with the terms of the Europe portion of the international plan. Refer to Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures primarily relate to construction and sustaining activities for billboards, street furniture and other out-of-home advertising displays, including digital displays. We made the following capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1)In 2020, we reduced or deferred capital expenditures as part of our strategy to increase our liquidity and preserve and strengthen our financial flexibility given the adverse financial impacts and economic uncertainty resulting from COVID-19.
(2)Other capital expenditures during 2020 and 2019 included expenditures of $4.7 million and $4.1 million, respectively, related to our Latin America business.
The primary driver of our capital expenditure requirements is the construction of new advertising structures, including the continued deployment of digital displays in accordance with our long-term strategy to digitize our network as an alternative to traditional methods of displaying our clients’ advertisements. We believe cash flow from operations will generally be sufficient to fund these expenditures because we expect enhanced margins through lower costs of production as digital advertisements are controlled by a central computer network, decreased down-time on displays as digital advertisements are digitally changed rather than manually posted, and incremental revenue through more targeted and time-specific advertisements. However, in light of the negative impact of COVID-19 and the uncertainty around the related economic downturn, we deferred certain capital expenditures beginning in the second quarter of 2020. As our operating performance improves, we plan to increase our investment in our business through additional capital expenditures; however, we will continue to reassess and modify our actions as circumstances warrant.
As of December 31, 2021, we had short-term future capital expenditure commitments of $48.2 million to be paid in the next 12 months related to certain transit and street furniture contracts that require minimum purchases of property, plant and equipment, as well as certain contracts that contain penalties for not fulfilling our commitments related to our obligations to build bus stops, kiosks and other public amenities or advertising structures. Refer to Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our total future capital expenditure commitments, including a schedule of future minimum payments.
Debt Service Obligations
A substantial amount of our cash requirements is for debt service obligations. In 2021, 2020 and 2019, we paid interest of $387.6 million, $323.8 million and $323.9 million, respectively. The increase in 2021 was due in part to timing of the semi-annual interest payments on the refinanced debt as interest payments on the CCOH 7.75% Senior Notes and CCOH 7.5% Senior Notes are due later in the year. Additionally, the first interest payments on the CCIBV 6.625% Senior Secured Notes were made in 2021. Based on our debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021, we estimate cash interest payments of $323.8 million in 2022 and $323.7 million in 2023.
Additionally, during each of 2021 and 2020, we made $20.0 million of principal payments on the Term Loan Facility in accordance with the terms of the Senior Secured Credit Agreement, and we will continue to make principal payments of $5.0 million per quarter until the remaining balance matures. Our next material debt maturity is in 2025 when the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes are due. At our option, we may redeem a portion of our outstanding debt prior to maturity in accordance with the terms of our debt agreements.
Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details on our outstanding long-term debt, including a schedule of future maturities and description of debt covenants. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants contained in our financing agreements.
Sources of Capital and Liquidity
Cash On Hand
As of December 31, 2021, we had $410.8 million of cash on our balance sheet, including $164.1 million of cash held outside the U.S. by our subsidiaries. Excess cash from our foreign operations may be transferred to our operations in the U.S. if needed to fund operations in the U.S., subject to the foreseeable cash needs of our foreign operations and restrictions in the indenture governing the CCIBV Senior Secured Notes. We could presently repatriate excess cash with minimal U.S. tax consequences, as calculated for tax law purposes, and dividend distributions from our international subsidiaries may be exempt from U.S. federal income tax.
Cash Flow from Operations
Net cash provided by operating activities primarily results from cash collected from customers for use of our out-of-home advertising space, offset by cash payments made for site leases; production, maintenance and installation costs; employee compensation; marketing, facility and information technology costs; interest on our debt; taxes; and other general corporate expenditures.
We typically generate positive net cash flow from operations; however, due to the negative impact of COVID-19, we used net cash for operating activities in 2021 and 2020, as cash paid for interest in these periods exceeded other net cash inflows from operations.
•In 2021, net cash used for operating activities was $133.5 million. Cash paid for interest was $387.6 million. Cash collections from customers exceeded cash payments to vendors, including site lease costs, and our employees; however, collections earlier in the period lagged primarily due to COVID-19’s impact on fourth quarter 2020 and first quarter 2021 sales. Additionally, cash payments during the period include the payment of site lease costs that were deferred from 2020.
•In 2020, net cash used for operating activities was $137.8 million. Cash paid for interest was $323.8 million. Cash collections from customers exceeded cash payments to vendors, including site lease costs, and our employees; however, cash collections primarily later in the period lagged due to COVID-19’s impact on sales and our collection cycle. This adverse impact was partially mitigated by initiatives that we implemented to reduce our expenditures, including the deferral of rent payments and temporary reductions in compensation costs.
Credit Facilities
We have access to a Revolving Credit Facility and Receivables-Based Credit Facility, both of which include sub-facilities for letters of credit and short-term borrowings and are scheduled to mature on August 23, 2024. During 2020, we made a cautionary draw of $150.0 million under our Revolving Credit Facility to enhance liquidity and preserve financial flexibility during the economic downturn resulting from COVID-19. We have since repaid the entire balance, including $20.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the remaining $130.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2021.
The table below presents our borrowings and excess availability under these credit facilities as of December 31, 2021. We may request incremental credit commitments under each facility at any time, subject to customary conditions; however, the lenders under such facilities do not have an obligation to provide incremental commitments.
(1)The borrowing limit of the Receivables-Based Credit Facility is equal to the lesser of $125.0 million and the borrowing base, which is calculated based on our accounts receivable balance each period in accordance with our Receivables-Based Credit Agreement.
The Senior Secured Credit Agreement contains a springing financial covenant, applicable solely to the Revolving Credit Facility if the balance of the Revolving Credit Facility is greater than $0 and undrawn letters of credit exceed $10 million, that generally requires compliance with a specified first lien net leverage ratio subject to a step-down. Amendments made in June 2020 and May 2021 suspended the springing financial covenant through the fourth quarter of 2021 and delayed the scheduled financial covenant step-down until the third quarter of 2022. In addition, we are required to maintain minimum liquidity of $150 million, including cash on hand and availability under our Receivables-Based Credit Facility and Revolving Credit Facility through delivery of the March 31, 2022 springing financial covenant calculation and have agreed not to make voluntary restricted payments with certain exceptions. We were in compliance with the minimum liquidity covenant as of December 31, 2021.
Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more details on each of these credit facilities.
Debt Activity
We have been active in the capital markets over the last several years primarily to refinance our debt portfolio with lower interest rates and extended maturities. For a summary of our capital market transactions during the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
In May 2020, we exchanged our Preferred Stock for a $53.0 million promissory note issued by CCIBV (the “CCIBV Promissory Note”) in order to effectively eliminate certain restrictions on our flexibility to potentially pursue liquidity-enhancing capital structure transactions. The Preferred Stock was transferred to one of our subsidiaries and is thereby eliminated in consolidation. In August 2020, we issued $375.0 million aggregate principal amount of CCIBV Senior Secured Notes through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary. A portion of these proceeds was used to pay the CCIBV Promissory Note in full, including paid-in-kind interest, and the remainder is being used for general corporate purposes, including to fund the operating expenses and capital expenditures of our Europe segment.
In February 2021, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of CCOH 7.75% Senior Notes and in March 2021 used the net proceeds to redeem $940.0 million of the CCWH Senior Notes. In June 2021, we issued $1.05 billion aggregate principal amount of CCOH 7.5% Senior Notes and used the net proceeds to redeem the remaining outstanding $961.5 million of CCWH Senior Notes. The CCWH Senior Notes redemptions were at 104.625% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes redeemed.
In June 2021, one of our non-guarantor European subsidiaries entered into an unsecured loan of approximately $34.1 million, at current exchange rates, with a third-party lender through a state-guaranteed loan program established in response to COVID-19. Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The results of these evaluations form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such difference could be material.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that the following accounting estimates are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following narrative describes these critical accounting estimates, management's judgments and assumptions, and the effect if actual results differed from these assumptions.
Long-lived Assets
We estimate the useful lives for our long-lived assets, including structures, other property, plant and equipment and definite-lived intangibles, based on our historical experience and our plans regarding how we intend to use those assets. Advertising structures have different lives depending on their nature, with large format bulletins generally having longer depreciable lives and posters and other displays having shorter depreciable lives. Street furniture and transit displays are depreciated over their estimated useful lives or appropriate contractual periods, whichever is shorter. Our experience indicates that the estimated useful lives applied to our portfolio of assets have been reasonable, and we do not expect significant changes to the estimated useful lives of our long-lived assets in the future. When we determine that a long-lived asset will be disposed of prior to the end of its useful life, we estimate the revised useful life and depreciate the remaining net book value of the asset over the revised period.
We review long-lived assets for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that depreciable and amortizable long-lived assets might be impaired and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amounts. When specific assets are determined to be unrecoverable, we reduce the cost basis of the asset to reflect the current fair market value. We did not recognize any impairments on our long-lived assets in 2021, 2020 or 2019.
We use various assumptions in determining the remaining useful lives of assets to be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives and in determining the current fair market value of long-lived assets that are determined to be unrecoverable. Estimated useful lives and fair values are sensitive to factors including contractual commitments, regulatory requirements, future expected cash flows, industry growth rates and discount rates, and future salvage values. Our impairment loss calculations require management to apply judgment in estimating future cash flows, including forecasting useful lives of the assets and selecting the discount rate that reflects the risk inherent in future cash flows. If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Annual Impairment Tests
We perform impairment tests on indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill at least annually, as of July 1 of each year, and more frequently as events or changes in circumstances warrant. During the first quarter of 2021, we performed an impairment test on our indefinite-lived billboard permits due to changes in our estimates and assumptions, resulting in an impairment charge of $119.0 million. Additionally, we performed our annual impairment tests on indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill as of July 1, 2021, which did not result in any additional impairment charges. As of December 31, 2021, there were no indicators of impairment.
Management’s judgements and assumptions used in our impairment tests are detailed below. The assumptions used to perform our impairment tests are not indicative of future results. While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and utilized appropriate assumptions to calculate the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets and reporting units, it is possible that a material change could occur. In particular, there continues to be a high level of uncertainty in estimating our expected economic and operational impacts relative to COVID-19 as it is an evolving situation. If future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, we may be exposed to additional impairment charges in the future.
Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
We review our indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as our billboard permits, for possible impairment using the direct valuation method as prescribed in ASC 805-20-S99. Our key assumptions using the direct valuation method are market revenue growth rates, market share, profit margin, duration and profile of the build-up period, estimated start-up capital costs and losses incurred during the build-up period, the risk-adjusted discount rate and terminal values. This data is populated using industry-normalized information representing an average asset within a market, and we engage a third-party valuation firm to assist with the development of our assumptions used to determine the fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets.
We tested our indefinite-lived billboard permits for impairment as of March 31, 2021, resulting in an impairment charge of $119.0 million across several markets in our Americas segment. The impairment was primarily driven by an increase in the discount rate and reductions in projected cash flows related to impacts from COVID-19. In determining the fair value of our billboard permits as of March 31, 2021, we used the following key assumptions:
•Industry revenue growth forecasts used for the initial four-year period, which varied by market, started with the trailing twelve month forecast period ending March 31, 2022, and annual revenue growth on average of 4.9% was assumed from year two to year four, factoring in recovery from the impacts related to COVID-19;
•Revenue growth beyond the initial four-year period was assumed to be 3.0%;
•Revenue was grown over a build-up period, reaching maturity by the second year;
•Operating margins gradually climbed to the industry average margin (as high as 47.4%, depending on market size) by the third year; and
•The discount rate was assumed to be 10.5%.
Additionally, we performed our annual impairment test as of July 1, 2021 in accordance with ASC 350-30-35, which did not result in any additional impairment to our intangible assets. In determining the fair value of our billboard permits as of July 1, 2021, we used the following key assumptions:
•Industry revenue growth forecasts used for the initial four-year period, which varied by market, started with the trailing twelve month forecast period ending July 1, 2022, and annual revenue growth on average of 5.2% was assumed from year two to year four, factoring in recovery from the impacts related to COVID-19;
•Revenue growth beyond the initial four-year period was assumed to be 3.0%;
•Revenue was grown over a build-up period, reaching maturity by the second year;
•Operating margins gradually climbed to the industry average margin (as high as 47.7%, depending on market size) by the third year; and
•The discount rate was assumed to be 10.5%.
The following table shows the decrease in the fair value of our billboard permits that would have resulted from decreases of 100 basis points in our discrete and terminal period revenue growth rate and profit margin assumptions and an increase of 100 basis points in our discount rate assumption as of each of the impairment testing dates:
(1)The change in the revenue growth rate and discount rate assumptions as of July 1, 2021 would have resulted in impairment of $18.2 million and $20.6 million, respectively. The change in the profit margin assumption as of July 1, 2021 would not have resulted in any impairment.
Goodwill
The discounted cash flow approach that we use for valuing goodwill as part of our impairment testing approach involves estimating future cash flows expected to be generated from the related assets, discounted to their present value using a risk-adjusted discount rate. Terminal values are also estimated and discounted to their present value. Assessing the recoverability of goodwill requires us to make estimates and assumptions about sales, operating margins, growth rates and discount rates based on our budgets, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and marketplace data.
We performed our annual impairment test as of July 1, 2021 in accordance with ASC 350-30-35, which did not result in any goodwill impairment. In determining the fair value of our reporting units, we used the following assumptions:
•Expected cash flows underlying our business plans for the initial five-year period were based on detailed, multi-year forecasts performed by each of our operating segments and reflected the advertising outlook across our businesses;
•Cash flows were projected to grow at a perpetual growth rate, which we estimated at 3.0%; and
•In order to risk-adjust the cash flow projections in determining fair value, we utilized a discount rate for each of our reporting units ranging from 9.5% to 12.0%.
Based on our assessment using the assumptions described above, a hypothetical 10% reduction in the estimated fair value of each of our reporting units with goodwill would not have resulted in a material impairment condition.
The following table shows the decrease in the fair value of each of our reporting units with goodwill that would have resulted from decreases of 100 basis points in our discrete and terminal period revenue growth rate and profit margin assumptions and an increase of 100 basis points in our discount rate assumption as of July 1, 2021:
(1)Changes to our assumptions by these amounts would not have resulted in goodwill impairment as the fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit would still be greater than its carrying value.
Leases
The most significant estimates used by management in accounting for leases are the lease term, the incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”), and the fair market value of the leased property as each of these estimates are used to determine whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. The majority of our leases are classified as operating.
When determining the lease term for contracts in which we are the lessee, we generally exclude renewal periods at the Company’s option as we do not consider exercise of such options to be reasonably certain for most of our leases; therefore, the optional terms and payments are not generally included within our lease liability. An increase in the expected lease term would increase our lease liability and the probability that a lease may be considered a finance lease.
We use the IBR to determine the present value of lease payments at the commencement of a lease. In our Americas segment, the IBRs used are based upon the trading levels of our CCOH Senior Secured Notes and are extrapolated over a time horizon using the composite credit rating yield curve to adjust for the lease term. Internationally, the Company uses a portfolio approach using the Americas IBR to apply an interest rate parity theory, in which the resulting calculation determines the equivalent interest rate to borrow in the foreign locations based on the expected appreciation/depreciation of the currencies. An increase in the IBR would decrease the net present value of the minimum lease payments and, therefore, the value of the lease right-of-use asset and liability on the balance sheet, reducing the probability that a lease would be considered a finance lease.
We generally estimate the fair market value of leased property based on comparable market data as provided by third-party sources. A higher fair market value reduces the likelihood that a lease will be considered a finance lease.
Tax Provisions
Our estimates of income taxes and the significant items giving rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect our assessment of actual future taxes to be paid on items reflected in the financial statements, giving consideration to both timing and probability of these estimates. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates due to future changes in income tax law or results from the final review of our tax returns by federal, state or foreign tax authorities.
We use our best and most informed judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized. Deferred tax assets are reduced by valuation allowances if we believe it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire asset will not be realized.
We also use our best and most informed judgment to determine whether it is more likely than not that we will sustain positions that we have taken on tax returns and, if so, the amount of benefit to initially recognize within our financial statements. We regularly review our uncertain tax positions and adjust our unrecognized tax benefits (“UTBs”) in light of changes in facts and circumstances, such as changes in tax law, interactions with taxing authorities and developments in case law. These adjustments to our UTBs may affect our income tax expense, and settlement of uncertain tax positions may require use of our cash.
Litigation Accruals
We are currently involved in certain legal proceedings. Based on current assumptions, we have accrued an estimate of the probable costs for the resolution of those claims for which the occurrence of loss is probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. These estimates have been developed in consultation with counsel and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. Future results of operations could be materially affected by changes in these assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies related to these proceedings.
Pension Benefits
We estimate pension benefit obligations and costs based on actuarial valuations. The annual measurement date for our pension benefit plan is December 31. The actuarial valuations require the use of certain assumptions including discount rates, expected long-term rates of return on plan assets and expected rates of compensation increase. We determine the discount rate based on a range of factors, including a yield curve composed of rates of return on high-quality corporate bonds that have a comparable cash flow pattern to the expected payments to be made under our plans. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based upon the weighted averages of the expected long-term rates of return for the broad categories of investments held in our plans, and the expected rate of compensation increase represents average long-term salary increases.
Changes in these assumptions are primarily influenced by factors outside our control and could affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. A 0.25% change in the discount rate and compensation rate assumptions would have resulted in increases of the projected benefit obligation as of December 31, 2021 of $9.0 million and $1.0 million, respectively.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of the expected impact of newly issued but not yet adopted accounting pronouncements on our financial position and results of operations, refer to Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements located in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.