ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report. The discussion in this report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. The cautionary statements made in this report should be read as applying to all related forward-looking statements wherever they appear in this report. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” as well as those discussed elsewhere. You should read “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed here. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to:
The COVID-19 pandemic and accompanying government policies worldwide; vaccination and in-office requirements, delays in the delivery of network equipment and optical fiber, future economic instability in the global economy, which could affect spending on Internet services; the impact of changing foreign exchange rates (in particular the Euro to US dollar and Canadian dollar to US dollar exchange rates) on the translation of our non-US dollar denominated revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities into US dollars; legal and operational difficulties in new markets; the imposition of a requirement that we contribute to the US Universal Service Fund on the basis of our Internet revenue; changes in government policy and/or regulation, including rules regarding data protection, cyber security and net neutrality; increasing competition leading to lower prices for our services; our ability to attract new customers and to increase and maintain the volume of traffic on our network; the ability to maintain our Internet peering arrangements on favorable terms; our ability to renew our long-term leases of optical fiber that comprise our network; our reliance on an equipment vendor, Cisco Systems Inc., and the potential for hardware or software problems associated with such equipment; the dependence of our network on the quality and dependability of third-party fiber providers; our ability to retain certain customers that comprise a significant portion of our revenue base; the management of network failures and/or disruptions; our ability to make payments on our indebtedness as they become due and outcomes in litigation, risks associated with variable interest rates under our interest rate Swap Agreement as well as other risks discussed from time to time in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including, without limitation, this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our management reviews and analyzes several key financial measures in order to manage our business and assess the quality and variability of our service revenue, operating results and cash flows. The following summary tables present a comparison of our results of operations with respect to certain key financial measures. The comparisons illustrated in the tables are discussed in greater detail below.
(1)Includes non-cash equity-based compensation expense of $2,521 and $1,219 for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Includes non-cash equity-based compensation expense of $24,301 and $22,306 for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Page 25 of 70
NM - not meaningful
Service Revenue. We continually work to grow our total service revenue by increasing the number of potential customers that we can reach on our network. We do this by investing capital to expand the geographic footprint of our network, by increasing the number of buildings that we are connected to, including carrier neutral data centers and multi-tenant office buildings, and by increasing our penetration rate into our existing buildings. These efforts broaden the global reach of our network and increase the size of our potential addressable market. We also seek to grow our service revenue by investing in our sales and marketing team. We typically sell corporate connections at similar pricing to our competitors, but our clients benefit from our significantly faster speeds, enhanced service level agreements and rapid installation times. In the net-centric market, we offer comparable services in terms of capacity but typically at significantly lower prices.
Our service revenue increased by 3.8% from 2020 to 2021. Exchange rates positively impacted our increase in service revenue by $5.3 million. All foreign currency comparisons herein reflect results for 2021 translated at the average foreign currency exchange rates for 2020. We increased our total service revenue by expanding our network, by adding additional buildings to our network, by increasing our penetration into the buildings connected to our network and by gaining market share by offering our services at lower prices than our competitors.
Revenue recognition standards include guidance relating to any tax assessed by a governmental authority that is directly imposed on a revenue-producing transaction between a seller and a customer and may include, but is not limited to, gross receipts taxes, Universal Service Fund fees and certain state regulatory fees. We record these taxes billed to our customers on a gross basis (as service revenue and network operations expense) in our consolidated statements of operations. The impact of these taxes including the Universal Service Fund resulted in an increase to our revenues from 2020 to 2021 of $3.4 million.
Our corporate customers generally purchase their services on a price per connection basis. Our net-centric customers generally purchase their services on a price per megabit basis. Revenues from our corporate and net-centric customers represented 60.8% and 39.2% of total service revenue, respectively, for 2021 and represented 67.5% and 32.5% of total service revenue, respectively, for 2020. Revenues from corporate customers decreased by 6.5% to $358.4 million for 2021 from 2020. Revenues from our net-centric customers increased by 25.3% to $231.4 million for 2021 from 2020.
Our corporate customers take advantage of our superior speeds, service levels and installation times versus our competitors. The growing trend of customers installing second lines for redundancy in order to construct VPNs has also led to our ability to increase our corporate revenues. However, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we saw corporate customers take a more cautious approach to new configurations and upgrades as well as a reduction in demand for connecting smaller satellite offices as a result of the challenges and uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also witnessed a deteriorating real estate market in and around the buildings we service, with rising vacancy levels and falling lease initiations or renewals resulting in fewer sales opportunities for our salesforce. As a result, we have experienced a slowdown in new sales to our corporate customers which negatively impacted our corporate revenue results. While we believe that demand for office space in the buildings in which we operate will remain among the strongest in our markets, we may experience increased corporate customer turnover, fewer upgrades of existing corporate customer configurations and fewer new tenant opportunities which would negatively impact our corporate revenue growth.
Our revenue from our net-centric customers increased primarily due to an increase in our number of net-centric customers and growth in network traffic from these customers partly offset by a decline in our average price per megabit. Our net-centric customers purchase our services on a price per megabit basis. The net-centric market exhibits significant pricing pressure due to the continued introduction of new technology which lowers the marginal cost of transmission and routing, and the commodity nature of the service where price is typically the only differentiating factor for these customers. Our average price per megabit of our installed base of customers declined by 24.2% from 2020 to 2021. We expect that our average price per megabit will continue to decline at similar rates. The impact of foreign exchange rates has a more significant impact on our net-centric revenues.
Page 26 of 70
Our on-net revenues increased by 5.6% from 2020 to 2021. Our on-net revenues increased as we increased the number of our on-net customer connections by 4.4% at December 31, 2021 from December 31, 2020. On-net revenues increased at a greater rate than on-net customer connections primarily due to an increase in our on-net ARPU from 2020 to 2021 and the positive impact of foreign exchange. ARPU is determined by dividing revenue for the period by the average customer connections for that period.
Our off-net revenues decreased by 1.2% from 2020 to 2021. Our off-net revenues decreased primarily from the 5.2% decrease in our off-net ARPU from 2020 to 2021 offsetting the 5.8% increase in the number of our off-net customer connections from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
Network Operations Expenses. Network operations expenses include the costs of personnel associated with service delivery, network management and customer support, network facilities costs, fiber and equipment maintenance fees, leased circuit costs, access and facilities fees paid to building owners and excise taxes billed to our customers and recorded on a gross basis. Non-cash equity-based compensation expense is included in network operations expenses consistent with the classification of the employee’s salary and other compensation. Our network operations expenses, including non-cash equity-based compensation expense, increased by 3.3% for 2021 from 2020. The increase in network operations expense is primarily attributable to an increase in costs related to our network and facilities expansion activities and an increase in equity-based compensation expense from the vesting of restricted employee shares, partly offset by price reductions obtained in certain of our leased circuit costs and the impact of a renewal of an IRU fiber lease agreement in the second quarter of 2020. When we adopted ASU 2016-02, we elected to apply certain practical expedients under ASU 2016-02 including not separating the lease and non-lease components of our finance and operating leases. As a result of accounting for this IRU renewal under ASU 2016-02, the present value of $1.8 million of quarterly maintenance and co-location fees (non-lease components) that were previously accounted for as network operations expenses prior to the second quarter of 2020, were capitalized as a finance lease liability and right-of-use leased asset totaling $34.0 million. Amortization of the right-of-use asset is recorded as depreciation and amortization expense and the payments that are made toward the finance lease liability are recorded as a reduction of the finance lease liability and interest expense.
Selling, General, and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses. Our SG&A expenses, including non-cash equity-based compensation expense, increased by 2.5% for 2021 from 2020. Non-cash equity-based compensation expense is included in SG&A expenses consistent with the classification of the employee’s salary and other compensation. SG&A expenses increased primarily from an increase in salaries and related costs required to support our expansion and increases in our sales efforts, partly offset by a reduction in sales meeting and travel costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and a reduction in bad debt expense. Our sales force headcount was 712 at December 31, 2020 and 633 at December 31, 2021, and our total headcount was 1,083 at December 31, 2020 and 1,001 at December 31, 2021. We experienced an increase in both voluntary and involuntary employee departures, particularly within our sales department, in the third and fourth quarters of 2021. We believe that this rise in departures was attributable both to an increased focus on monitoring sales productivity and to the unwillingness of some employees to be vaccinated and/or to return to a full-time, in-office environment.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Our depreciation and amortization expense increased by 6.9% for 2021 from 2020. The increase is primarily due to the depreciation expense associated with the increase in deployed fixed assets and the impact of a renewal of an IRU fiber lease agreement in the second quarter of 2020. As a result of accounting for this IRU renewal under ASU 2016-02, the present value of $1.8 million of quarterly maintenance and co-location fees (non-lease components) that were previously accounted for as network operations expenses prior to the second quarter of 2020, were capitalized as a finance lease liability and right-of-use leased asset totaling $34.0 million. Amortization of the right-of-use asset is recorded as depreciation and amortization expense and the payments that are made toward the finance lease liability are recorded as a reduction of the finance lease liability and interest expense.
Interest Expense and Losses on Debt Extinguishment and Redemptions. Our interest expense resulted from interest incurred on our $445.0 million of our 2022 Notes until these notes were fully extinguished in May 2021, interest incurred on our €350.0 million of 2024 Notes, interest incurred on our $500.0 million of 2026 Notes that we issued in May 2021, interest incurred on our installment payment agreement and interest incurred on our finance lease obligations. We issued €215.0 million of our 2024 Notes in June 2020 and €135.0 million of our 2024 Notes were issued in June 2019. In June 2020, we redeemed and extinguished our $189.2 million of 2021 Notes at par value resulting in a loss on debt extinguishment and redemption of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In March 2021, we redeemed and extinguished $115.9 million of our 2022 Notes at 103.24% of par value resulting in a loss on debt extinguishment and redemption of $3.9 million and reduced the par value from $445.0 million to $329.1 million. In May 2021, we extinguished the remaining $329.1 million of our 2022 Notes at par value and deposited funds with the trustee to pay $11.5 million of interest through December 1, 2021 resulting in a loss on debt extinguishment and redemption of $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Page 27 of 70
In August 2021 we entered into our Swap Agreement that has the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest rate obligation associated with our 2026 Notes to a variable interest rate obligation based on SOFR so that the interest payable on the 2026 Notes effectively became variable based on overnight SOFR. The Swap Agreement is recorded at its fair value at each reporting period, and we incurs gains and losses due to changes in market interest rates. The values that we report for the Swap Agreement as of each reporting date are recognized as non-cash interest expense with the corresponding amounts included in assets or liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021 the fair value of our Swap Agreement was a net liability of $9.0 million and we recorded an unrealized loss as interest expense related to our Swap Agreement of $9.0 million in 2021. We did not elect hedge accounting for our Swap Agreement. Our interest expense increased by 7.3% from 2020 to 2021. This increase was primarily due to the reduction in interest expense from the lower interest rate on our new 2026 Notes as compared to our extinguished 2022 Notes being offset by the additional $9.0 million of additional non-cash interest expense we recorded related to our Swap Agreement.
Realized Gain and Unrealized Gain (Loss) on Foreign Exchange - 2024 Notes. In June 2020, our €215.0 million of 2024 Notes were issued at a Euro to USD rate of $1.112. We received proceeds in USD on the 2024 Notes on June 9, 2020 at a Euro to USD rate of $1.133 resulting in a realized gain on foreign exchange of $2.5 million. Our 2024 Notes were issued in Euros and are reported in our reporting currency - US Dollars. As of December 31, 2021, our 2024 Notes were valued at $397.0 million. Our unrealized gain (loss) on foreign exchange on our 2024 Notes from converting our 2024 Notes into USD was $32.5 million for 2021 and $(37.0) million for 2020. We have not entered into hedging arrangements for our foreign currency obligations.
Income Tax Expense. Our income tax expense was $23.2 million for 2021 and $4.1 million for 2020. The increase in our income tax expense is primarily related to an increase in certain non-deductible expenses and the increase in our income before income taxes.
Buildings On-net. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a total of 3,035 and 2,914 on-net buildings connected to our network, respectively. The increase in our on-net buildings was a result of our disciplined network expansion program. We anticipate adding a similar number of buildings to our network for the next several years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In assessing our liquidity, management reviews and analyzes our current cash balances, accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, capital expenditure commitments, and required finance lease and debt payments and other obligations. As our business has grown as a result of an increasing customer base, broader geographic coverage and increased traffic on our network, we have produced a growing level of operating cash flow. As a result of the operating leverage of our network, our annual capital expenditures as measured as a percentage of revenues has fallen over the last decade. Increasing our operating cash flow is in part dependent upon expanding our geographic footprint and increasing our network capacity. Recent supply chain issues may adversely impact our ability to grow our network and revenue.
We have also had increasing success in raising capital by issuing notes and arranging financing and leases that have had a lower cost and more flexible terms. The combination of this improved operating performance and access to capital has enhanced our financial flexibility and increased our ability to make distributions to shareholders in the form of cash dividends or through share repurchases. Since our initial public offering, we have returned over $1.0 billion to our shareholders through share repurchases and dividends. We will continue to assess our capital and liquidity needs and, where appropriate, return capital to shareholders.
Over the next several years we have significant contractual and anticipated cash outlays including our indicative dividend payments on our common stock, our maturing debt obligations, interest payments on our debt obligations and our projected capital expenditure requirements in order to help execute our business plan. Based upon our historical growth rate of our dividend, we expect that we would have to provide approximately $353 million in order to meet our quarterly dividend payments over the next two years. Our $500.0 million of Senior Secured Notes mature in May 2026 and include annual interest payments of $17.5 million until maturity. Our €350 million of Senior Unsecured Euro Notes mature in June 2024 and include annual interest payments €15.3 million until maturity. Our €350 million of Senior Unsecured Euro Notes are denominated in Euros and expose us to potentially unfavorable adverse movements in foreign currency rate changes. Our overseas operations provides us access to Euros, however these amounts may be insufficient to fund our obligations under our Senior Unsecured Euro Notes. Additionally, we have not entered into foreign currency hedging arrangements which would seek to reduce our risks related to foreign exchange volatility.
Any future acquisitions or other significant unplanned costs or cash requirements in excess of amounts we currently hold may require that we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt or equity. We cannot assure you that such financing will be available on terms acceptable to us or our stockholders, or at all. Insufficient funds may require us to delay or scale back the number of buildings and markets that we add to our network, reduce our planned increase in our sales and marketing efforts, or require us to otherwise alter our business plan or take other actions that could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. If issuing equity securities raises additional funds, substantial dilution to existing stockholders may result.
Page 28 of 70
We may need to or elect to refinance all or a portion of our indebtedness at or before maturity and we cannot provide assurances that we will be able to refinance any such indebtedness on commercially reasonable terms or at all. In addition, we may elect to secure additional capital in the future, at acceptable terms, to improve our liquidity or fund acquisitions or for general corporate purposes. In addition, in an effort to reduce future cash interest payments as well as future amounts due at maturity or to extend debt maturities, we may, from time to time, issue new debt, enter into interest rate swap agreements, enter into debt for debt, or cash transactions to purchase our outstanding debt securities in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. We will evaluate any such transactions in light of the existing market conditions. The amounts involved in any such transaction, individually or in the aggregate, may be material.
We or our affiliates may, at any time and from time to time, seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity or debt, in open-market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will be upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine, and will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
In light of the economic uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, our executive officers and Board have continued to carefully monitor our liquidity and cash requirements. Based on current circumstances, we plan to continue our current dividend policy. Given uncertainties regarding the duration of the pandemic and timing for economic recovery, we will continue to monitor our capital spending. As we do each year, we will continue to monitor our future sources and uses of cash, and anticipate that we will make adjustments to our capital allocation strategies when, as and if determined by our Board of Directors.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Liquidity and Operating Performance
We continue to operate with a high level of liquidity, and as of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $328.6 million. The COVID-19 pandemic has not impacted our credit rating to date, nor do we believe that it has materially changed our cost of capital. We believe we are able to timely service our debt obligations and will not require any concessions to do so. We believe we will have access to additional capital from a variety of sources and the public capital markets for debt and equity.
In late March 2020, we adopted a mandatory policy through which we required all employees to work from home and follow shelter in place guidelines issued by state and local authorities. In July 2021, we allowed all employees to return voluntarily to all offices in the United States. In August 2021, we notified our employees that they would be required to return to the office on a full time basis in the United States beginning in September 2021 and that they would be required to attest that they were fully vaccinated against the COVID-19 virus to do so. Employees had until October 11, 2021 to provide their vaccine self-attestation. Fully vaccinated employees in the United States returned to our offices on a full-time basis in early September 2021. In October 2021, we opened most of our non-US offices for employees to return on a voluntary basis and, where permitted, on a mandatory basis in November 2021.
The spread of the Omicron variant around the world in December 2021 caused us to modify further our office environment. First, we mandated that all U.S. employees receive a COVID-19 booster vaccine no later than six weeks after first becoming eligible for such vaccine. Second, we mandated that all U.S. employees provide proof of vaccination to us. Third, for offices around the world that had not been closed by government order, we shifted much of our workforce to fully remote status on a temporary basis at the end of 2021 in order to reduce the density of our offices. Sales representatives with less than 12 months tenure, sales representative on performance improvement plans and their managers are currently still working in our offices on a full-time basis, as we believe that the training and coaching required by new and underperforming sales representatives is significantly more effective when provided in an in-office environment.
Our employees have largely complied with our vaccine mandate in the United States. However, we experienced an increase in both voluntary and involuntary employee departures, particularly within our sales department, in the third and fourth quarters of 2021. We believe this rise in departures is attributable both to an increased focus on managing underperforming sales representatives and to the unwillingness of some employees to be vaccinated and/or to return to a full time, in office environment. As a result of our decisions to mandate COVID vaccination and to require employees to return to our offices on a full time basis, we may find it difficult to retain existing employees or hire new employees. If this occurs, we may experience lower sales, revenue and profitability.
Page 29 of 70
We have experienced certain corporate customers taking a more cautious approach to new configurations and upgrades as well as a reduction in demand for connecting smaller satellite offices as a result of the challenges and uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also have witnessed a deteriorating real estate market in and around the buildings we service with rising vacancy levels and falling lease initiations or renewals which resulted in fewer sales opportunities for our salesforce and a reduction in VPN opportunities. As a result, we experienced a slowdown in new sales to our corporate customers which negatively impacted our corporate revenue growth. Moreover, with the spread of the Delta variant of COVID-19 in the summer of 2021 and then the Omicron variant in December of 2021, we believe many companies delayed the return of their employees to in-office work. As the pandemic has continued, and the return of employees to their offices has been delayed, a greater number of corporate customers with contracts that reached their termination date have elected not to renew their service with us. As such, we began to see increased corporate customer turnover. We also experienced a reduction in new sales to corporate customers. While we believe that demand for office space in the buildings in which we operate will remain among the strongest in our markets, and that most employers will eventually require their employees to return to their offices, we may experience increased customer turnover, fewer upgrades of existing customer configurations and fewer new tenant opportunities. These trends may negatively impact our revenue growth, cash flows and profitability.
We have seen a slight slowdown in the availability and delivery of networking equipment and optical fiber. While we believe we can adequately manage the operation, maintenance, upgrading and growth of our network, a worsening or prolonged slowdown may impact our ability to expand and augment our network.
Shortly after COVID-19 began its rapid spread around the world, domestic and worldwide capital markets ceased normal operations for a short period. While worldwide capital markets have remained unstable or unpredictable since then, particularly for non-investment grade issuers, legislative bodies and reserve banks have taken various actions in response to the pandemic that have impacted the capital markets, and we expect that these efforts may continue. We cannot predict whether new COVID-19 variants will arise and spread widely, the impact of the spread of new COVID-19 variants on the global economy, how national and local governments may react to the spread of new variants nor predict the impact the variants and any measures taken in response may have on our operations, employee retention, revenue growth, cash flows and our profitability.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our consolidated cash flows.
Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities. Our primary source of operating cash is receipts from our customers who are billed on a monthly basis for our services. Our primary uses of operating cash are payments made to our vendors, employees and interest payments made to our finance lease vendors and our note holders. Our changes in cash provided by operating activities are primarily due to changes in our operating profit and changes in our interest payments. Cash provided by operating activities for 2021, 2020 and 2019 included interest payments on our note obligations of $50.1 million, $48.8 million and $38.0 million, respectively.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities. Our primary use of investing cash is for purchases of property and equipment. These amounts were $69.9 million, $56.0 million and $47.0 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The annual changes in purchases of property and equipment are primarily due to the timing and scope of our network expansion activities including geographic expansion and adding buildings to our network. In 2020 and 2019 we obtained $5.8 million and $11.3 million, respectively, of network equipment and software in non-cash exchanges for notes payable under an installment payment agreement. There was no network equipment and software obtained under the installment payment agreement in 2021.
Page 30 of 70
Net Cash (Used In) Provided By Financing Activities. Our primary uses of cash for financing activities are for dividend payments, stock purchases and principal payments under our debt and finance lease obligations. During 2021, 2020 and 2019 we paid $150.3 million, $129.4 million and $112.6 million, respectively, for our quarterly dividend payments. Our quarterly dividend payments have increased due to regular quarterly increases in our quarterly dividend per share amounts. Amounts paid under our stock buyback program were $4.5 million for 2020. There were no stock purchases during 2021 or 2019. Principal payments under our finance lease obligations were $23.1 million, $24.0 million and $9.1 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and are impacted by the timing and extent of our network expansion activities. Total installment payment agreement principal payments were $6.9 million, $10.5 million and $10.0 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We completed a series of debt redemptions and issuances in 2021, 2020 and 2019. In March 2021, we paid $119.7 million to redeem and extinguish $115.9 million of our 2022 Notes at 103.24% of par value. In May 2021, we redeemed and extinguished the remaining $329.1 million of our 2022 Notes at par value and deposited funds with the trustee to pay $11.5 million of interest through December 1, 2021. The total payments to redeem our 2022 Notes were $459.3 million. In May 2021, we issued $500.0 million of our 2026 Notes for net proceeds of $496.9 million. In June 2020, we redeemed our $189.2 million of our 2021 Notes at par value and completed an offering of €215.0 million of our 2024 Notes for net proceeds of $240.3 million. In June 2019 we received net proceeds of $152.1 million from the issuance of €135.0 million of our 2024 Notes.
Indebtedness
Our total cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at December 31, 2021 were $328.6 million. We believe this level of liquidity reduces our exposure to refinancing risk, potential underperformance of the business or other unforeseen challenges and enhances our ability to pursue acquisitions or operating opportunities. We intend upon holding levels of cash and cash equivalents sufficient to maintain our ability to fund operations, refinance indebtedness and make dividend payments to our shareholders.
Our total indebtedness at December 31, 2021, at par value, was $1.1 billion. Our total indebtedness at December 31, 2021 includes $245.9 million of finance lease obligations for dark fiber under long-term IRU agreements.
On May 15, 2014, pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Reorganization (the “Merger Agreement”) by and among Cogent Communications Group, Inc. (“Group”), a Delaware corporation, Cogent Communications Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Holdings”) and Cogent Communications Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), Group adopted a new holding company organizational structure whereby Group is now a wholly owned subsidiary of Holdings. Holdings is a “successor issuer” to Group pursuant to Rule 12g-3(a) under the Exchange Act.
Senior secured notes-$500.0 million
In May 2021, Group issued $500.0 million of 2026 Notes. The 2026 Notes were sold in private offerings for resale to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to SEC Rule 144A and mature on May 1, 2026. Interest accrues at 3.50% and is paid semi-annually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year. Holdings provided a guarantee of the 2026 Notes but Holdings is not subject to the covenants under the indenture.
Senior unsecured notes-€350.0 million
In June 2019, Group completed an offering of €135.0 million of 2024 Notes. In June 2020, Group completed an offering of €215.0 million of 2024 Notes. The 2024 Notes were sold in private offerings for resale to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to SEC Rule 144A and mature on June 30, 2024. Interest accrues at 4.375% and is paid semi-annually in arrears on June 30 and December 30 of each year. Holdings provided a guarantee of the 2024 Notes but Holdings is not subject to the covenants under the indenture.
Page 31 of 70
Limitations under the indentures
The indenture governing the 2024 Notes (the “2024 Notes Indenture”) and the 2026 Notes (the “2026 Notes Indenture”), among other things, limit the Company’s ability to incur indebtedness; to pay dividends or make other distributions; to make certain investments and other restricted payments; to create liens; to consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of its assets; to incur restrictions on the ability of a subsidiary to pay dividends or make other payments; and to enter into certain transactions with its affiliates. There are certain exceptions to the limitations on our ability to incur indebtedness under the 2024 Notes Indenture and the 2026 Notes Indenture, including IRU agreements incurred in the normal course of business and any additional indebtedness if (i) under the 2024 Notes Indenture, our consolidated leverage ratio, as defined in 2024 Notes Indenture, is less than 6.0 to 1.0 and (ii) under the 2026 Notes Indenture, either our consolidated leverage ratio, as defined in 2026 Notes Indenture, is less than 6.0 to 1.0 or our fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the 2026 Notes Indenture, is greater than 2.0 to 1.0. We can also incur unlimited liens (which can be used, together with capacity under the debt covenant, to incur additional secured indebtedness) if our consolidated secured leverage ratio, as defined in each of the 2024 Notes Indenture and the 2026 Notes Indenture, is less than 4.0 to 1.0. The 2024 Notes Indenture permits restricted payments, such as dividends and stock purchases, using accumulated consolidated cash flow, as defined in the 2024 Notes indenture, when our consolidated leverage ratio, as defined by the 2024 Notes Indenture, is less than 4.25 to 1.00. Under the 2026 Notes Indenture, such accumulated consolidated cash flow, as defined therein, can be used to make such restricted payments if we are able to incur $1 of debt, as defined (i.e., either its consolidated leverage ratio is less than 6.0 to 1.0 or our fixed charge coverage ratio is greater than 2.0 to 1.0). Our consolidated leverage ratio was above 4.25 as of December 31, 2021, and our fixed charge coverage ratio was above 2.0 as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, a total of $185.5 million was unrestricted and permitted for restricted payments including dividends and stock purchases.
Summarized Financial Information of Holdings
Holdings is a guarantor under the 2024 and 2026 Notes. Under the indentures we are required to disclose financial information of Holdings including its assets, liabilities and its operating results (“Holdings Financial Information”). The Holdings Financial Information as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 is detailed below (in thousands).
Common Stock Buyback Program
Our Board of Directors has approved through December 31, 2022, purchases of our common stock under a buyback program (the “Buyback Program”). We purchased 79,056 shares of our common stock for $4.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 at an average price per share of $56.85. There were no purchases of common stock during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2021 there was a total of $30.4 million available under the Buyback Program.
Dividends on Common Stock
Dividends are recorded as a reduction to retained earnings. Dividends on unvested restricted shares of common stock are paid as the awards vest. Our initial quarterly dividend payment was made in the third quarter of 2012. On February 23, 2022, our Board of Directors approved the payment of our quarterly dividend of $0.855 per common share. The dividend for the first quarter of 2022 will be paid to holders of record on March 11, 2022. This estimated $39.7 million dividend payment is expected to be made on March 25, 2022.
Page 32 of 70
The payment of any future dividends and any other returns of capital, including stock buybacks, will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and may be reduced, eliminated or increased and will be dependent upon our financial position, results of operations, available cash, cash flow, capital requirements, limitations under our debt indentures and other factors deemed relevant by the our Board of Directors. We are a Delaware Corporation and under the General Corporate Law of the State of Delaware distributions may be restricted including a restriction that distributions, including stock purchases and dividends, do not result in an impairment of a corporation’s capital, as defined under Delaware Law. The indentures governing our notes limit our ability to return cash to our stockholders. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of limitations on distributions.
Future Capital Requirements
We believe that our cash on hand and cash generated from our operating activities will be adequate to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, debt service, dividend payments and other cash requirements for the next twelve months if we execute our business plan.
Any future acquisitions or other significant unplanned costs or cash requirements in excess of amounts we currently hold may require that we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt or equity. We cannot assure you that such financing will be available on terms acceptable to us or our stockholders, or at all. Insufficient funds may require us to delay or scale back the number of buildings and markets that we add to our network, reduce our planned increase in our sales and marketing efforts, or require us to otherwise alter our business plan or take other actions that could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. If issuing equity securities raises additional funds, substantial dilution to existing stockholders may result.
We may need to or elect to refinance all or a portion of our indebtedness at or before maturity and we cannot provide assurances that we will be able to refinance any such indebtedness on commercially reasonable terms or at all. In addition, we may elect to secure additional capital in the future, at acceptable terms, to improve our liquidity or fund acquisitions or for general corporate purposes. In addition, in an effort to reduce future cash interest payments as well as future amounts due at maturity or to extend debt maturities, we may, from time to time, issue new debt, enter into debt for debt, or cash transactions to purchase our outstanding debt securities in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. We will evaluate any such transactions in light of the existing market conditions. The amounts involved in any such transaction, individually or in the aggregate, may be material.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. As such, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in these relationships.
Income Taxes
Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code in the United States limits the utilization of net operating losses when ownership changes, as defined by that section, occur. We have performed an analysis of our Section 382 ownership changes and have determined that the utilization of certain of our net operating loss carryforwards in the United States is limited.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies we believe to be most critical to understanding our financial results and condition or that require complex, significant and subjective management judgments are discussed below.
Page 33 of 70
Finance Lease Obligations
We record assets and liabilities under finance leases at the lesser of the present value of the aggregate future minimum lease payments or the fair value of the assets under lease. We establish the number of renewal option periods used in determining the lease term, if any, based upon our assessment at the inception of the lease of the number of option periods for which failure to renew the lease imposes a penalty on us in such amount that renewal appears to be reasonably certain. Useful lives are determined based on historical usage with consideration given to technological changes and trends in the industry that could impact the asset utilization. We estimate the fair value of leased assets primarily using estimated replacement cost data for similar assets. We determine the incremental borrowing rate for each lease using our current borrowing rate adjusted for various factors including the level of collateralization and term to align with the term of the lease.