Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In addition to historical information, the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those discussed in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s opinions only as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to revise or publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review the Risk Factors and the risk factors set forth in other documents we file from time to time with the SEC.
Overview
On October 7, 2021, J2 Global, Inc. completed its previously announced plans to separate into two leading publicly traded companies: one addressing healthcare interoperability and comprising the Cloud Fax business, which does business as Consensus Cloud Solutions, Inc. (“Consensus” or “the Company”), and one that will continue J2 Global’s strategy of building a leading internet platform focused on key verticals, including technology & gaming, shopping, health, cybersecurity and martech, which does business as Ziff Davis. We refer to the transactions that resulted in the separation of Consensus and Ziff Davis into two separate publicly traded companies as the “separation and distribution.”
Following the separation and distribution, Consensus is a leading provider of secure information delivery services with a scalable Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) platform. Consensus serves more than one million customers of all sizes, from enterprises to individuals, across over 50 countries and multiple industry verticals including healthcare, financial services, law and education. Beginning as an online fax company over two decades ago, Consensus has evolved into a leading global provider of enterprise secure communication solutions. Consensus is well positioned to capitalize on advancements in how people and businesses share private documents and information. Its mission is to democratize secure information interchange across technologies and industries, and solve the healthcare interoperability challenge. Consensus’s communication and interoperability solutions enable its customers to securely and cooperatively access, exchange and use information across organizational, regional and national boundaries.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have widespread, rapidly evolving and unpredictable impacts on global economies, inflation, supply chains, work force participation and wages, and has created significant volatility and disruption in financial markets. Our focus remains on promoting employee health and safety and serving our customers. During fiscal 2021, we have observed an increasingly competitive labor market. Increased employee turnover, changes in the availability of our employees, including as a result of COVID-19-related absences, and labor shortages generally have resulted in, and could continue to result in, increased costs, and could adversely impact the efficiency of our operations. We continue to actively monitor the situation and will continue to adapt our business operations as necessary.
For purposes of this management’s discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of Consensus (“MD&A”) section, we use the terms “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” to refer to Consensus. References in this MD&A section to “Parent” or “Parent Company” refer to Ziff Davis, Inc. Inc., collectively with its consolidated subsidiaries (now known as Ziff Davis).
Key Performance Metrics
We use the following metrics to evaluate our business, including the growth of our business, the value provided by customers to our business, and our customer retention.
The following table sets forth certain key operating metrics for Consensus continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except for percentages):
(1)Consensus customers are defined as paying Corporate and SoHo customer accounts
(2)Represents a monthly ARPA calculated for the quarter or year calculated as follows. Monthly ARPA on a quarterly basis is calculated using our standard convention of dividing revenue for the quarter by the average of the quarter’s beginning and ending customer base and dividing that amount by 3 months. Monthly ARPA on an annual basis is calculated by dividing revenue for the year by the average customer base for the applicable four quarters and dividing that amount by 12 months. We believe ARPA provides investors an understanding of the average monthly revenues we recognize per account associated within Consensus’ customer base. As ARPA varies based on fixed subscription fee and variable usage components, we believe it can serve as a measure by which investors can evaluate trends in the types of services, levels of services and the usage levels of those services across Consensus’ customers.
(3)Paid Adds represents paying new Consensus customer accounts added during the annual period.
(4)Monthly churn is defined as Consensus paying customer accounts that cancelled its services during the period divided by the average number of customers over the period. This measure is calculated monthly and expressed as an average over the applicable period.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results require us to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. See Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K which describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions and may be material.
We believe that our most critical accounting policies are those related to revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business combinations, long-lived and intangible asset impairment, contingent consideration, income taxes and contingencies and allowance for doubtful accounts. We consider these policies critical because they are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in Section 3(a) of the Exchange Act, as amended by the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act,” reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports, proxy statements and registration statements and exemptions from the requirement of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation, exemption from new or revised financial accounting.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues substantially consist of monthly recurring subscription and usage-based fees, the majority of which are paid in advance by credit card. We defer the portions of monthly, quarterly, semi-annually and annually recurring subscription and usage-based fees collected in advance of the satisfaction of performance obligations and recognizes them in the period earned.
Along with our numerous proprietary solutions, we also generated revenues by reselling various third-party solutions. These third-party solutions, along with our proprietary products, allowed us to offer customers a variety of solutions to better meet their needs. We recorded revenue on a gross basis with respect to reseller revenue because we have control of the specified good or service prior to transferring control to the customer.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
We account for share-based awards to employees and non-employees in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). Accordingly, we measure share-based compensation expense at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and recognize the expense over the employee’s requisite service period using the straight-line method. The measurement of share-based compensation expense is based on several criteria including, but not limited to, the valuation model used and associated input factors, such as expected term of the award, stock price volatility, risk free interest rate, dividend rate and award cancellation rate. These inputs are subjective and are determined using management’s judgment. If differences arise between the assumptions used in determining share-based compensation expense and the actual factors, which become known over time, we may change the input factors used in determining future share-based compensation expense. Any such changes could materially impact our results of operations in the period in which the changes are made and in periods thereafter. The Company estimates the expected term based upon the historical exercise behavior of our employees.
Impairment or Disposal of Long-lived and Intangible Assets
We account for long-lived assets, which include property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and identifiable intangible assets with finite useful lives (subject to amortization), in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), which requires that long-lived assets be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the expected undiscounted future net cash flows generated by the asset. If it is determined that the asset may not be recoverable, and if the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recognized to the extent of the difference.
We assess the impairment of identifiable definite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important which could individually or in combination trigger an impairment review include the following:
•Significant underperformance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results;
•Significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business;
•Significant negative industry or economic trends;
•Significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period; and
•Our market capitalization relative to net book value.
If we determined that the carrying value of definite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above indicators of impairment, we would record an impairment equal to the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its estimated fair value. We have assessed whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that potentially indicate the carrying amount of definite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets may not be recoverable. We recorded total impairment of $7.5 million related to operating lease right-of-use assets, of which $6.5 million is related to continuing operations and $1.0 million is related to discontinued operations. Additionally, we recorded an impairment charge of $1.7 million for property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021. The impairment is related to the Company’s decision to exit and seek subleases for certain leased facilities primarily due to a distributed workforce as a result of the pandemic. As we seek to return to offices, we will seek a hybrid return to office model. No impairment was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
The Company classifies its long-lived assets to be sold as held for sale in the period (i) it has approved and committed to a plan to sell the asset, (ii) the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition, (iii) an active program to locate a buyer and other actions required to sell the asset have been initiated, (iv) the sale of the asset is probable, (v) the asset is being actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable in relation to its current fair value, and (vi) it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or that the plan will be withdrawn. The Company initially measures a long-lived asset that is classified as held for sale at the lower of its carrying value or fair value less any costs to sell. Any loss resulting from this measurement is recognized in the period in which the held for sale criteria are met. Conversely, gains are not recognized on the sale of a long-lived asset until the date of sale. Upon designation as an asset held for sale, the Company stops recording depreciation expense on the asset. The Company assesses the fair value of a long-lived asset less any costs to sell at each reporting period and until the asset is no longer classified as held for sale.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We apply the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations in accordance with GAAP and uses estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price paid for acquisitions to the fair value of the assets, including identifiable intangible assets and liabilities acquired. Such estimates may be based on significant unobservable inputs and assumptions such as, but not limited to, revenue growth rates, gross margins, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, discount rates and terminal growth rate assumptions. We use established valuation techniques and may engage reputable valuation specialists to assist with the valuations. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Fair values are subject to refinement for up to one year after the closing date of an acquisition as information relative to closing date fair values becomes available. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Intangible assets resulting from the acquisitions of entities accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting are recorded at the estimated fair value of the assets acquired. Identifiable intangible assets are comprised of purchased customer relationships, trademarks and trade names, developed technologies and other intangible assets. Intangible assets subject to amortization are amortized over the period of estimated economic benefit ranging from one to 20 years and are included in general and administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Income. We evaluate our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment pursuant to FASB ASC Topic No. 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”), which provides that goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized but tested for impairment annually or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment exist. In connection with the annual impairment test for goodwill, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment in determining whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform the impairment test upon goodwill. The impairment test involves comparing the fair values of the applicable reporting units with their aggregate carrying values, including goodwill. We generally determine the fair value of our reporting units using the income approach methodology of valuation. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference.
Contingent Consideration
Certain of our acquisition agreements include contingent earn-out arrangements, which are generally based on the achievement of future income thresholds or other metrics. The contingent earn-out arrangements are based upon our valuations of the acquired companies and reduce the risk of overpaying for acquisitions if the projected financial results are not achieved.
The fair values of these earn-out arrangements are included as part of the purchase price of the acquired companies on their respective acquisition dates. For each transaction, we estimate the fair value of contingent earn-out payments as part of the initial purchase price and record the estimated fair value of contingent consideration as a liability on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We consider several factors when determining that contingent earn-out liabilities are part of the purchase price, including the following: (1) the valuation of our acquisitions is not supported solely by the initial consideration paid, and the contingent earn-out formula is a critical and material component of the valuation approach to determining the purchase price; and (2) the former shareholders of acquired companies that remain as key employees receive compensation other than contingent earn-out payments at a reasonable level compared with the compensation of our other key employees. The contingent earn-out payments are not affected by employment termination.
We measure our contingent earn-out liabilities in connection with acquisitions at fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy (see Note 6 - Fair Value Measurements of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). We may use various valuation techniques depending on the terms and conditions of the contingent consideration including a Monte-Carlo simulation. This simulation uses probability distribution for each significant input to produce hundreds or thousands of possible outcomes and the results are analyzed to determine probabilities of different outcomes occurring. Significant increases or decreases to these inputs in isolation would result in a significantly higher or lower liability with a higher liability capped by the contractual maximum of the contingent earn-out obligation. Ultimately, the liability will be equivalent to the amount paid, and the difference between the fair value estimate and amount paid will be recorded in earnings. The amount paid that is less than or equal to the liability on the acquisition date is reflected as cash used in financing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Any amount paid in excess of the liability on the acquisition date is reflected as cash used in operating activities.
We review and re-assess the estimated fair value of contingent consideration on a quarterly basis, and the updated fair value could be materially different from the initial estimates or prior quarterly amounts. Changes in the estimated fair value of our contingent earn-out liabilities and adjustments to the estimated fair value related to changes in all other unobservable inputs are reported in general and administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Income Taxes
For historical periods, we are included in the federal consolidated and state consolidated income tax returns with Ziff Davis and its other subsidiaries. For purposes of the Consolidated Financial Statements, our taxes were determined using the separate return method as if we had filed separate tax returns. In addition, our income is subject to taxation in both the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining its provision for income taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate
tax determination is uncertain. We establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. These reserves for tax contingencies are established when we believe that certain positions might be challenged despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the outcome of a tax audit or lapse of a statute of limitations. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate.
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB ASC Topic No. 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax basis of recorded assets and liabilities. GAAP also requires that deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our valuation allowance is reviewed quarterly based upon the facts and circumstances known at the time. In assessing this valuation allowance, we review historical and future expected operating results and other factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are realizable.
Income Tax Contingencies
We calculate current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed during the following year. Adjustments based on filed returns are recorded when identified in the subsequent year.
ASC 740 provides guidance on the minimum threshold that an uncertain income tax position is required to meet before it can be recognized in the financial statements and applies to all tax positions taken by a company. ASC 740 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain income tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the income tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. If it is not more likely than not that the benefit will be sustained on its technical merits, no benefit will be recorded. Uncertain income tax positions that relate only to timing of when an item is included on a tax return are considered to have met the recognition threshold. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain income tax positions in income tax expense on our Consolidated Statements of Income. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate uncertain income tax positions and establish or release reserves as appropriate under GAAP.
As a multinational corporation, we are subject to taxation in many jurisdictions, and the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in various taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts and circumstances existing at that time. Therefore, the actual liability for U.S. or foreign taxes may be materially different from our estimates, which could result in the need to record additional tax liabilities or potentially to reverse previously recorded tax liabilities. In addition, we may be subject to examination of our tax returns by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other domestic and foreign tax authorities.
Non-Income Tax Contingencies
The Company has not historically withheld sales tax in states where it was not able to quantify the appropriate sales tax to be withheld. The Company believes it is probable that sales tax liability exists for its corporate accounts for the periods 2017 through 2021. However, the Company is currently unable to determine which of these customers are either exempt organizations or resellers and are thus exempt from sales tax. Therefore it cannot estimate the sales tax liability for these corporate customers. The Company is currently analyzing the pool of corporate customers subject to sales tax in order to estimate the liability and will record an accrual when the exposure is estimable. The Company currently cannot estimate the range of sales tax liability for corporate customers.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company determined that a sales tax liability is probable and it developed a methodology to estimate the liability for the sales tax for the SoHo revenue stream during the affected periods 2017 through 2021. Accordingly, the Company has recorded a sales tax expense in 2021 of $6.7 million for all periods affected, net of federal income tax benefit of $1.9 million of which $4.6 million, net of federal income tax benefit of $1.3 million, is deemed to be an out of period correction that is not deemed to be material to either the current or any prior periods.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for credit losses for accounts receivable, which is recorded as an offset to accounts receivable and changes in such are classified as general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Income. We assess collectability by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar characteristics exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectability issues. In determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses, we consider historical collectability based on past due status. We also consider customer-specific information, current market conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions to inform adjustments to historical loss data. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates the adequacy of these reserves.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of the extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to us, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Note 1 to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
See Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements and our expectations of their impact on our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The main strategic focus of our Consensus offerings is to enable our customers to securely and cooperatively access, exchange and use information across organizational, regional and national boundaries. As a result, we expect to continue to take steps to enhance our existing offerings and offer new services to continue to satisfy the evolving needs of our customers.
We expect our business to primarily grow organically and inorganically through the use of capital for re-investment in the business and opportunistic acquisitions that expedite our product roadmap in the interoperability space should they arise.
The following table sets forth for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, information derived from our Statements of Income as a percentage of revenues. This information should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenues
Consensus revenues primarily consist of revenues from “fixed” customer subscription revenues and “variable” revenues generated from actual usage of our services. We also generate an immaterial amount of Consensus revenues from intellectual property licensing.
Revenues increased $21.5 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 over the prior year period primarily due to growth in our corporate business. Our total revenue increased by $20.5 million primarily as a result of an increase of approximately $20.0 million in corporate revenues due to organic growth in existing customer usage and new customer acquisitions. Our corporate revenue retention for 2020 customers in 2021 is greater than 100%.
Revenues increased $8.6 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 over the prior year period primarily due to $13.6 million growth in corporate revenues as a result of organic growth in existing customer usage and new customer acquisitions of $8.4 million and $5.2 million due to an acquisition; partially offset by a decline of $4.5 million in SoHo and $0.6 million in patent revenue.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues is primarily comprised of costs associated with data transmission, network operations, customer service, software licenses for resale, online processing fees and equipment depreciation. The increase in cost of revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in revenues, higher software licensing and infrastructure / database hosting costs as a result of moving our data storage from physical storage into the cloud.
The increase in cost of revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in revenues, higher phone operation costs, an increase in licensing costs and an overall increase in the operational database hosting expense as a result of moving data storage from physical storage into the cloud.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing costs consist primarily of internet-based advertising, personnel costs and other business development-related expenses. Our internet-based advertising relationships consist primarily of fixed cost and performance-based (cost-per-impression, cost-per-click and cost-per-acquisition) advertising relationships with an array of online service providers. Our sales personnel consist of a combination of inside sales and outside sales professionals.
The increase in sales and marketing expense of $6.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 versus prior period was primarily due to an increase in third party advertising of $3.0 million primarily in SoHo, as well as an increase of $3.5 million in personnel expense due to continued investment in the corporate sales team.
The reduction in sales and marketing expense of $4.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 versus prior period was primarily due to a reduction in third party advertising of $4.5 million primarily due to increased SoHo funnel metrics as a result of an increase in demand of our services in a work from home environment, a decrease in travel due to the pandemic, offset by an increase of $0.1 million in sales personnel costs due to the increased focus on the corporate sales team.
Research, Development and Engineering
Our research, development and engineering costs consist primarily of personnel-related expenses. The increase in research, development and engineering costs for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was mostly due to our continued focus on developing our platform, products and solutions to primarily support corporate revenue growth. The decrease in research, development and engineering costs for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was due to the increase in capitalized labor related to developing our platform, products and solutions.
General and Administrative.
Our general and administrative costs consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, bad debt expense, professional fees, severance and insurance costs.
The increase in general and administrative expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 versus prior period was primarily due to $11.5 million in non-recurring expenses related to the spin-off from Ziff Davis, approximately $5.0 million increase in Q4 2021 operational expense due to standalone public company costs, an $8.2 million impairment of our downtown LA office space and an $8.6 million Wayfair Sales Tax expense related to 2017-2021, of which $0.6 million was related to post spin in Q4 2021.
The increase in general and administrative expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 versus prior period was primarily due to $1.7 million in office rent and $1.0 million increase in Salaries and Benefits and Employee Related expenses.
Share-Based Compensation
The following table represents share-based compensation expense included in cost of revenues and operating expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Non-Operating Income and Expenses
Interest expense. Our interest expense is generated from interest expense due to outstanding debt. Interest expense was $14.3 million, $75.8 million, and $43.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest expense decreased between 2020 and 2021 due to the Company redeeming all of its outstanding $650 million 6% Senior Notes in 2020, in which the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of $38.0 million, which is included in interest expense. This is coupled with the Company recording three months of interest associated with the 2026 and 2028 Senior Notes in the current period, in comparison to nine months of interest associated with the 6% Senior Notes in 2020. The increase from 2019 to 2020 is primarily due to the extinguishment of the Company’s 6% Senior Notes in 2020.
Interest income. Our interest income is generated by interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents. Interest income was $0.1 million, zero and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Changes in interest income was immaterial between the period from 2020 and 2021 and 2019 to 2020.
Other income (expense), net. Our other income (expense), net is generated primarily from miscellaneous items and gain or losses on currency exchange. Other income (expense), net was $0.2 million, $31.6 million, and $(1.4) million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change was attributable to changes in gain or losses on the currency exchange. The change in our gains (losses) recognized in earnings from 2020 to 2021 were primarily attributable to lower inter-company balances between periods in foreign subsidiaries that were in functional currencies other than the U.S. Dollar and exchange rate fluctuations. The change in our gains (losses) recognized in earnings from 2019 to 2020 were primarily attributable to the settlement of certain intra-entity transactions.
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and in evaluating our tax positions on a worldwide basis. We believe our tax positions, including intercompany transfer pricing policies, are consistent with the tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we conduct our business. Certain of these tax positions have in the past been, and are currently being, challenged, and this may have a significant impact on our effective tax rate if our tax reserves are insufficient.
Our effective tax rate is based on pre-tax income, statutory tax rates, tax regulations (including those related to transfer pricing) and different tax rates in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. The tax bases of our assets and liabilities reflect our best estimate of the tax benefits and costs we expect to realize. When necessary, we establish valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to an amount that will more likely than not be realized.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has interest expense limitation carryovers of $4.9 million and zero, respectively, which last indefinitely. The Company also has no federal capital loss limitation carryforwards as of December 31, 2021 nor 2020. The Company has $0.2 million and zero million foreign tax credit carryforward as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Income tax expense (benefit) amounted to $39.9 million, $30.0 million and $(33.1) million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective tax rates for 2021, 2020 and 2019 were 24.8%, 19.7% and (22.7)%, respectively.
The increase in our annual effective income tax rate from 2020 to 2021 was primarily attributable to the following:
1.An increase in tax expense relating to an increase in income in comparison to the prior year, and
2.an increase in tax expense relating to certain non-deductible expenses incurred in the year in connection with the Spin and the recording of the Non Income Tax Contingency.
The increase in our annual effective income tax rate from 2019 to 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
1.An increase in tax expense during 2020 due to a large tax benefit recognized in 2019 from an intra-entity transfer as part of the reorganization of our international operating structure resulting in the recognition of a deferred tax asset with no comparable event during 2020, and
2.an increase in tax expense in 2020 due to a decrease in relation to certain uncertain tax positions in 2019 with no similar reduction in 2020.
In order to provide additional understanding in connection with our foreign taxes, the following represents the statutory and effective tax rate by significant foreign country:
(1) Effective tax rate excludes certain discrete items.
The statutory tax rate is the rate imposed on taxable income for corporations by the local government in that jurisdiction. The effective tax rate measures the taxes paid as a percentage of pretax profit. The effective tax rate can differ from the statutory tax rate when a company can exempt some income from tax, claim tax credits, or due to the effect of book-tax differences that do not reverse and discrete items.
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and in evaluating our tax positions on a worldwide basis. We believe our tax positions, including intercompany transfer pricing policies, are consistent with the tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we conduct our business. Certain of these tax positions have in the past been, and are currently being, challenged, and this may have a significant impact on our effective tax rate if our tax reserves are insufficient.
Quarterly Results of Operations (Unaudited)
The following tables contain selected unaudited Statements of Operation information for each quarter of 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except share and per share data). The Company believes that the following information reflects all normal recurring adjustments necessary for a fair presentation of the information for the periods presented. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period. This data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the full fiscal year or any other period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $66.8 million compared to $66.2 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in cash and cash equivalents resulted primarily from cash provided from operations, partially offset by cash used for purchases of property and equipment (including capitalized labor) and cash used to pay Ziff Davis for its equity interest in J2 Cloud Services, LLC. As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents held within domestic and foreign jurisdictions were $44.5 million and $22.3 million, respectively.
On October 7, 2020, the Former Parent issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% Senior Notes due 2030. A portion of the proceeds were used to fund the redemption of the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 6.0% Senior Notes due 2025 previously issued by J2 Cloud Services, LLC and to pay the redemption premium due in respect of such redemption and accrued and unpaid interest. The Parent used the remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes including acquisitions.
On October 7, 2021, the Company issued $305 million of 6.0% senior notes due in 2026 (the “2026 Senior Notes”), in a private placement offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933. Consensus received proceeds of $301.2 million, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts, commissions and offering expenses. The 2026 Senior Notes are presented as long-term debt, net of deferred issuance costs, on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021. The 2026 Senior Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.0% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing on April 15, 2022.
On October 7, 2021, Consensus issued $500 million of 6.5% senior notes due in 2028 (the “2028 Senior Notes”), in a private placement offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933. In exchange for the equity interest in J2 Cloud Services, LLC, Consensus issued the 2028 Senior Notes to Ziff Davis. Ziff Davis then exchanged the 2028 Senior Notes with lenders under its credit agreement (or their affiliates) in exchange for extinguishment of a similar amount indebtedness under such credit agreement. The 2028 Senior Notes are presented as long-term debt, net of deferred issuance costs, on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021. The 2028 Senior Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.5% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing on April 15, 2022.
On March 1, 2022, the Company’s Board of Directors has approved a share buyback program. Under this program, the Company may purchase in the public market or in off-market transactions up to $100 million worth of stock through February 2025. The timing and amounts of purchases will be determined by the Company, depending on market conditions and other factors it deems relevant.
On March 4, 2022, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement with certain lenders from time to time party thereto (collectively, the “Lenders”) and MUFG Union Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, collateral agent and sole lead arranger for the Lenders (the “Agent”). Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, the Lenders have provided Consensus with a revolving credit facility of $25 million (the “Credit Facility”). The final maturity of the Credit Facility will occur on March 4, 2027.
We currently anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated needs for working capital, capital expenditure, investment requirements, stock repurchases and cash dividends for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operations, together with cash and cash equivalents. Net cash provided by operating activities was $233.7 million, $238.8 million and $226.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our operating cash flows resulted primarily from cash received from our customers offset by cash payments we made to third parties for their services, employee compensation and lease payments associated offices. The decrease in our net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to a decrease in operating lease liabilities, offset by increased prepaid expenses, accounts payable and other long-term liabilities. The increase in our net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase in accounts payable and operating lease liabilities; partially offset by an decrease lower uncertain tax positions and reduced deferred revenue. Our prepaid tax payments were zero and $0.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $66.8 million, $66.2 million and $51.1 million at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities was $42.5 million, $60.9 million and $304.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to business acquisitions and capital expenditures associated with the purchase of property and equipment (including capitalized labor); partially offset by proceeds from the sale of businesses. Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was primarily due to business acquisitions and capital expenditures associated with the purchase of property and equipment (including capitalized labor).
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities was $(247.8) million, $(179.1) million and $61.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash used in financing activities in 2021 increased over the prior comparable period and was primarily attributable to distributions to the Former Parent; partially offset by the issuance of debt. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 decreased over the prior comparable period and was primarily attributable to the repayment of debt; partially offset by contributions from the Former Parent.Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 was primarily attributable to contributions from the Former Parent.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(a)These amounts represent principal on long-term debt.
(b)These amounts represent interest on long-term debt.
(c)These amounts represent undiscounted future minimum rental commitments under noncancellable operating leases.
(d)These amounts represent undiscounted future minimum rental commitments under noncancellable finance leases.
(e)These amounts represent service commitments to various telecommunication providers.
(f)These amounts represent the holdback amounts in connection with certain business acquisitions.
(g)These amounts primarily represent certain consulting and Board of Director fee arrangements, software license commitments and others.
As of December 31, 2021, our liability for uncertain tax positions was $4.8 million. The future payments related to uncertain tax positions have not been presented in the table above due to the uncertainty of the amounts and timing of cash settlement with the taxing authorities.