Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report including, without limitation, statements under this “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this annual report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this annual report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We completed our initial public offering in November 2021, and since that time, we have engaged in discussions with potential business combination target companies; we have not, however, as of yet, reached a definitive agreement with a specific target company with respect to an initial business combination with us. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
The issuance of additional ordinary shares in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions of the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change of control if a substantial number of our ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is issued and outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021 we had cash of $975,000 and a working capital of $1,068,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have not engaged in any revenue-generating operations to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, preparations for our initial public offering, and, subsequent to our initial public offering, searching for, and due diligence related to, potential target companies with which to consummate a business combination transaction. We have not and we will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on funds held in our trust account after our initial public offering. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the December 31, 2021 date of our audited financial statements contained in this Annual Report. After our initial public offering, which was consummated in November 2021, we have been incurring increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses related to our search for a target company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs were satisfied prior to the completion of our initial public offering from the availability of up to $300,000 in loans from our sponsor under an unsecured promissory note. After having borrowed the full $300,000 under that promissory note, we repaid that amount upon the closing of our initial public offering, and as of December 31, 2021, no amounts remained outstanding under that note. Further, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our financing and acquisition plans. Our management expects that the proceeds of our initial public offering, together with proceeds from additional loans from our sponsor, if necessary (as described below), will suffice to cover our working capital needs until our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to consummate an initial business combination will be successful.
The net proceeds from (i) the sale of the units in our initial public offering, including due to the underwriters’ exercise, in full, of their over-allotment option, after deducting offering expenses of approximately $1,128,000 and underwriting commissions of $2,530,000 (but excluding a deferred underwriting fee of $4,427,500 that will be payable to the representatives of the underwriters upon (and subject to) the consummation of our initial business combination transaction), and (ii) the sale of the private warrants for a purchase price of $7,300,000, was, in the aggregate, $130,142,000. Of this amount, $129,030,000 (including up to $4,427,500 as a deferred underwriting fee to be payable to the representatives of the underwriters upon (and subject to) the consummation of our initial business combination transaction) was deposited into a non- interest-bearing trust account. The funds in the trust account are invested only in specified U.S. government treasury bills or in specified money market funds. The remaining $1,112,000 from the IPO and private placement proceeds was held outside of the trust account, and after we have incurred and paid operating expenses of $137,000, the cash on hand balance as of December 31, 2021 was $975,000.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding potential fees to be payable to the underwriters for advisory services in connection with our initial business combination transaction), minus amounts paid out to redeeming shareholders, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust to pay taxes, if any. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. To the extent that our ordinary shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account (less any amounts paid out to redeeming shareholders) will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Following our initial public offering, we had available to us $1,112,000 of proceeds held outside of the trust account. We use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, pay for administrative and support services, and pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the trust account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
In order to fund potential working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor, together with three primary limited partners of our sponsor (Clal Biotechnology Industries, Israel Biotech Fund and Consensus Business Group (via its affiliate, Kalistcare Ltd.)), have committed to funding us, in an equivalent manner among the sponsors, an aggregate, up to $450,000, as may be required by us. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside of the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of loans from our sponsor and its affiliates (including the foregoing $450,000 amount) may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private warrants issued to our sponsor.. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Our primary anticipated liquidity requirements during our post-initial public offering, pre-business combination period include approximately $700,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting any business combinations; $100,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements, including Nasdaq and other regulatory fees; $180,000 for administrative and support services; and approximately $132,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
Currently we anticipate that we will need to obtain additional financing following our initial public offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business up until our initial business combination. The costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are likely to be greater than what we had originally estimated would be needed to do so. Consequently, we will likely have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination without the up to $450,000 of sponsor/affiliate loans described above. Moreover, we will likely need to obtain additional financing in connection with, and in order to complete, our initial business combination and/or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we will likely need to issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. If we succeed at consummating our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient following that transaction, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations; Quarterly Results
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as described in Item 303 of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments for capital expenditures or contractual obligations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
None.