Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Amendment. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for our Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,136,002, which consists of a change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,340,000, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account
of $189,309, Change in fair value of conversion option liability of 46,293 and unrealized gain on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $8,379, offset by operating costs of $2,394,781 and interest expense of $53,198.
For the period from May 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $4,868,590, which consists of operating costs of $67,626, change in fair value of warrant liability of $4,105,000, transaction costs related to warrant liability of $679,016 and unrealized loss on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $25,107, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $8,159.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 18, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 50,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $500,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,000,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $11,000,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $500,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $26,982,949 in transaction costs, including $8,950,000 of underwriting fees, net of $1,050,000 reimbursed from the underwriters, $17,500,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $532,949 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $500,030,740 consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, $150,000 of permitted withdrawals withdrawn for working capital purposes.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $2,448,275. Net income of $2,136,002 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $189,309, an unrealized gain on of marketable securities of $8,379, a change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,340,000, change in value of conversion option liability of $46,293, and amortization of debt discount of $53,198. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $53,494 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from May 12, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $36,935. The change in fair value of warrants was $4,105,000 and offering costs were 679,016. Interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $8,159, an unrealized loss on marketable securities held in our Trust Account $25,107 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $30,691 of cash from operating activities, contributed to a Net loss of $4,868,590.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $206,841. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. As of December 31, 2021 the $1,000,000 has been borrowed, with a remaining balance for withdrawal of $500,000.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $30,000 for office space and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on December 18, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $17,500,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D
and 7F under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair
value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a Monte Carlo simulation and modified Black Scholes model, respectively. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class
method in calculating income (loss) per common share. Remeasurement adjustment associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 1,2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not have an impact on our financial statements.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. One of the more significant accounting estimates included in these financial statements is the determination of the fair value of the warrant liabilities. Such estimates may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and, accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the Initial Public Offering that are directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred and presented as non-operating expenses. Offering costs amounted to $26,982,949, of which $26,303,933 were charged to stockholders’ deficit upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering and $679,016 were charged to operations.
Convertible Debt
The Company accounts for conversion options embedded in convertible notes in accordance with ASC 815. ASC 815 generally requires companies to bifurcate conversion options embedded in convertible notes from their host instruments and to account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments.
The Company reviews the terms of convertible debt issued to determine whether there are embedded derivative instruments, including embedded conversion options, which are required to be bifurcated and accounted for separately as derivative financial instruments. In circumstances where the host instrument contains more than one embedded derivative instrument, including the conversion option, that is required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are accounted for as a single, compound derivative instrument.
Bifurcated embedded derivatives are initially recorded at fair value and are then revalued at each reporting date with changes in the fair value reported as non-operating income or expense. When the equity or convertible debt instruments contain embedded derivative instruments that are to be bifurcated and accounted for as liabilities, the total proceeds received are first allocated to the fair value of all the bifurcated derivative instruments. The remaining proceeds, if any, are then allocated to the host instruments themselves, usually resulting in those instruments being recorded at a discount from their face value. The discount from the face value of the convertible debt, together with the stated interest on the instrument, is amortized over the life of the instrument through periodic charges to interest expense.