ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections of this Annual Report entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on March 8, 2021, formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering.
Our sponsor is Compass Digital SPAC LLC (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on October 19, 2021. On October 19, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200 million.
Certain institutional anchor investors (the “Institutional Anchor Investors”) that are not affiliated with us, our Sponsor, or our officers, directors, or any member of our management purchased an aggregate of 20,000,000 Units. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200 million.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,666,667 units (the “Private Placement Units”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement to our Sponsor, and the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering, generating gross proceeds of $7 million. Concurrently with the closing of the Private Placement, our Sponsor sold an aggregate of 186,667 Private Warrants to the Institutional Anchor Investors.
The Institutional Anchor Investors also purchased 1,547,727 shares of Class B ordinary shares (“Founder Shares”) from our Sponsor at the original purchase price of $0.004 per share. The Founder Shares will automatically convert into shares of Class A ordinary shares at the time of our initial business combination on a one-for-one
basis, subject to adjustment as provided in the Final Prospectus.
Following the closing of our Initial Public Offering on October 19, 2021, an amount of $200,000,000($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Units was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States and will be invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7
of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account, as described below.
The underwriters notified the Company of their intention to partially exercise the over-allotment option on November 30, 2021 (the “Over-Allotment”). As such, on November 30, 2021, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 1,240,488 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, and the sale of an additional 165,398 Private Placement Warrants, at $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $12,404,880 and $248,097, respectively. The underwriters forfeited the balance of the over-allotment option. A total of $12,404,880 of the net proceeds was deposited into the Trust Account, bringing the aggregate proceeds held in the Trust Account to $212,407,824 (see Note 2). The Company incurred additional offering costs of $682,268 in connection with the Over-Allotment (of which $434,171 was for deferred underwriting fees).
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. NASDAQ rules provide that the Business Combination must be with one or more target businesses that together have a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the balance in the Trust Account (as defined below) (less any deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on interest earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the signing a definitive agreement to enter a Business Combination. We will only complete a Business Combination if the post-Business Combination company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”). There is no assurance that we will be able to successfully effect a Business Combination.
We will provide the holders of our outstanding Public Shares (the “public shareholders”) with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their Public Shares upon the completion of a Business Combination either (i) in connection with a shareholder meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) by means of a tender offer. In connection with a proposed Business Combination, we may seek shareholder approval of a Business Combination at a meeting called for such purpose at which shareholders may seek to redeem their shares without voting, and if they do vote, irrespective of whether they vote for or against a Business Combination. We will proceed with a Business Combination only if we have net tangible assets of at least $5,000,001 either immediately prior to or upon such closing of a Business Combination and, if we seek shareholder approval, a majority of the outstanding shares voted are voted in favor of the Business Combination.
If we seek shareholder approval of a Business Combination and do not conduct redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules, our Certificate of Incorporation provides that, a public shareholder, together with any affiliate of such shareholder or any other person with whom such shareholder is acting in concert or as a “group” (as defined under Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)), will be restricted from seeking redemption rights with respect to more than an aggregate of 15% of the Public Shares without our prior written consent.
The public shareholders will be entitled to redeem their shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then in the Trust Account (initially $10.00 per share, plus any pro rata interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its tax obligations). The per-share
amount to be distributed to shareholders who redeem their shares will not be reduced by the deferred underwriting commissions we will pay to the underwriters. There will be no redemption rights upon the completion of a Business Combination with respect to the Company’s warrants. These Class A ordinary shares will be recorded at a redemption value and classified as temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering, in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.”
If a shareholder vote is not required and we do not decide to hold a shareholder vote for business or other legal reasons, we will, pursuant to its Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association, offer such redemption pursuant to the tender offer rules of the SEC, and file tender offer documents containing substantially the same information as would be included in a proxy statement with the SEC prior to completing a Business Combination.
Our Sponsor has agreed (a) to vote its Founder Shares and any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in favor of a Business Combination, (b) not to propose an amendment to the Company’s Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association with respect to the Company’s pre-Business
Combination activities prior to the closing of a Business Combination unless the Company provides dissenting public shareholders
with the opportunity to redeem their Public Shares in conjunction with any such amendment; (c) not to redeem any shares (including the Founder Shares) into the right to receive cash from the Trust Account in connection with a shareholder vote to approve a Business Combination (or to sell any shares in a tender offer in connection with a Business Combination if we do not seek shareholder approval in connection therewith) or a vote to amend the provisions of the Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association relating to shareholders’ rights of pre-Business
Combination activity and (d) that the Founder Shares shall not participate in any liquidating distributions upon winding up if a Business Combination is not consummated. However, the Sponsor will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering if the Company fails to complete its Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination by October 19, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but no more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholder’s rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and our board of directors, proceed to commence a voluntary liquidation and thereby a formal dissolution of the Company, subject in each case to its obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of applicable law. The underwriters have agreed to waive their rights to the deferred underwriting commission held in the Trust Account in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period and, in such event, such amounts will be included with the funds held in the Trust Account that will be available to fund the redemption of the Public Shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the assets remaining available for distribution will be less than the Initial Public Offering price per Unit $10.00.
We have completed our Initial Public Offering on October 19, 2021 as described above and had approximately $3.4 million in cash and approximately $2.7 million of working capital immediately after the IPO. Accordingly, management has since reevaluated our liquidity and financial condition and determined that sufficient capital exists to sustain operations through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing and therefore substantial doubt has been alleviated. There is no assurance that our plans to consummate an initial Business Combination will be successful within the Combination Period. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
As of December 31, 2021, we held cash of $1,788,014 and current liabilities of $568,571. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the IPO and after search for target. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in
the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $1,435,067, which consisted of approximately $3,244 of interest income, $375,560 of non-operating loss from change in FV of warrant liabilities, and approximately $1,062,751 of formation costs and other operating expenses.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K
and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations other than obligations disclosed herein.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on October 14, 2021, and until completion of our initial business combination or liquidation, we may reimburse an affiliate of our Sponsor up to an amount of $10,000 per month for office space and secretarial and administrative support.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (and in each case holders of their component securities, as applicable) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed prior to or on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to our Class A ordinary shares). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of a Business Combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
In connection with the IPO, the underwriters were granted a 45-day
option from the date of the prospectus (the “Over-Allotment Option”) to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments (the “Option Units”), if any. On November 30, 2021, the underwriters purchased an additional 1,240,488 Option Units pursuant to the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option. The Option Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating aggregate additional gross proceeds of $12,404,880 to the Company.
The underwriters were entitled to a cash underwriting discount of 2.00% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $4,000,000 (or $4,600,000 if the over-allotment option in exercised in full). In addition, the underwriters were entitled to a deferred fee of three and half percent (3.50%) of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $7,000,000 (or $8,050,000 if the over-allotment option in exercised in full). The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited condensed financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these audited condensed financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Liquidity and Management’s Plans
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, the Company lacked the liquidity it needed to sustain operations for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statements. The Company has since completed its Initial Public Offering at which time the Company raised capital that is deposited in the Trust Account. Funds raised in excess of the capital in trust accounts are to be used for fund offering expenses and released to the Company for general working capital purposes.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $1.8 million in its operating bank account and working capital of approximately $1.6 million. To date, the Company’s liquidity needs have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain expenses on behalf of the Company in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined in Note 5), a loan of approximately $195,000 pursuant to the Note issued to the Sponsor (Note 5), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. The Company fully repaid the Note on October 19, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s officers, directors and Initial Shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (see Note 5). As of December 31, the company drew $60,000 from the Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, operating costs, identifying and evaluating prospective Initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging
growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public company, which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all short-term investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash equivalents. The Company had approximately $1,788,014 of cash and no cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021.
Net Earnings (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period. The Company did not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 1,240,488 shares of ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share because their exercise is contingent upon future events and since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
on March 8, 2021 (inception). The impact to the financial statements was not material.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
The Company accounts for its ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares is classified as shareholder’s equity. The Company’s ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholder’s equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As such, our unaudited condensed financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the unaudited condensed financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.