Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of Coeur Mining, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively the “Company”, “our”, or “we”). We use certain non-GAAP financial performance measures in our MD&A. For a detailed description of these measures, please see “Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures” at the end of this Item. We provide Costs applicable to sales (“CAS”) allocation, referred to as the co-product method, based on revenue contribution for Palmarejo, Rochester and Silvertip and based on the primary metal, referred to as the by-product method, for Wharf. Revenue from secondary metal, such as silver at Wharf, is treated as a cost credit.
Overview
We are primarily a gold and silver producer with assets located in the United States, Canada and Mexico
2021 Highlights
For full year 2021, Coeur reported revenue of $832.8 million and cash flow from operating activities of $110.5 million. We reported GAAP net loss of $31.3 million, or $0.13 per diluted share. On an adjusted basis1, the Company reported EBITDA of $210.8 million and net loss of $1.4 million or $0.01 per diluted share.
•Solid fourth quarter production growth led to full-year production within guidance ranges - Gold and silver production increased 2% and 6% quarter-over-quarter, respectively, to 88,946 ounces and 2.6 million ounces. Full-year gold and silver production totaled 348,529 ounces and 10.1 million ounces, respectively, within the Company’s consolidated production guidance range for both metals
•Strong cost performance from primary gold operations - Full-year costs applicable to sales1 at Palmarejo, Kensington and Wharf were within their guidance ranges for 2021 despite inflationary cost headwinds, leading to strong free cash flow1 at each of these primary gold operations. During 2021, gold sales represented 70% of the Company’s total revenue
•Largest exploration program in Company history extended mine lives and drove resource growth - Coeur increased total exploration investment 41% year-over-year to $71 million in 2021, bringing its five-year cumulative investment in exploration to nearly $240 million, which has led to significant increases in reserves and resources. From the 2021 program, mine life extensions at Palmarejo and Wharf as well as significant resource additions at Silvertip and Kensington continue to lay the foundation for future organic growth
•Updated capital and schedule estimates for Rochester expansion provide clarity - The Company estimates the total capital for the Plan of Operations Amendment 11 (“POA 11”) will be approximately $520 million, which is in-line with recent updates. Approximately $236 million has been incurred on the project as of December 31, 2021. In addition, Coeur estimates the cost to incorporate pre-screens into the new crusher circuit and associated re-assessment of project contingency to be approximately $70 - $80 million. Construction is expected to be completed mid-2023 with commissioning to follow. Post-expansion, full-year production is expected to average roughly 8 million ounces of silver and 76,250 ounces of gold with average free cash flow1 of $90 million from 2024 to 20344
•Silvertip trade-off study underway - The Company commenced work to assess the economics of a potential larger expansion and restart of its high-grade Silvertip silver-zinc-lead property in British Columbia. The review is evaluating the potential to target a higher throughput to take advantage of the significant resource growth and on a timetable that would sequence an expansion and restart following completion and commissioning of the Rochester expansion. Results from this ongoing work are expected by the end of the year
•Initial Technical Report Summaries filed under new SEC rules confirm strength and stability of Coeur’s multi-asset portfolio - The Company today filed initial Technical Report Summaries pursuant to Item 1300 of SEC Regulation S-K. Highlights from the reports include reserve-only based mine lives of 8 years at Palmarejo, 13 years at Rochester, 3 years at Kensington and 8 years at Wharf
Selected Financial and Operating Results
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures.”
(2)Includes finance leases. Net of debt issuance costs and premium received.
(3)Due to the suspension of mining and processing activities these amounts are not meaningful.
(4) Additional details for Rochester can be found in the Technical Report Summary filed by the Company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 16, 2022 which is incorporated by reference into this Report.
Consolidated Financial Results
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
We sold 350,347 gold ounces and 10.1 million silver ounces, compared to 356,251 gold ounces, 9.6 million silver ounces, 3.2 million zinc pounds and 2.5 million lead pounds in the prior year. Revenue increased by $47.4 million, or 6%, as a result of a 1% and 21% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively, and higher silver ounces sold (5%), partially offset by lower gold ounces sold (2%). The increase in silver ounces sold was primarily due to higher mill throughput at Palmarejo. Gold and silver accounted for 70% and 30% of 2021 sales revenue, respectively. This compares to gold and silver accounting for 74% and 25% of 2020 sales revenue, respectively, with zinc and lead accounting for the remaining 2020 sales revenue.
The following table summarizes consolidated metal sales:
Costs Applicable to Sales
Costs applicable to sales increased $71.2 million, or 16%, primarily due to inflationary pressures related to employee-related, maintenance and consumable costs at all operating sites, higher silver ounces sold primarily at Palmarejo, the Rochester fourth quarter lower of cost or net realizable value (“LCM”) adjustment of $7.3 million, partially offset by the $13.8 million favorable impact from foreign currency hedges. For a complete discussion of costs applicable to sales, see Results of Operations below.
Amortization
Amortization decreased $3.1 million, or 2%, primarily due to longer assumed mine life based on year-end 2020 mineral reserve growth, partially offset by higher silver ounces sold.
Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $6.7 million, or 20%, primarily due to higher compensation, travel and outside service costs.
Exploration expense increased $8.5 million, or 20%, as the Company maintained its commitment to a higher-level of exploration investment following the completion of the largest and most successful drilling campaign in Coeur’s history during 2020. The Company completed 746,900 feet (227,650 meters) of expansion drilling and 417,200 feet (127,175 meters) of infill drilling in 2021 compared to 617,500 feet (188,225 meters) of expansion drilling and 165,700 feet (50,475 meters) of infill drilling in 2020.
Pre-development, reclamation, and other expenses decreased $7.0 million, or 13%, stemming from lower costs incurred in connection with the Company’s COVID-19 health and safety protocols, partially offset by full-year ongoing carrying costs and absence of one-time 2020 costs associated with the suspension of mining and processing activities at Silvertip.
The following table summarizes pre-development, reclamation, and other expenses:
Other Income and Expenses
During the first quarter of 2021, the Company incurred a $9.2 million loss in connection with the tender and redemption of the 2024 Senior Notes concurrent with the completed offering of the 2029 Senior Notes.
Fair value adjustments, net, decreased to a loss of $0.5 million compared to a gain of $7.6 million as a result of a reduction in value of the Company’s equity investments. The estimated fair values of the Company’s equity investments in Victoria Gold Corp. and Integra Resources Corp. (“Integra Resources”) were $124.2 million and $8.0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2021.
Interest expense (net of capitalized interest of $11.1 million) decreased to $16.5 million from $20.7 million due to higher capitalized interest associated with the POA 11 project at Rochester, and lower interest paid under the RCF, partially offset by higher interest paid under the 2029 Senior Notes compared to the 2024 Senior Notes and higher interest paid under finance lease obligations.
Other, net increased to a loss of $22.9 million compared to $5.9 million due to a write-down of a VAT receivable of $26.0 million due to uncertain collectability, partially offset by an increase in gains on the sale of assets in 2021 and a one-time fee of $3.8 million related to the novation of certain of the Company’s gold zero cost collars incurred in 2020. For additional details on the VAT receivable write-down see Note 20 -- Commitments and Contingencies.
Income and Mining Taxes
The Company’s Income and mining tax (expense) benefit consisted of:
Income and mining tax expense of approximately $35.0 million resulted in an effective tax rate of 961.4% for 2021. This compares to income tax expense of $37.0 million or effective tax rate of 59.1% for 2020. The comparability of the Company’s income and mining tax (expense) benefit and effective tax rate for the reported periods was impacted by multiple factors, primarily: (i) variations in our income before income taxes; (ii) geographic distribution of that income; (iii) mining taxes; (iv) foreign exchange rates; (v) percentage depletion (vi) the impact of uncertain tax positions; and (vii) the non-recognition of tax assets. Therefore, the effective tax rate will fluctuate, sometimes significantly, period to period.
The following table summarizes the components of the Company’s income (loss) before tax and income and mining tax (expense) benefit:
A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that the related tax benefits will not be realized. The Company analyzes its deferred tax assets and, if it is determined that the Company will not realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets, it will record or increase a valuation allowance. Conversely, if it is determined that the Company will ultimately be more likely than not able to realize all or a portion of the related benefits for which a valuation allowance has been provided, all or a portion of the related valuation allowance will be reduced. There are a number of factors that impact the Company’s ability to realize its deferred tax assets. For additional information, please see “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in the 2021 10-K.
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss was $31.3 million, or $0.13 per diluted share, compared to net income of $25.6 million, or $0.11 per share. The decrease in net income was driven by higher operating costs, a VAT write-down of $26.0 million, higher exploration expense, a $9.2 million loss on debt extinguishment and higher income and mining taxes. This was partially offset by a 1% and 21% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively and higher silver ounces sold (5%). Adjusted net loss was $1.4 million, or $0.01 per diluted share, compared to an adjusted net income of $59.0 million, or $0.24 per share (see “Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures”).
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased by $74.0 million or 10%, as a result of a 22% and 29% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively, partially offset by lower gold and silver ounces sold (3% and 19%, respectively), recovery delays at Rochester and the suspension of mining and processing activities at Silvertip in February. We sold 356,251 gold ounces, 9.6 million silver ounces, 3.2 million zinc pounds and 2.5 million lead pounds compared to 367,650 gold ounces, 11.9 million silver ounces, 18.2 million zinc pounds and 16.5 million lead pounds in the prior year. Gold and silver accounted for 74% and 25% of 2020 sales revenue, respectively, with zinc and lead accounting for the remaining sales revenue. This compares to gold and silver accounting for 69% and 27% of 2019 sales revenue.
The following table summarizes consolidated metal sales: Costs Applicable to Sales
Costs applicable to sales decreased primarily due to the suspension at Silvertip and lower ounces sold at Palmarejo and Rochester. For a complete discussion of costs applicable to sales, see Results of Operations below.
Amortization
Amortization decreased $47.5 million, or 27%, primarily due to the suspension at Silvertip, and longer assumed mine life based on year-end 2019 reserve growth at Palmarejo and lower ounces sold at Palmarejo and Rochester.
Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $0.8 million, or 2%, primarily due to lower travel costs.
Exploration expense increased $20.1 million, or 89%, due to the Company’s multi-year exploration program. The Company completed 617,500 feet (188,225 meters) of expansion drilling and 165,700 feet (50,475 meters) of infill drilling in 2020 compared to 342,500 (104,425 meters) of expansion drilling and 181,600 feet (55,350 meters) of infill drilling in 2019.
Pre-development, reclamation, and other expenses increased $37.2 million, or 202%, stemming from ongoing carrying and suspension costs at Silvertip and incremental costs incurred to comply with the Company’s COVID-19 health and safety protocols, partially offset by a gain resulting from the modification of a right of use lease at Silvertip.
The following table summarizes pre-development, reclamation, and other expenses:
Other Income and Expenses
Fair value adjustments, net, decreased to a gain of $7.6 million compared to $16.0 million as a result of changes in value related to the Company’s equity investments, primarily Integra Resources and Metalla Royalty & Streaming Ltd. ("Metalla"), which had estimated fair values of $11.9 million and $1.0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
Interest expense (net of capitalized interest of $1.5 million) decreased to $20.7 million from $24.8 million due to a lower interest rate paid under the RCF and lower average balances of both the RCF and 2024 Senior Notes.
Other, net increased to a loss of $5.9 million compared to a loss of $3.2 million due to an increase in losses on the sale of assets and a one-time fee of $3.8 million related to the novation of certain of the Company’s gold zero cost collars, partially offset by a reduction in foreign exchange losses.
Income and Mining Taxes
The Company’s Income and mining tax (expense) benefit consisted of:
Income and mining tax expense of approximately $37.0 million resulted in an effective tax rate of 59.1% for 2020. This compares to income tax benefit of $11.1 million or effective tax rate of 3.1% for 2019. The comparability of the Company’s income and mining tax (expense) benefit and effective tax rate for the reported periods was impacted by multiple factors, primarily: (i) mining taxes; (ii) variations in our income before income taxes; (iii) geographic distribution of that income; (iv) foreign exchange rates; (v) percentage depletion; (vi) the non-recognition of tax assets; and (vii) the impact of uncertain tax positions. Therefore, the effective tax rate will fluctuate, sometimes significantly, period to period.
The following table summarizes the components of the Company’s income (loss) before tax and income and mining tax (expense) benefit:
A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that the related tax benefits will not be realized. The Company analyzes its deferred tax assets and, if it is determined that the Company will not realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets, it will record or increase a valuation allowance. Conversely, if it is determined that the Company will ultimately be more likely than not able to realize all or a portion of the related benefits for which a valuation allowance has been provided, all or a portion of the related valuation allowance will be reduced. There are a number of factors that impact the Company’s ability to realize its deferred tax assets. For additional information, please see the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A.
Net Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations
Net income from continuing operations was $25.6 million, or $0.11 per diluted share, compared to net loss of $346.9 million, or $1.59 per share. The increase in net income from continuing operations was driven by strong operating results at Wharf and Palmarejo, a 22% and 29% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively, lower operating costs at Rochester and Silvertip, and an impairment of long-lived assets at Silvertip of $250.8 million in 2019. This was partially offset by lower sales of gold and silver (3% and 19%, respectively), higher exploration expense, ongoing carrying and severance costs at Silvertip and incremental costs associated with the Company’s COVID-19 health and safety protocols. Adjusted net income was $59.0 million, or $0.24 per diluted share, compared to adjusted net loss of $54.6 million, or $0.25 per share (see “Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures”).
2022 Guidance Framework
2022 Production Guidance
2022 Costs Applicable to Sales Guidance
2022 Capital, Exploration and G&A Guidance
Note: The Company’s guidance figures assume estimated prices of $1,800/oz gold and $24.00/oz silver as well as CAD of 1.25 and MXN of 20.00. Guidance figures exclude the impact of any metal sales or foreign exchange hedges.
Results of Operations
Palmarejo
(1)See Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gold production decreased 1% as a result of lower gold grade, partially offset by higher mill throughput and recoveries. Silver production increased 9% as a result of higher mill throughput and recoveries, partially offset by lower silver grade. Metal sales were $320.3 million, or 38% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared with $286.6 million, or 36% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $33.7 million or 12%, of which $23.9 million was due to higher average realized silver prices and $9.8 million was the result of a higher volume of silver sales. Costs applicable to sales per gold and silver ounce increased 9% and 31%, respectively, due to the mix of gold and silver sales, and higher employee-related, maintenance and consumable costs largely due to inflationary pressures, partially offset by the favorable impact of foreign currency hedges ($13.8 million). Amortization decreased to $36.1 million due to longer assumed mine life based on year-end 2020 mineral reserve growth. Capital expenditures increased to $36.5 million from $25.0 million due to higher underground development and infill drilling activities.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gold and silver production decreased 1% and 7%, respectively, as a result of lower gold and silver grades, partially offset by higher gold and silver recovery. In the second quarter, Palmarejo temporarily suspended active mining and processing activities in accordance with a COVID-related government decree. After receiving guidance from the Mexican government in May that the suspension decree did not apply to precious metals mining, production began ramping back up in June, increasing steadily during the month as staffing levels returned to a pre-shutdown level. Despite the temporary suspension, Palmarejo’s milled tons were in-line with the prior year. Metal sales were $286.6 million, or 36% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared with $252.7 million, or 36% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $33.9 million or 13%, of which $52.6 million was due to higher average realized gold and silver prices, partially offset by a decrease of $18.7 million due to a lower volume of gold and silver sales. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce decreased 11% while costs applicable to sales per silver ounce remained comparable due to higher revenue contribution from silver sales compared to gold. Additionally, favorable foreign exchange rates and lower compensation and consumable costs contributed to an overall favorable movement in costs applicable to sales. Amortization decreased to $44.9 million due to longer assumed mine life based on year-end 2019 reserve growth and lower gold and silver ounces sold. Capital expenditures decreased to $25.5 million from $32.7 million due to lower underground development and lower mining equipment expenditures.
Rochester
(1)See Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gold and silver production remained comparable year over year. Metal sales were $130.8 million, or 16% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared with $110.3 million, or 14% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $20.6 million or 19%, of which $13.3 million was the result of higher average realized gold and silver prices and $7.3 million was the result of a higher volume of gold and silver sales. Costs applicable to sales per gold and silver ounce increased 31% and 54%, respectively, due to the mix of gold and silver sales, higher employee-related, maintenance and consumable costs partially due to inflationary pressures, and a LCM adjustment of $7.3 million. Amortization increased to $20.2 million due to higher equipment depreciation from recently placed-in service assets and an LCM adjustment of $1.1 million in the fourth quarter. Capital expenditures increased to $166.5 million from $37.5 million due to the commencement of construction activities related to POA 11 in August 2020.
In the second half of 2021 the Company began seeing inflationary pressures on bids for remaining unawarded contracts on the POA 11 expansion project at Rochester during the second half of 2021, most notably on two structural, mechanical, piping, electrical and instrumentation (“SMPEI”) construction contracts for the Merrill-Crowe process plant and crushing circuit, respectively. Coeur recently selected the general SMPEI contractor for construction of the Merrill-Crowe process plant and crusher corridor based on a revised commercial approach from the previous lump-sum commercial model to a single contract. SMPEI work under the initial contract is beginning to advance.
Coeur has also advanced work related to implementation of pre-screens as part of the POA 11 expansion project and has elected to proceed with this scope change enhancement. As previously disclosed, the Company plans to integrate pre-screens into the current crushing system at Rochester, which is expected to drive improved performance while providing valuable operating experience and knowledge that can be applied to the new crushing circuit as part of the POA 11 expansion. Coeur has commenced detailed engineering for pre-screens and intends to align construction of the pre-screens with the completion of the crusher corridor. Installation of pre-screens on the existing crusher system is scheduled for the first half of 2022 with commissioning expected to begin around mid-year.
In connection with the items discussed above, the Company has conducted a comprehensive re-baselining of the overall schedule and costs associated with the original scope of POA 11.
Coeur now estimates the total construction capital for POA 11 to be approximately $597 million, which includes the 10-15% previously announced potential cost escalation as well as $70 - $80 million related to pre-screen implementation and additional project contingency to reflect ongoing COVID and schedule risk. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has incurred approximately $236 million in the expansion and 61% of the capital is now committed (excluding the recently-awarded SMPEI contract, which is expected to be formalized in the first quarter).
Excluding capital leases, Coeur forecasts capital expenditures related to POA 11 to be approximately $217 - $257 million and $131 - $171 million in 2022 and 2023, respectively. Additional details on expected production and capital expenditures for Rochester can be found in the Technical Report Summary filed by the Company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 16, 2022 which is incorporated by reference into this Report.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gold and silver production decreased 23% and 16%, respectively, due to the impact of dilution from stacking high-pressure grinding roll (“HPGR”) crushed material on top of historic ore on the Stage IV leach pad and upset conditions in the Merrill-Crowe process plant due to higher-than-expected fine particulates in pregnant solution from ore placed on newly constructed inter-lift liners in the first nine months of 2020. Metal sales were $110.3 million, or 14% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared with $112.0 million, or 16% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $1.7 million or 2%, of which $33.8 million was the result of a lower volume of gold and silver sales, partially offset by an increase of $32.1 million due to higher average realized gold and silver prices. Costs applicable to sales per gold and silver ounce increased 10% and 14%, respectively, driven by higher cyanide and outside service costs and a change in the Company’s recovery rate assumptions. Amortization decreased to $14.3 million due to lower ounces sold. Capital expenditures increased to $37.5 million from $22.6 million due to the commencement of construction activities related to POA 11.
Kensington
(1)See Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gold production decreased 3% as a result of lower grade and lower mill throughput. Metal sales were $215.0 million, or 26% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared to $216.5 million, or 28% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $1.5 million or 1%, of which $4.6 million resulted from lower volume of gold sales, partially offset by an increase of $3.1 million due to higher average realized gold prices. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 11% due to lower production and higher employee-related, maintenance and consumable costs, partially due to inflationary pressures. Amortization increased to $54.9 million primarily due to higher Jualin production, partially offset by lower ounces sold. Capital expenditures increased to $27.5 million from $19.8 million due to higher infill drilling and underground development.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gold production decreased 2% as a result of processing lower grade ore and COVID-19 response efforts that temporarily impacted mine production in the first nine months of 2020. Metal sales were $216.5 million, or 28% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared to $181.1 million, or 25% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $35.4 million or 20%, of which $45.3 million was due to higher average realized gold prices, partially offset by a decrease of $9.9 million due to a lower volume of gold sales. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 6% due to lower production and higher compensation, outside service and maintenance costs, partially offset by lower diesel costs. Amortization decreased to $49.5 million due to lower ounces sold. Capital expenditures decreased to $19.8 million from $23.5 million due to lower underground development.
Wharf
(1)See Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Gold production decreased 2% driven by the timing of recoveries. Metal sales were $166.7 million, or 20% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared to $170.2 million, or 22% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $3.5 million or 2%, of which $5.6 million resulted from a lower volume of gold sales, partially offset by an increase of $2.1 million due to higher average realized gold and silver prices. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 8% due to higher equipment rental, diesel and employee-related costs partially due to inflationary pressures. Amortization decreased to $11.0 million due to lower ounces sold. Capital expenditures were $8.1 million reflecting $4.0 million of infill drilling.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Gold production increased 11% driven by higher grade. Metal sales were $170.2 million, or 22% of Coeur’s metal sales, compared to $121.4 million, or 17% of Coeur’s metal sales. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $48.8 million or 40%, of which $31.1 million was due to higher average realized gold and silver prices and $17.7 million was the result of a higher volume of gold and silver sales. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce decreased 2% due to higher production and lower diesel costs. Amortization increased to $12.5 million due to higher ounces sold. Capital expenditures were $2.4 million.
Silvertip(1) Due to the suspension of mining and processing activities these amounts are not meaningful.
(2) See Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Silvertip suspended mining and processing activities, unrelated to COVID-19, in February 2020. Operational results in the table above reflected performance prior to the suspension. Ongoing carrying and suspension costs are included in Pre-development, reclamation, and other.
Coeur continues to generate positive results from ongoing exploration as the Company evaluates various opportunities to enhance the economics of a potential expansion and restart of Silvertip.
The Company received preliminary capital estimates for an accelerated expansion and restart in late 2021, which were higher than originally anticipated and reflect overall inflationary pressures as well as supply disruptions and labor market tightness consistent with broader macroeconomic themes.
Capital expenditures increased to $70.1 million from $13.1 million due to planned early civil works construction, higher infill drilling and underground development. For 2022, capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $15 - 25 million, primarily focusing on the economics of a potential expansion, including study work to evaluate additional opportunities to enhance and restart and as well as continued underground development and infill drilling at the mine.
In June 2021, Silvertip repurchased from Silvertip Resources Investment Cayman Ltd. a net smelter returns royalty of 1.429% on the first 1,434,000 metric tonnes of mineral resources mined, and 1.00% thereafter for $7.0 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, the Company had $58.3 million of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash and $200.0 million available under the RCF. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $36.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, due to higher capital expenditures related to POA 11 at Rochester and the potential expansion project at Silvertip coupled with higher operating costs, lower gold ounces sold (2%), higher general and administrative and exploration costs, and the tender and redemption of the 2024 Senior Notes for $238.3 million, including premiums. This was partially offset by a 1% and 21% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively, higher silver ounces sold (5%), $65.0 million drawn from the RCF, and the net proceeds of $367.5 million from the issuance of the 2029 Senior Notes.
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has completed various scenario planning analyses to consider potential impacts of COVID-19 on its business, including volatility in commodity prices, temporary disruptions and/or curtailments of operating activities (voluntary or involuntary). To provide additional flexibility to respond to potential downside scenarios, the Company has been able to periodically draw and make repayments under its RCF subsequent to the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. The RCF was amended in March 2021 to extend the maturity to March 2025 and to potentially allow the Company to obtain one or more increases of the RCF in an aggregate amount of up to $100.0 million. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $65.0 million drawn and $35.0 million in outstanding letters of credit under the RCF. The Company also holds $132.0 million of equity securities including a 17.8% interest in Victoria Gold. Additionally, Coeur established a $100.0 million ATM Program in April 2020 as a means to proactively increase its financial flexibility in response to increased volatility and uncertainty associated with COVID-19. At the date of this filing, the Company has yet to issue any shares of its common stock under the ATM Program.
We currently believe we have sufficient sources of funding to meet our business requirements for the next twelve months and long-term. We expect to use a combination of cash provided by operating activities, borrowings under our RCF and additional capital leases to fund near term capital requirements, including those described in this Report for POA 11 and in our 2022 capital expenditure guidance. We also have additional potential sources of funding including proceeds from sales under the ATM program, potential asset sales, and the monetization of our equity investments, including our investment in Victoria Gold. Our longer-term plans contemplate the expansion and restart of Silvertip, as well as the continued exploration and potential development of our other projects, such as Crown/Sterling and the Lincoln Hill area adjacent to Rochester.
Coeur now estimates the total construction capital for POA 11 to be approximately $597 million, which includes the 10-15% previously announced potential cost escalation as well as $70 - $80 million related to pre-screen implementation and additional project contingency to reflect ongoing COVID and schedule risk. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has incurred approximately $236 million in the expansion and 61% of the capital is now committed (excluding the recently-awarded SMPEI contract, which is expected to be formalized in the first quarter).
Excluding capital leases, Coeur forecasts capital expenditures related to POA 11 to be approximately $217 - $257 million and $131 - $171 million in 2022 and 2023, respectively. Additional details on expected production and capital expenditures for Rochester can be found in the Technical Report Summary filed by the Company with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 16, 2022 which is incorporated by reference into this Report.
We also have additional obligations as part of our ordinary course of business, beyond those committed for capital expenditures and other purchase obligations and commitments for purchases of goods and services.
If and to the extent liquidity resources are insufficient to support short- and long-term expenditures, we may need to incur additional indebtedness or issue additional equity securities, among other financing options, which may not be available on acceptable terms or at all. This could have a material adverse impact on the Company, as discussed in more detail under Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $110.5 million, compared to $148.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $210.8 million, compared to $263.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (see “Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures”). Net cash provided by operating activities was impacted by the following key factors for the applicable periods:
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $38.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to lower gold ounces sold (2%), higher operating costs, exploration costs, and mining and income taxes at Palmarejo, partially offset by a 1% and 21% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively, and higher silver ounces sold (5%). Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $47.4 million, of which $44.5 million was the result of higher average realized gold and silver prices and $2.9 million was due to the higher volume of silver sales.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $56.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a 22% and 29% increase in average realized gold and silver prices, respectively, and lower metal inventory write-downs at Silvertip, partially offset by lower ounces sold of gold and silver (3% and 19%, respectively). Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $74.0 million, of which $151.9 million was the result of higher average realized gold and silver prices, partially offset by a decrease of $77.9 million due to lower volume of gold and silver sales.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $304.1 million compared to $65.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities increased primarily due to construction activities related to POA 11 at Rochester and the potential expansion at Silvertip in the current period and the impact of the net proceeds of $19.4 million from the sale of Metalla Common Shares in the comparable period of 2020. The Company incurred capital expenditures of $309.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $99.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Capital expenditures in the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily related to POA 11 construction activities at Rochester, potential expansion expenditures at Silvertip and underground development at Palmarejo and Kensington. Capital expenditures in the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily related to POA 11 at Rochester, which commenced construction activities during the third quarter, and underground development at Palmarejo and Kensington.
The Company is experiencing inflationary pressures, specifically with respect to building materials and fuel as well as overall tightness in the construction market related to capital projects, most notably the POA 11 project at Rochester, and to operating costs company-wide.
Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $65.7 million compared to $92.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used in investing activities decreased primarily due to the net proceeds of $30.1 million from the sale of the Company’s equity investments. The Company had capital expenditures of $99.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $99.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. Capital expenditures in the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily related to POA 11 at Rochester, which commenced construction activities during the third quarter, and underground development at Palmarejo and Kensington. Capital expenditures in the year ended December 31, 2019 were primarily related to underground development at Silvertip, Palmarejo, and Kensington, a new thickener at Palmarejo, POA 11 and the new crushing circuit, including the HPGR unit at Rochester.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $158.1 million compared to net cash used in financing activities of $46.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received net proceeds of $367.5 million from the issuance of the 2029 Senior Notes, and drew $65.0 million, net, from the RCF, partially offset by the tender and redemption of the 2024 Senior Notes for $238.3 million, including premiums. As of December 31, 2021, there was $65.0 million drawn under the RCF. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company fully repaid the $150.0 million drawn from the RCF during 2020, and paid contingent cash consideration of $18.8 million associated with the Silvertip acquisition.
The Company secured a finance lease package for nearly $60 million during the year, a portion of which has been funded as of December 31, 2021. The package is earmarked for planned equipment purchases for the POA 11 project in 2021 and 2022, and has an interest rate of 5.22%.
Net cash used in financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $46.5 million compared to $60.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company fully repaid the $150.0 million drawn from the RCF during 2020, and paid contingent cash consideration of $18.8 million associated with the Silvertip acquisition. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company repaid $135.0 million, net, of outstanding amounts under the RCF and paid contingent cash consideration of $18.7 million associated with the Silvertip acquisition, partially offset by net proceeds of approximately $123.1 million from the sale of 30.9 million shares of its common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Accounting Developments
Listed below are the accounting policies that we believe are critical to our financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the estimates and assumptions involved and the magnitude of the asset, liability, revenue, and expense being reported. For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 -- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company produces doré and concentrate that is shipped to third-party refiners and smelters, respectively, for processing. The Company enters into contracts to sell its metal to various third-party customers which may include the refiners and smelters that process the doré and concentrate. The Company’s performance obligation in these transactions is generally the transfer of metal to the customer.
In the case of doré shipments, the Company generally sells refined metal at market prices agreed upon by both parties. The Company also has the right, but not the obligation, to sell a portion of the anticipated refined metal in advance of being fully refined. When the Company sells refined metal or advanced metal, the performance obligation is satisfied when the metal is delivered to the customer. Revenue and Costs Applicable to Sales are recorded on a gross basis under these contracts at the time the performance obligation is satisfied.
Under the Company’s concentrate sales contracts with third-party smelters, metal prices are set on a specified future quotational period, typically one to three months, after the shipment date based on market prices. When the Company sells gold concentrate to the third-party smelters, the performance obligation is satisfied when risk of loss is transferred to the customer. The contracts, in general, provide for provisional payment based upon provisional assays and historical metal prices. Final settlement is based on the applicable price for the specified future quotational period and generally occurs three to six months after shipment. The Company’s provisionally priced sales contain an embedded derivative that is required to be separated from the host contract for accounting purposes. The host contract is the receivable from the sale of concentrates measured at the forward price at the time of sale. The embedded derivative does not qualify for hedge accounting and is adjusted to fair value through revenue each period until the date of final metal settlement.
The Company also sells concentrate under off-take agreements to third-party customers that are responsible for arranging the smelting of the concentrate. Prices can either be fixed or based on a quotational period. The quotational period
varies by contract, but is generally a one-month period following the shipment of the concentrate. The performance obligation is satisfied when risk of loss is transferred to the customer.
The Company recognizes revenue from concentrate sales, net of treatment and refining charges, when it satisfies the performance obligation of transferring control of the concentrate to the customer.
For doré and off-take sales, the Company may incur a finance charge related to advance sales that is not considered significant and, as such, is not considered a separate performance obligation. In addition, the Company has elected to treat freight costs as a fulfillment cost under ASC 606 and not as a separate performance obligation.
The Company’s gold stream agreement with Franco-Nevada provided for a $20.0 million deposit paid by Franco-Nevada in exchange for the right and obligation, commencing in 2016, to purchase 50% of a portion of Palmarejo gold production at the lesser of $800 or market price per ounce. Because there is no minimum obligation associated with the deposit, it is not considered financing, and each shipment is considered to be a separate performance obligation. The stream agreement represents a contract liability under ASC 606, which requires the Company to ratably recognize a portion of the deposit as revenue for each gold ounce delivered to Franco-Nevada.
Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of its financial statements, the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period, and mined reserves. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates. There are a number of uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of reserves, including many factors beyond the Company’s control. Mineral reserve estimates are based upon engineering evaluations of samplings of drill holes and other openings. These estimates involve assumptions regarding future silver and gold prices, mine geology, mining methods and the related costs to develop and mine the reserves. Changes in these assumptions could result in material adjustments to the Company’s reserve estimates. The Company uses reserve estimates in determining the units-of-production amortization and evaluating mine assets for potential impairment. For a discussion of estimates and assumptions used by management that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of its financial statements, the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period, and mined reserves, see Note 2 -- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Amortization
The Company amortizes its property, plant, and equipment, mining properties, and mine development using the units-of-production method over the estimated life of the ore body generally based on its proven and probable reserves or the straight-line method over the useful life, whichever is shorter. The accounting estimates related to amortization are critical accounting estimates because (1) the determination of reserves involves uncertainties with respect to the ultimate geology of its reserves and the assumptions used in determining the economic feasibility of mining those reserves and (2) changes in estimated proven and probable reserves and asset useful lives can have a material impact on net income.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We review and evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Asset impairment is considered to exist if the total estimated undiscounted pretax future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there is identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of future cash flows from other asset groups. An impairment loss is measured by discounted estimated future cash flows, and recorded by reducing the asset's carrying amount to fair value. Future cash flows are estimated based on estimated quantities of recoverable minerals, expected gold, silver, lead and zinc prices (considering current and historical prices, trends and related factors), production levels, operating costs, capital requirements and reclamation costs, all based on life-of-mine plans.
During 2019, the Company recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $250.8 million. The write-down was allocated between Property, plant and equipment, net, Mining properties, net and Other non-current assets, in the amounts of $43.6 million, $201.5 million and $5.7 million, respectively.
Existing proven and probable reserves and value beyond proven and probable reserves, including mineralization other than proven and probable reserves are included when determining the fair value of mine site asset groups at acquisition and, subsequently, in determining whether the assets are impaired. The term “recoverable minerals” refers to the estimated amount of gold, silver, lead and zinc that will be obtained after taking into account losses during ore processing and treatment. Estimates of recoverable minerals from exploration stage mineral interests are risk adjusted based on management’s relative confidence in such materials. The ability to achieve the estimated quantities of recoverable minerals from exploration stage
mineral interests involves further risks in addition to those risk factors applicable to mineral interests where proven and probable reserves have been identified, due to the lower level of confidence that the identified mineral reserves and resources could ultimately be mined economically. Assets classified as exploration potential have the highest level of risk that the carrying value of the asset can be ultimately realized, due to the still lower level of geological confidence and economic modeling.
Gold, silver, zinc and lead prices are volatile and affected by many factors beyond the Company’s control, including prevailing interest rates and returns on other asset classes, expectations regarding inflation, speculation, currency values, governmental decisions regarding precious metals stockpiles, global and regional demand and production, political and economic conditions and other factors may affect the key assumptions used in the Company’s impairment testing. Various factors could impact our ability to achieve forecasted production levels from proven and probable reserves. Additionally, production, capital and reclamation costs could differ from the assumptions used in the cash flow models used to assess impairment. Actual results may vary from the Company’s estimates and result in additional Impairment of Long-lived Assets.
Ore on Leach Pads
The heap leach process is a process of extracting silver and gold by placing ore on an impermeable pad and applying a diluted cyanide solution that dissolves a portion of the contained silver and gold, which are then recovered in metallurgical processes. The Company uses several integrated steps to scientifically measure the metal content of ore placed on the leach pads. As the ore body is drilled in preparation for the blasting process, samples are taken of the drill residue which are assayed to determine estimated quantities of contained metal. The Company then processes the ore through crushing facilities where the output is again weighed and sampled for assaying. A metallurgical reconciliation with the data collected from the mining operation is completed with appropriate adjustments made to previous estimates. The crushed ore is then transported to the leach pad for application of the leaching solution. As the leach solution is collected from the leach pads, it is continuously sampled for assaying. The quantity of leach solution is measured by flow meters throughout the leaching and precipitation process. After precipitation, the product is converted to doré, which is the final product produced by the mine. The inventory is stated at lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost being determined using a weighted average cost method.
The historical cost of the metal that is expected to be extracted within 12 months is classified as current. Ore on leach pad is valued based on actual production costs incurred to produce and place ore on the leach pads, less costs allocated to minerals recovered through the leach process.
The estimate of both the ultimate recovery expected over time and the quantity of metal that may be extracted relative to the time the leach process occurs requires the use of estimates and relies upon laboratory testwork. Testwork consists of 60-day leach columns from which the Company projects metal recoveries up to five years in the future. The quantities of metal contained in the ore are estimated based upon actual weights and assay analysis. The rate at which the leach process extracts gold and silver from the crushed ore is based upon laboratory column tests and actual experience occurring over more than 20 years of leach pad operations at the Rochester mine. The assumptions used by the Company to measure metal content during each stage of the inventory conversion process includes estimated recovery rates based on laboratory testing and assaying. The Company periodically reviews its estimates compared to actual experience and revises its estimates when appropriate. The ultimate recovery will not be known until leaching operations cease. Variations between actual and estimated quantities resulting from changes in assumptions and estimates that do not result in write-downs to net realizable value are accounted for on a prospective basis. In 2020, the Company revised its recovery rate assumptions in line with the updated technical report for Rochester filed in December 2020. This change resulted in an adjustment to the ending Ore on leach pads balance with the resulting charges allocated between Costs Applicable to Sales and Amortization in the amounts of $7.2 million and $1.2 million, respectively. In June 2021, the Company updated the recovery rate assumption on the Stage IV leach pad at Rochester, based on the historical performance of the leach pad since the third quarter of 2019. This change resulted in an adjustment to the ending ore on leach pads balance with the resulting non-cash charges allocated between Costs Applicable to Sales and Amortization in the amounts of $8.6 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
Reclamation
The Company recognizes obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets and the associated asset retirement costs. The fair value of a liability for an asset retirement obligation will be recognized in the period in which it is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. The fair value of the liability is added to the carrying amount of the associated asset and this additional carrying amount is depreciated over the life of the asset. An accretion cost, representing the increase over time in the present value of the liability, is recorded each period in Pre-development, Reclamation, and Other. As reclamation work is performed or liabilities are otherwise settled, the recorded amount of the liability is reduced. Future remediation costs for inactive mines are accrued based on management’s best estimate at the end of each period of the discounted costs expected to be incurred at the site. Such cost estimates include, where applicable, ongoing care and maintenance and monitoring costs. Changes in estimates are reflected in earnings in the period an estimate is revised. See Note 12 -- Reclamation in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Derivatives
The Company is exposed to various market risks, including the effect of changes in metal prices and interest rates, and uses derivatives to manage financial exposures that occur in the normal course of business. The Company may elect to designate certain derivatives as hedging instruments under U.S. GAAP.
The Company, from time to time, uses derivative contracts to protect the Company’s exposure to fluctuations in metal prices. The Company has elected to designate these instruments as cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions at their inception. Assuming normal market conditions, the change in the market value of such derivative contracts has historically been, and is expected to continue to be, highly effective at offsetting changes in price movements of the hedged item. For derivatives not designated as hedging instruments, the Company recognizes derivatives as either assets or liabilities on the balance sheet and measures those instruments at fair value. Changes in the value of derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments are recorded each period in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (Loss) in Fair value adjustments, net or Revenue. Management applies judgment in estimating the fair value of instruments that are highly sensitive to assumptions regarding commodity prices, market volatilities, and foreign currency exchange rates.
Income and Mining Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with the guidance of ASC 740. The Company’s annual tax rate
is based on income, statutory tax rates in effect and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which the Company operates. Significant judgment is required in determining the annual tax expense, current tax assets and liabilities, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and our future taxable income, both as a whole and in various tax jurisdictions, for purposes of assessing our ability to realize future benefit from our deferred tax assets. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates due to future changes in income tax law, significant changes in the jurisdictions in which we operate or unpredicted results from the final determination of each year’s liability by taxing authorities.
The Company’s deferred income taxes reflect the impact of temporary differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and such amounts measured by tax laws and regulations. In evaluating the realizability of the deferred tax assets, management considers both positive and negative evidence that may exist, such as earnings history, reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies in each tax jurisdiction. A valuation allowance may be established to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is considered more likely than not to be realized through the generation of future taxable income and other tax planning strategies.
The Company has asserted indefinite reinvestment of earnings from its Mexican operations as determined by management’s judgment about and intentions concerning the future operations of the Company. The Company does not record a U.S. deferred tax liability for foreign earnings that meet the indefinite reversal criteria. Refer to Note 13 -- Income and Mining Taxes for further discussion on our assertion.
The Company’s operations may involve dealing with uncertainties and judgments in the application of complex tax regulations in multiple jurisdictions. The final taxes paid are dependent upon many factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in various jurisdictions and resolution of disputes arising from federal, state, and international tax audits. The Company recognizes potential liabilities and records tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in the United States and other tax jurisdictions based on its estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. The Company adjusts these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution could result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period which they are determined. The Company recognizes interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Other Liquidity Matters
We believe that our liquidity and capital resources in the U.S. are adequate to fund our U.S. operations and corporate activities. The Company has asserted indefinite reinvestment of earnings from its Mexican operations as determined by management’s judgment about and intentions concerning the future operations of the Company. The Company does not believe that the amounts reinvested will have a material impact on liquidity.
In order to reduce indebtedness, fund future cash interest payments and/or amounts due at maturity or upon redemption and for general working capital purposes, from time-to-time we may (1) issue equity securities for cash in public or private offerings or (2) repurchase certain of our debt securities for cash or in exchange for other securities, which may include secured or unsecured notes or equity, in each case in open market or privately negotiated transactions. We evaluate any such transactions in light of prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, and other factors. The
amounts involved may be significant and any debt repurchase transactions may occur at a substantial discount to the debt securities’ face amount.
Non-GAAP Financial Performance Measures
Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide additional information only and do not have any standard meaning prescribed by generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Unless otherwise noted, we present the Non-GAAP financial measures in the tables below. These measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
Management uses Adjusted net income (loss) to evaluate the Company’s operating performance, and to plan and forecast its operations. The Company believes the use of Adjusted net income (loss) reflects the underlying operating performance of our core mining business and allows investors and analysts to compare results of the Company to similar results of other mining companies. Management’s determination of the components of Adjusted net income (loss) are evaluated periodically and is based, in part, on a review of non-GAAP financial measures used by mining industry analysts. The tax effect of adjustments are based on statutory tax rates and the Company’s tax attributes, including the impact through the Company’s valuation allowance. The combined effective rate of tax adjustments may not be consistent with the statutory tax rates or the Company’s effective tax rate due to jurisdictional tax attributes and related valuation allowance impacts which may minimize the tax effect of certain adjustments and may not apply to gains and losses equally. Adjusted net income (loss) is reconciled to Net income (loss) in the following table:
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2021, tax effect of adjustments of $10.3 million (-27%) is primarily related to the VAT write-off. For the year ended December 31, 2019, tax effect of adjustments of $19.4 million (-6%) is primarily related to the write-down of Silvertip inventory.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
Management uses EBITDA to evaluate the Company’s operating performance, to plan and forecast its operations, and assess leverage levels and liquidity measures. The Company believes the use of EBITDA reflects the underlying operating performance of our core mining business and allows investors and analysts to compare results of the Company to similar results of other mining companies. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure used in indenture governing the 2029 Senior Notes and the RCF to determine our ability to make certain payments and incur additional indebtedness. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not represent, and should not be considered an alternative to, Net income (Loss) or Cash Flow from Operations as determined under GAAP. Other companies may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently and those calculations may not be comparable to our presentation. Adjusted EBITDA is reconciled to Net income (loss) in the following table:
Free Cash Flow
Management uses Free Cash Flow as a non-GAAP measure to analyze cash flows generated from operations. Free Cash Flow is Cash Provided By (used in) Operating Activities less Capital expenditures as presented on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The Company believes Free Cash Flow is also useful as one of the bases for comparing the Company’s performance with its competitors. Although Free Cash Flow and similar measures are frequently used as measures of cash flows generated from operations by other companies, the Company’s calculation of Free Cash Flow is not necessarily comparable to such other similarly titled captions of other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Free Cash Flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, to Cash Provided By (used in) Operating Activities, which the Company believes to be the GAAP financial measure most directly comparable to Free Cash Flow.
Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital
Management uses Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital as a non-GAAP measure to analyze cash flows generated from operations. Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital is Cash Provided By (used in) Operating Activities excluding the change in Receivables, Prepaid expenses and other, Inventories and Accounts payable and accrued liabilities as presented on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The Company believes Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital is also useful as one of the bases for comparing the Company’s performance with its competitors. Although Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital and similar measures are frequently used as measures of cash flows generated from operations by other companies, the Company’s calculation of Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital is not necessarily comparable to such other similarly titled captions of other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital, a non-GAAP financial measure, to Cash Provided By (used in) Operating Activities, which the Company believes to be the GAAP financial measure most directly comparable to Operating Cash Flow Before Changes in Working Capital.
Costs Applicable to Sales
Management uses CAS to evaluate the Company’s current operating performance and life of mine performance from discovery through reclamation. We believe these measures assist analysts, investors and other stakeholders in understanding the costs associated with producing gold, silver, zinc and lead, assessing our operating performance and ability to generate free cash flow from operations and sustaining production. These measures may not be indicative of operating profit or cash flow from operations as determined under GAAP. Management believes that allocating CAS to gold, silver, zinc and lead based on gold, silver, zinc and lead metal sales relative to total metal sales best allows management, analysts, investors and other stakeholders to evaluate the operating performance of the Company. Other companies may calculate CAS differently as a result of reflecting the benefit from selling non-silver metals as a by-product credit, converting to silver equivalent ounces, and differences in underlying accounting principles and accounting frameworks such as in International Financial Reporting Standards.
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Year Ended December 31, 2020(1) Due to the suspension of mining and processing activities these amounts are not meaningful.
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Reconciliation of Costs Applicable to Sales for 2022 Guidance