Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We were formed on May 19, 2021 for the purpose of engaging in a merger, stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination, which we refer to throughout this report as our initial business combination, with one or more businesses or entities with one or more target businesses. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to a particular industry or geographic region. We intend to utilize cash derived from the proceeds of our initial public offering and contemporaneous private placement and our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt, in effecting a business combination. The issuance of additional shares of common stock or preferred stock:
• may significantly reduce the equity interest of our stockholders;
• may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of common stock if we issue shares of preferred stock with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
• will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
• may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
• default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after a business combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations;
• acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
• our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
• our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding;
• our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
• using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
• limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
• increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
• limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
We are an emerging growth company as defined in the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and subsequently identifying a target business for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company after the initial public offering.
We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the period from May 19, 2021 (date of inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $144,837, which consisted of formation costs and operating expenses of $20,887 and a provision for income taxes of $124,434, which was partially offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $484.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 26, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 6,200,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $62,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 2,500,000 private warrants for a total purchase price of $2,500,000 in a private placement to our sponsor. On November 30, 2021, we sold an additional 300,000 units to the underwriter pursuant to the partial exercise of the over-allotment option at an offering price of $10.00 per unit, generating additional gross proceeds to the Company of $3,000,000, or $65,000,000 in total.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $65,000,000 was placed in the trust account located in the United States and we had $900,000 of cash held outside of the trust account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $1,697,431 in transaction costs, including $1,300,000 of underwriting fees and $397,431 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $300,944. Net loss of $144,837 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $484 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $300,944 of cash used in operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities of $65,000,484 held in the trust account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate prospective acquisition candidates, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, select the target business to acquire and structure, negotiate and consummate a Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our founders, officers and directors and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,400,000 of such loans may be convertible into working capital warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants issued to our initial stockholders. The terms of such loans by our founders, officers and directors and their affiliates if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our founders, officers and directors and their affiliates if any, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. If our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, or we earn less interest on the funds held in the trust account than anticipated, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. We do not have a maximum debt leverage ratio or a policy with respect to how much debt we may incur. The amount of debt we will be willing to incur will depend on the facts and circumstances of the proposed business combination and market conditions at the time of the potential business combination. At this time, we are not party to any arrangement or understanding with any third party with respect to raising additional funds through the sale of our securities or the incurrence of debt. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only consummate such financing simultaneously with the consummation of our initial business combination. In the current economic environment, it has become especially difficult to obtain acquisition financing. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Pursuant to a Business Combination Marketing Agreement, we have engaged Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. and I-Bankers Securities, Inc. as advisors in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential business combination, provide financial advisory services to assist us in our efforts to obtain any stockholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. This agreement will provide that we will pay Ladenburg Thalmann and I-Bankers Securities, Inc. the marketing fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 2.5% of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering. As a result, Ladenburg Thalmann and I-Bankers Securities, Inc. will not be entitled to such fee unless we consummate our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Shares subject to redemption
We account for our shares of common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares (including shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.