ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our results and the timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements because of many factors.
Much of the discussion in this Item is “forward-looking” as that term is used in Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Actual operations and results may materially differ from present plans and projections due to changes in economic conditions, new business opportunities, changed business conditions, and other developments. Other factors that could cause results to differ materially are described in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. There are several factors that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those anticipated, and include, but are not limited to general economic, financial and business conditions, changes in and compliance with governmental laws and regulations, including various state and federal environmental regulations, our ability to obtain additional financing from outside investors and/or bank and mezzanine lenders and our ability to generate sufficient revenues to cover operating losses and position us to achieve positive cash flow. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained herein, which speak only as of a certain date. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Going Concern
By the acquisition on 22nd November 2021, this Company entered into a regular business and for the first time, this Company reported revenue from its wholly owned subsidiary. This Company asserts its ability as a Going Concern.
Results of Operations for the current reporting period, as compared to previous reporting period
Revenue during the current reporting period is $22,400, as compared to $0 for the previous year
Expenses during the current reporting period are $36,112 which is lower than $73,609 for the previous year.
The net loss for the current year is $13,712 lower than $73,609 for the previous year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During the two months of November and December 2021, the wholly owned subsidiary reported $22,400 revenue, which is a positive sign for liquidity. However, this Company may need at least a year or two to achieve stronger liquidity
With the deposit of $1 million by the wholly owned subsidiary, the Company’s resources can yield higher return on investments. However, the Company’s activities are in the real estate development and hence, the industry trends may impact the capital resources
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
The Company used $109,279 in cash for the current reporting period as against $65,687 in the previous year.
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
The Company neither used nor received any from the investing activities for the current reporting period and it is the same in the previous year.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
The Company received $80,159 as a repayable loan from as a related party transaction, in the current reporting period whereas it was $66,510 in the previous year
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect or change on the company’s financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement, or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with the company is a party, under which the company has (i) any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument, or variable interest; or (ii) a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity, or market risk support for such assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Specifically, critical accounting estimates have the following attributes: 1) we are required to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate; and 2) different estimates we could reasonably have used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, would have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. These changes have historically been minor and have been included in the financial statements as soon as they became known. Based on a critical assessment of our accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that our financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and present a meaningful presentation of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Use of Estimates-These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and, accordingly, require management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Specifically, our management has estimated variables used to calculate the Black Scholes and binomial lattice model calculations used to value derivative instruments discussed below under “Valuation of Derivative Instruments”. In addition, management has estimated the expected economic life and value of our licensed technology, our net operating loss for tax purposes, share-based payments for compensation to employees, directors, consultants and investment banks, and the useful lives of our fixed assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Deferred Financing Costs-Payments, either in cash or share-based payments, made in connection with the sale of debentures are recorded as deferred debt issuance costs and amortized using the effective interest method over the lives of the related debentures.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments-For certain of our financial instruments, including accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, interest payable, bank overdraft, advances payable and notes payable, the carrying amounts approximate fair value due to their relatively short maturities.
Valuation of Derivative Instruments-FAS 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments and measurement of fair value for accounting purposes. In addition, FAS 155, “Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial Instruments” requires measurement of fair values of hybrid financial instruments for accounting purposes. In determining the appropriate fair value, the Company uses a variety of valuation techniques including Black Scholes models, Binomial Option Pricing models, Standard Put Option Binomial models and the net present value of certain penalty amounts. Derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as Adjustments to Fair Value of Derivatives. The effects of interactions between embedded derivatives are calculated and accounted for in arriving at the overall fair value of the financial instruments. In addition, the fair values of freestanding derivative instruments such as warrant derivatives are valued using the Black Scholes model.
Stock Based Compensation-The Company follows the fair value recognition provisions of FAS 123®. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized in the financial statements for granted, modified, or settled stock options based on estimated fair values.