Item 7. Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes thereto set forth in “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding the anticipated impact of the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic on our business operations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and our results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, refer to “Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, which was filed with the SEC on June 29, 2021.
Overview
We are a dedicated contract development and manufacturing organization (“CDMO”) that provides a comprehensive range of services from process development to Current Good Manufacturing Practices (“CGMP”) clinical and commercial manufacturing, focused on development and CGMP manufacturing of biologics for the biotechnology and biopharmaceutical industries. With 29 years of experience producing monoclonal antibodies and recombinant proteins, our services include CGMP clinical and commercial product manufacturing, bulk packaging, release and stability testing and regulatory submissions support. We also provide a variety of process development services, including upstream and downstream development and optimization, analytical methods development, testing and characterization.
Strategic Objectives
We have a growth strategy that seeks to align with the growth of the biopharmaceutical drug substance contract services market. That strategy encompasses the following objectives:
· Invest in additional manufacturing capacity and resources required for us to achieve our long-term growth strategy and meet the growth-demand of our customers’ programs, moving from development through to commercial manufacturing;
· Broaden our market awareness through a diversified yet flexible marketing strategy;
· Continue to expand our customer base and programs with existing customers for both process development and manufacturing service offerings;
· Explore strategic opportunities both within our core business as well as in adjacent and/or synergistic biologic service offerings in order to enhance and/or broaden our capabilities; and
· Increase our operating profit margin to best in class industry standards.
Fiscal Year 2022 Highlights
The following summarizes select highlights from our fiscal year ended April 30, 2022:
· Reported revenues of $119.6 million, an increase of 25%, or $23.7 million, compared to fiscal 2021;
· Reported net income attributable to common stockholders of $127.7 million, or $2.08 per basic and $1.84 per diluted share;
· Expanded our customer base and programs with existing customers and ended the year with a backlog of approximately $153 million compared to $118 million at the end of fiscal 2021;
· Announced the expansion of our CDMO service offerings into the rapidly growing cell and gene therapy market, and initiated construction of a world-class, purpose-built cell and gene therapy development and CGMP manufacturing facility as further discussed in the “Facility Expansions” section below.
· Announced the official opening of our second downstream processing suite within our Myford facility. This milestone marks the completion of the first phase of our two-phased expansion of our Myford facility; and
· Continued to advance the second phase of expansion of our Myford facility as further discussed in the “Facility Expansions” section below.
Facility Expansion
During fiscal year 2021, we announced plans for a two-phased expansion of our Myford facility. The first phase, which was initiated during the second quarter of fiscal 2021 and completed in January 2022, expands the production capacity of our existing north side of our Myford facility (“Myford North”) by adding an additional downstream processing suite. This phase is now operational and we have been generating revenue from this new suite since the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022. The second phase, which was initiated during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 and is anticipated to be online during the first calendar quarter of 2023, will further expand our capacity through the build out of a second manufacturing train, including both upstream and downstream processing suites, within the south side of our Myford facility (“Myford South”). We estimate that the remaining cost to complete our second phase of expansion will be approximately $35 to $40 million.
In October 2021, we announced plans to expand our CDMO service offerings into viral vector development and manufacturing services for the rapidly growing cell and gene therapy market. As part of this expansion, we are in the process of constructing a world-class, purpose-built cell and gene therapy development and CGMP manufacturing facility within a building we are leasing in Costa Mesa, California (the “Cell and Gene Therapy Facility”). Based on current projections, we expect the entire build out of our new Cell and Gene Therapy Facility will take up to 18 months at an estimated cost of approximately $65 to $75 million. In June 2022, we completed the first phase of our two-phase construction plan of our Cell and Gene Therapy Facility, with the opening of our new analytical and process development laboratories. The second phase of construction includes the build out of the CGMP manufacturing suites, which are expected to be online in mid calendar 2023.
In June 2022, we announced plans to further expand the process development capacity of our mammailian cell culture services, by adding new suites within our existing process development laboratory space that will double its capacity. This expansion is expected to be completed by the end of calendar 2022 at an estimated cost of approximately $6 million.
Upon completion, we estimate that all of these expansions, combined with our existing facilities, has the potential to bring our total revenue generating capacity to up to approximately $400 million annually, depending on the mix of projects.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) outbreak a global pandemic. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant impact on our operations, as we have been able to continue to operate our manufacturing facilities and provide essential services to our customers. Additionally, in an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees and in compliance with state regulations, we have implemented precautionary measures, including providing remote-working arrangements for employees who can perform their job functions offsite, re-emphasized good hygiene practices, reorganized our workflows where permitted to maximize physical distancing, limited employee travel and other measures to allow manufacturing and other personnel essential to production to continue work within our manufacturing facilities.
The full extent to which COVID-19 will directly or indirectly impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. We will continue to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. For a further discussion of potential risks to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” of this Annual Report.
Performance and Financial Measures
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are revenues, gross profit, selling, general and administrative expenses, operating income and interest expense.
We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our consolidated financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those consolidated financial statements from period to period and the primary factors that accounted for those changes.
Revenues
Revenues are derived from services provided under our customer contracts and are disaggregated into manufacturing and process development revenue streams. Manufacturing revenue generally represents revenue from the manufacturing of customer products derived from mammalian cell culture covering clinical through commercial manufacturing runs. Process development revenue generally represents revenue from services associated with the custom development of a manufacturing process and analytical methods for a customer’s product.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to revenues less cost of revenues. Cost of revenues reflects the direct cost of labor, overhead and material costs. Direct labor costs include compensation, benefits, recruiting fees, and stock-based compensation within the manufacturing, process and analytical development, quality assurance, quality control, validation, supply chain, project management and facilities functions. Overhead costs primarily include the rent, common area maintenance, utilities, property taxes, security, materials and supplies, software, small equipment and deprecation costs incurred at all of our manufacturing and laboratory locations.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses are composed of corporate-level expenses, including compensation, benefits, recruiting fees, and stock-based compensation of corporate functions such as executive management, finance and accounting, business development, legal, human resources, information technology, and other centralized services. SG&A expenses also include corporate legal fees, audit and accounting fees, investor relation expenses, non-employee director fees, corporate facility related expenses, and other expenses relating to our general management, administration, and business development activities. SG&A expenses are generally not directly proportional to revenues, but we expect such expenses to increase over time to support the needs of our growing company.
Results of Operations
The following table compares the operating results of our operations for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021 (in thousands):
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
Revenues
Revenues were $119.6 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $95.9 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of approximately $23.7 million or 25%. The increase in revenues can primarily be attributed to increases in the scope of in-process and completed manufacturing runs during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, unutilized capacity fees, and process development revenues primarily associated with services provided to new customers. The increase in revenues was attributed to the following components of our revenue streams:
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $36.6 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $29.3 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of approximately $7.3 million, and gross margins for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 were both 31%. The increase in gross profit for fiscal 2022 can primarily be attributed to increased revenues, partially offset by increases in costs associated with the growth of our business and our facility expansions including compensation and benefit related expenses, and facility and equipment related costs. We expect our gross profit will be impacted in the short-term by these and future costs as we continue to increase the hiring of personnel and incur additional facility and equipment related costs to support our rapidly growing capacity and expanded CDMO service offerings.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses were $21.2 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $17.1 million in fiscal 2021, an increase of approximately $4.2 million, or 24%. As a percentage of revenue, SG&A expenses for the fiscal years 2022 and 2021 were both 18%. The net increase in SG&A expenses was attributed to the following components:
Operating Income
Operating income was $15.4 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $12.2 million for fiscal 2021. This $3.2 million improvement in year-over-year operating income was primarily attributable to a $7.3 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by an increase in SG&A expense of approximately $4.2 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $2.7 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $1.2 million in fiscal 2021. The increase of $1.5 million can primarily be attributed to interest expense related to our outstanding Convertible Notes issued during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021 (as described in Note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements).
Income Tax Benefit
In fiscal 2022, we recorded a $115.0 million non-cash income tax benefit due to the release of our valuation allowance during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 (as described in Note 7 of the notes to consolidated financial statements).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We review our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for our judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may vary from what we anticipate and different assumptions or estimates about the future could change our reported results. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the notes to consolidated financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Revenue recognized from services provided under our customer contracts are disaggregated into manufacturing and process development revenue streams.
Manufacturing revenue
Manufacturing revenue generally represents revenue from the manufacturing of customer products recognized over time utilizing an input method that compares the cost of cumulative work-in-process to date to the most current estimates for the entire cost of the performance obligation. Under a manufacturing contract, a quantity of manufacturing runs are ordered at a specified scale with prescribed delivery dates, where the product is manufactured according to the customer’s specifications and typically includes only one performance obligation. Each manufacturing run represents a distinct service that is sold separately and has stand-alone value to the customer. The products are manufactured exclusively for a specific customer and have no alternative use. The customer retains control of its product during the entire manufacturing process and can make changes to the process or specifications at its request. Under these agreements, we are entitled to consideration for progress to date that includes an element of profit margin.
Process development revenue
Process development revenue generally represents revenue from services associated with the custom development of a manufacturing process and analytical methods for a customer’s product. Process development revenue is recognized over time utilizing an input method that compares the cost of cumulative work-in-process to date to the most current estimates for the entire cost of the performance obligation. Under a process development contract, the customer owns the product details and process, which has no alternative use. These process development projects are customized to each customer to meet its specifications and typically includes only one performance obligation. Each process represents a distinct service that is sold separately and has stand-alone value to the customer. The customer also retains control of its product as the product is being created or enhanced by our services and can make changes to its process or specifications upon request. Under these agreements, we are entitled to consideration for progress to date that includes an element of profit margin.
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivables, contract assets (unbilled receivables), and contract liabilities (customer deposits and deferred revenue). Contract assets are recorded when our right to consideration is conditioned on something other than the passage of time. Contract assets are reclassified to accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheet when our rights become unconditional. Contract liabilities represent customer deposits and deferred revenue billed and/or received in advance of our fulfillment of performance obligations. Contract liabilities convert to revenue as we perform our obligations under the contract.
The transaction price for services provided under our customer contracts generally reflects our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for providing goods and services to our customers. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate transaction price to each performance obligation identified in a contract on a relative standalone selling price basis. We generally determine relative standalone selling prices based on the price observed in the customer contract for each distinct performance obligation. If observable standalone selling prices are not available, we may estimate the applicable standalone selling price based on the pricing of other comparable services or on a price that we believe the market is willing to pay for the applicable service.
In determining the transaction price, we also considered the different sources of variable consideration including, but not limited to, discounts, credits, refunds, price concessions or other similar items. We have included in the transaction price some or all of an amount of variable consideration, utilizing the most likely method, only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. The actual amount of consideration ultimately received may differ.
In addition, our customer contracts generally include provisions entitling us to a cancellation or postponement fee when a customer cancels or postpones its commitments prior to our initiation of services. The determination of such cancellation and postponement fees are based on the terms stated in the related customer contract but are generally considered substantive for accounting purposes and create an enforceable right and obligation due to us when the cancellation or postponement occurs. Accordingly, we recognize such fees, subject to variable consideration, as revenue upon the cancellation or postponement date utilizing the most likely method.
Management may be required to exercise judgement in estimating revenue to be recognized. Judgement is required in identifying performance obligations, estimating the transaction price, estimating the stand-alone selling prices of identified performance obligations, estimating variable consideration, and estimating the progress towards the satisfaction of performance obligations. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, the estimates will be adjusted, which will affect revenues in the period that such variances become known.
Stock-based Compensation
We maintain equity compensation plans, which provide the ability for us to grant stock options, restricted stock units, performance stock units and other forms of stock-based awards. The estimated fair value of stock options granted to employees in exchange for services is measured at the grant date, using a fair value based method, such as a Black-Scholes option valuation model, and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods, which is generally the vesting period. The fair value of restricted stock units and performance stock units is measured at the grant date based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. For restricted stock units, the fair value is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods. For performance stock units, which are subject to performance conditions, the fair value is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods when the achievement of such performance condition is determined to be probable. If a performance condition is not determined to be probable or is not met, no stock-based compensation expense is recognized, and any previously recognized expense is reversed. Forfeitures are recognized as a reduction of stock-based compensation expense as they occur.
The use of a valuation model requires us to make certain estimates and assumptions with respect to selected model inputs. The expected volatility is based on the daily historical volatility of our common stock covering the estimated expected term. The expected term of options granted reflects actual historical exercise activity and assumptions regarding future exercise activity of unexercised, outstanding options. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury notes with terms within the contractual life of the option at the time of grant. The expected dividend yield assumption is based on our expectation of future dividend payouts. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock and currently do not anticipate paying such cash dividends.
Valuation Allowance
We utilize the liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under the liability method, deferred taxes are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Significant judgement is required by management to determine our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and the valuation allowance to record against our net deferred tax assets, which are based on complex and evolving tax regulation. We provide a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized. On a periodic basis, we reassess the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets, weighing positive and negative evidence to assess the recoverability of the deferred tax assets. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we reassessed the valuation allowance noting the shift of positive evidence outweighing negative evidence, including significant revenue growth, continued profitability, and expectations regarding future profitability. After assessing both the positive evidence and negative evidence, we determined it was more likely than not our deferred tax assets would be realized and therefore fully released our valuation allowance related to federal and state deferred tax assets as of April 30, 2022 (as described in Note 7 of the notes to consolidated financial statements).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents on hand and cash flows generated from operations. As of April 30, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $126.2 million. We believe that our existing cash on hand and our anticipated cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report.
If cash flows from operations are not sufficient to support our operations or capital requirements, including our ongoing expansion to our Myford facility and the ongoing construction of our Cell and Gene Therapy Facility, then we may need to obtain additional equity or debt financing to fund our future operations and/or such expansions. We may raise these funds at the appropriate time, accessing the form of capital that we determine is most appropriate considering the markets available to us and their respective costs of capital, such as through the issuance of debt or through the public offering of securities. These financings may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Our ability to raise additional capital in the equity and debt markets is dependent on a number of factors including, but not limited to, the market demand for our common stock. The market demand or liquidity of our common stock is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties including, but not limited to, our financial results, economic and market conditions, and global financial crises and economic downturns, which may cause extreme volatility and disruptions in capital and credit markets. In addition, even if we are able to raise additional capital, it may not be at a price or on terms that are favorable to us.
Cash Flows
The following table compares our cash flow activities for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021 (in thousands):
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2022 was a result of net income of $127.7 million, offset by net non-cash adjustments to net income of $101.8 million, which was primarily due to deferred income taxes of $115.1 million associated with the release of our valuation allowance during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, and cash flows from the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $16.4 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2022 consisted of $56.4 million used to acquire property and equipment primarily related to two ongoing projects, the expansion of our Myford facility and the construction of our Cell and Gene Therapy Facility.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2022 consisted of $3.4 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our equity compensation plans, offset by $0.2 million in principal payments on a finance lease.
Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Convertible Senior Notes
In March 2021, we issued $143.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.25% exchangeable senior notes due 2026 (“Convertible Notes”) in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act. The net proceeds we received from the issuance of Convertible Notes was $138.5 million, after deducting initial purchaser discounts and other debt issuance related expenses of $5.3 million.
The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations and accrue at a rate of 1.25% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on September 15, 2021. The Convertible Notes mature on March 15, 2026, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased by us or converted at the option of the holders. The Convertible Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election in the manner and subject to the terms and conditions provided in the indenture governing the Convertible Notes.
As of April 30, 2022, the aggregate principal amount outstanding or our Convertible Notes was $143.8 million. For additional information regarding the Convertible Notes, see Note 3 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Leases
We lease certain office, manufacturing, laboratory, and warehouse space located in Orange County, California under operating lease agreements. Our leased facilities have original lease terms ranging from 7 to 12 years, contain multi-year renewal options, and scheduled rent increases of 3% on either an annual or biennial basis. We also lease certain manufacturing equipment under a 5-year finance lease that expires in December 2026. As of April 30, 2022, we had outstanding lease obligations of $52.5 million, of which $4.9 million is payable in fiscal 2023, $4.8 million is payable in fiscal 2024, $4.7 million is payable in fiscal 2025, $4.8 million is payable in fiscal 2026, $4.6 million is payable in fiscal 2027, and $28.7 million is payable thereafter.
Capital Expenditures
We currently anticipate that our capital expenditures for fiscal 2023 to be approximately $85 to $95 million, primarily related to the ongoing expansion of our Myford facility, the construction of our Cell and Gene Therapy Facility, and the planned expansion of our process development capacity as further discussed in the “Facility Expansions” section above.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to us, please see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to consolidated financial statements.