Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report, which include additional information about our accounting policies, practices, and the transactions underlying our financial results. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report contains forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by such forward-looking information due to the factors discussed under “Cautionary Statements” appearing elsewhere herein and the risks and uncertainties described or identified in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Please also refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1 - Business in this Annual Report, and our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is segregated into four sections, including:
Executive Overview. This section provides a summary of our operating performance and cash flows, industry trends and our strategic initiatives.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section describes the accounting areas where management makes critical estimates to report our financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations. This section provides an analysis of our consolidated results of operations for the two comparative periods presented in our consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Position. This section provides an analysis of cash flow, contractual obligations, and certain other matters affecting our financial position.
Executive Overview
CEA Industries Inc. is a technology, engineering, and services provider to the global controlled environment agriculture (CEA) industry. The CEA industry is one of the fastest-growing sectors of the United States’ economy. From leafy greens (kale, Swiss chard, mustard, cress), microgreens (leafy greens harvested at the first true leaf stage), ethnic vegetables, ornamentals, and small fruits (such as strawberries, blackberries and raspberries) to bell peppers, cucumbers, tomatoes, and cannabis, some producers grow crops indoors in response to market dynamics or as part of their preferred farming practice. In service of the CEA, our principal service and product offerings include: (i) floor plans and architectural design of cultivation facilities, (ii) licensed mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) engineering of commercial scale environmental control systems specific to cultivation facilities, (iii) process cooling systems and other climate control systems, (iv) air handling equipment and systems, (v) LED lighting, (vi) benching and racking solutions for indoor cultivation, (vii) automation and control devices, systems and technologies used for environmental, lighting and climate control, and (viii) preventive maintenance services for CEA facilities. Our customers include commercial, state- and provincial-regulated CEA growers in the U.S. and Canada as well as in other international locations. Customers are those growers building new facilities and those expanding or retrofitting existing facilities, with both ranging in size from several thousand to more than 100,000 square feet.
Historically, our revenue stream is derived primarily from supplying our products, services and technologies to commercial indoor facilities that grow cannabis, but we have served facilities growing other crops and we intend to pursue such facilities more in the future.
We have three core assets that we believe are important to our going-forward business strategy. First, we have multi-year relationships with customers and others in the CEA industry, notably in the cannabis segment. Second, we have specialized engineering know-how and experience gathered from designing environmental control systems for CEA cultivation facilities since 2016. Third, we have a line of proprietary and curated environmental control products, which we are in the process of expanding.
Historically, nearly all of our customers have been in the cannabis cultivation business. We believe our employees have more experience than most other MEP firms serving this industry. Our customers engage us for their environmental and climate control systems because they want experts to design their facilities, and they come to us because of our reputation. We leverage our reputation and know-how against the many local contractors and MEP engineers who collectively constitute our largest competitors.
The three key pillars of our corporate strategy for growing the Company and increasing shareholder value are:
1. Pursue Organic growth. We serve a market for the construction and expansion of controlled environment agriculture (CEA) facilities and businesses that is projected to grow at a 20%+ compound annual growth rate for the foreseeable future. Our primary vertical market of cannabis cultivation facilities has been joined by the similarly rapidly growing urban vertical farming market to create two market opportunity segments that we are positioned to serve.
In May of 2021 we announced a new strategy for our organic growth, which included:
New markets. Expanding our business development plan to pursue non-cannabis CEA facilities, at least doubling our total addressable market.
New products & services. Expanding our product offerings from primarily environmental control to now offer all of the primary technologies and services required in a CEA facility. Our primary objective in expanding our service and product offerings is to improve our customers’ operations and sustainability, increase customer acquisition, and enhance our revenue and revenue recurrence. Our expanded offerings now or will include: architectural design, lighting, benching and racking, HVACD, sensing & control systems, CO2 enrichment and control, water filtration & condensate reclamation, irrigation & fertigation systems, wastewater treatment, air sanitation, preventative maintenance and odor mitigation. In the last four months alone, we have seen a broadening of our booked contract pipeline to include offerings of architectural design, lighting, benching, HVACD, sensing & control systems, CO2 control, water reclamation, air sanitation and preventative maintenance.
New trade name. In May of 2021 we adopted the trade name Surna Cultivation Technologies instead of Surna Inc. because we believe that the new name will more clearly identify our business to prospects and make us easier to find on various social media and search engines. In January of 2022, Surna Cultivation Technologies LLC was formed and is a wholly owned subsidiary of CEA Industries Inc.
Customer Operations - first and foremost we seek to help our customers build the most effective and efficient facility possible. We believe that we are uniquely positioned to engineer all of the complex components of a CEA facility into a holistic whole because of our dedicated engineering staff and our experience including over 200 commercial facilities. Our 15 years in the business has provided us a wide network of technology vendors from which we curate a selection of the best products. In addition, we are the leading experts in applying the most challenging component of the technical infrastructure, the environmental controls, and we have the knowledge required to engineer the interactions among the required components. A professional engineer (PE) license is required for all MEP engineering work, and this engineering competence is one of our greatest strengths.
Sustainability - indoor cultivation facilities, like data centers, are resource intensive. Several U.S. states have implemented building code changes that place limits on the energy consumption allowed within cultivation facilities, and we anticipate that more states will do the same. Among our objectives is to provide our customers with the most energy-efficient alternatives for their infrastructure. Energy and resource efficiency is a high priority to us as engineers, and our most senior engineering staff hold the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) credential. Our CEO previously helped build a cleantech company, has been involved in the cleantech industry for over five years, and published a book on selling energy efficient technologies. We believe that we are in a position to lead the industry in sustainability initiatives which our customers will highly value.
Customer Acquisition - By offering Facility Selection & Design services we seek to build relationships with prospects at the earliest opportunity in the lifecycle of the cultivation business. By expanding our offerings to include nearly every piece of the technical infrastructure required in a facility we hope to engage at the earliest possible moment with the customer and earn the opportunity to provide all the products and services required for the facility. Our post-start-up, lifecycle services will help us maintain a relationship with the customer as long as the facility is in operation. Our observation is that our customers want to grow plants, not maintain the technical infrastructure of complex systems, and we believe that they will accept our offer to do so, as some already have.
Revenue and Revenue Recurrence - We believe that our revenue can be expanded by offering most of the primary technical infrastructure components for a cultivation facility. For example, if we are able to provide all of the primary infrastructure components to a cultivation facility, our revenue on a project could be up to 200% higher than if we provided the environmental controls systems alone. In the past we did not have products or services to offer our customers after a facility was constructed. We have recently begun to offer preventative maintenance services, and we believe that by expanding this service offering we will be able to gain long-term recurring revenue on a subscription basis.
2. Seek strategic relationships, mergers, and acquisitions to add to our existing business. We enjoy wide brand recognition in the cannabis cultivation industry because of our longevity in the market segment (15 years) and the number of cultivation projects (over 200 commercial projects) we have served. Our core expertise is engineering the environmental controls of these facilities, which is a sophisticated engineering challenge due to the high humidity (latent heat) and heat load (sensible heat) within these facilities. Not only are the loads high, but the environmental conditions within these facilities must be held closely within limits that the facility’s managers request. Engineering to meet these limits requires us to consider all of the primary components within the facility: lighting, irrigation, HVACD, fertigation, sensors, controls, CO2 dosing, monitoring and alarms, facility physical limits such as power availability, and energy consumption. We believe that the expertise gained in working with many of the primary components provides us with a uniquely well-informed view of the efficacy of the many primary components on offer in the marketplace. We further believe that this knowledge will help us make wise choices of which products to pursue for strategic relationships, and which providers to potentially merge with or acquire. For smaller component providers we believe that our publicly traded platform and our existing sales and marketing reach will make us an attractive partner.
3. Continue to Improve Our Profile and the Market for Our Securities We recognize that the costs of being a public company are substantial. However, we believe that a public currency offers a wider audience to support our story and partnership opportunities to build that story. With that goal in mind, we continue to build our public brand through public capital markets, and as part of that effort ((and as further discussed in Note 17 Subsequent Events in our consolidated financial statements below, we completed two capital markets transactions that we believe will benefit our current and future shareholders.
First, effective February 10, 2022, trading of both shares of the Company’s common stock and certain of the Company’s warrants (which previously traded on the over-the-counter (OTCQB) market) commenced on the Nasdaq Capital Market (the “Uplist”). We believe an Uplist to the Nasdaq will contribute to our stock’s liquidity and offer a more visible and attractive equity currency to current and future investors.
Second, effective February 15, 2022, the Company received net proceeds of approximately $22 million from the sale of 5,811,138 shares of its common stock together with 5,811,138 warrants (the “Offering”). We believe the Offering will provide immediate liquidity to help fund the Company’s growth strategy through both organic development and opportunistic acquisitions. We also believe the expansion of our investor base created by the Offering will enhance our overall audience and promote liquidity and strengthen the overall market for our securities.
Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $13,639,000 compared to approximately $8,514,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5,125,000, or 57%. Overall, we had a net loss of approximately $1,338,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a net loss of approximately $1,759,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $421,000, or 24%. Our 2021 adjusted net loss was $889,000 compared to a 2020 adjusted net loss of $1,239,000. Our adjusted net income (loss) is our GAAP net income (loss) after addback for our non-cash equity compensation expenses, debt-related items and depreciation expense. Historically, one of the most significant financial challenges we face is the inconsistent and unpredictable revenue we generate quarter-over-quarter, and our revenue and cash flow remain difficult to predict.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted national, regional, and local governments, including those in the markets that the Company operates in, to implement preventative or protective measures to control its spread. As a result, there have been disruptions in business operations around the world, with an impact on our business.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated government and business response, the Company took and continues to take measures to adjust its operations as necessary. In early 2020 the Company responded to reduced orders by reducing expenses in an effort to preserve cash. Many expenses, including travel, marketing, headcount, work hours, and compensation were reduced, deferred, or eliminated while still allowing us to meet our customer obligations and develop new business. As 2020 progressed and our sales rebounded, and we were able to obtain additional funds through a forgivable bank loan, we restored our workforce and compensation. Many of these expense reductions were reversed by the end of 2021 when orders picked up and the overall business climate improved. Because the pandemic continues in different parts of the world and in different ways in the United States, the Company continues to actively monitor its operations.
We are experiencing unexpected and uncontrollable delays with our international supply of products and shipments from vendors due to a significant increase in shipments to U.S. ports, less cargo being shipped by air, a general shortage of containers, and domestic truck driver availability. While these delays have moderately improved in recent months, we, along with many other importers of goods across all industries, continue to experience severe congestion and extensive wait times for carriers at ports across the United States. In addition, restrictions imposed by local, state and federal agencies due to the COVID-19 pandemic have led to reduced personnel of importers, government staff and others in our supply chain. We have been working diligently with our network of freight partners and suppliers to expedite delivery dates and provide solutions to reduce further impact and delays. However, we are unable to determine the full impact of these delays and how long they will continue as they are out of our control.
While the Company is continuing to navigate the financial, operational, and personnel challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic, the full extent of the impact on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, the potential uncertainty related to and proliferation of new strains, and related actions taken by the U.S. government, state and local government officials, and international governments to prevent disease spread, all of which are uncertain, out of our control and cannot be predicted at this time.
Revenue. Our 2021 revenue was approximately $13,639,000. Our 2021 revenue represents an increase of 60% compared to 2020. One of our MFO customers accounted for 24% of our 2021 revenue. We believe, among other things, that we need to build a diversified sales pipeline of MFOs, which we believe will increase our consistency and predictability of revenue.
Gross Margin. Our 2021 gross margin was 21.5%, an increase from 18.2% in 2020. This increase was primarily due to our fixed cost base, offset by, a lower margin on equipment sales as described in Results of Operations below.
Profitability. Our 2021 adjusted net loss was approximately $889,000 compared to a 2020 adjusted net loss of approximately $1,239,000. Our adjusted net income (loss) is a key management metric and point of focus for us because it provides a proxy for the cash we generate from operations.
Capital Resources. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business presented major challenges for us in 2021 and we expect this to be a source of further uncertainty to our business. As discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report, we have taken steps during 2021 to focus on the Company’s core strategy and reduce our operating costs and general and administrative expenses to manage these challenges. We have also taken steps to address overall liquidity via the Offering (as further described in Note 16 Subsequent Events).
Nonetheless, there remain risks and uncertainties regarding our ability to grow revenue and generate sufficient revenues and cash flows. and there can be no assurances that we will be able to raise future capital on commercially reasonable terms, or at all.
Contract Bookings. Our bookings increased in 2021, and our backlog at December 31, 2021, was $10,818,000, an increase of $2,370,000, or 28%, from our December 31, 2020 backlog. During 2021, we had net bookings of $16,009,000, consisting of: (i) $13,543,000 of new sales contracts executed in 2021, (ii) $3,863,000 net positive changes orders, and (iii) $1,397,000 in project cancellations.
The following table sets forth: (i) our beginning backlog (the remaining contract value of outstanding sales contracts for which we have received an initial deposit as of the previous period), (ii) our net bookings for the period (new sales contracts executed during the period for which we received an initial deposit, net of any adjustments including cancellations and change orders during the period), (iii) our recognized revenue for the period, and (iv) our ending backlog for the period (the sum of the beginning backlog and net bookings, less recognized revenue). Based on the current economic climate and our cost cutting measures, there is no assurance that we will be able to continue to obtain the level of bookings that we have had in the past and or fulfill our current backlog, and we may experience contract cancellations, project scope reductions and project delays.
The completion of a customer’s new build facility project is dependent upon the customer’s ability to secure funding and real estate, obtain a license and then build their cultivation facility so they can take possession of the equipment. Accordingly, the time it takes for these customers to complete a new build project, which corresponds to when we are able to recognize revenue, is driven by numerous factors including: (i) the large number of first-time participants interested in the indoor cannabis cultivation business; (ii) the complexities and uncertainties involved in obtaining state and local licensure and permitting; (iii) local and state government delays in approving licenses and permits due to lack of staff or the large number of pending applications, especially in states where there is no cap on the number of cultivators; (iv) the customer’s need to obtain cultivation facility financing; (v) the time needed, and coordination required, for our customers to acquire real estate and properly design and build the facility (to the stage when climate control systems can be installed); (vi) the large price tag and technical complexities of the climate control and air sanitation system; (vii) the availability of power; and (viii) delays that are typical in completing any construction project.
As has historically been the case at each quarter-end, there remains significant uncertainty regarding the timing of revenue recognition of our backlog as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $411,000 of our backlog, or 4%, was attributable to customer contracts for which we have only received an initial advance payment to cover our engineering services (“engineering only paid contracts”). There are always risks that the equipment portion of our engineering only paid contracts will not be completed or will be delayed, which could occur if the customer is dissatisfied with the quality or timeliness of our engineering services, there is a delay or abandonment of the project due to the customer’s inability to obtain project financing or licensing, or the customer determines not to proceed with the project due to economic factors, such as declining cannabis wholesale prices in the state.
In contrast, after the customer has made an advance payment for a portion of the equipment to be delivered under the contract (“partial equipment paid contracts”), we typically are better able to estimate the timing of revenue recognition since the risks and delays associated with licensing, permitting and project funding are typically mitigated once the initial equipment payment is received. As of December 31, 2021, 96% of our backlog was attributable to partial equipment paid contracts.
We have provided an estimate in our consolidated financial statements of when we expect to recognize revenue on our remaining performance obligations (i.e., our Q4 2021 backlog), using separate time bands, with respect to engineering only paid contracts and partial equipment paid contracts. However, there continues to be significant uncertainty regarding the timing of our recognition of revenue in our Q4 2021 backlog. Refer to the Revenue Recognition section of Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements, included as part of this Annual Report for additional information on our estimate of future revenue recognition on our remaining performance obligations.
Our backlog, remaining performance obligations and net bookings may not be indicative of future operating results, and our customers may attempt to renegotiate or terminate their contracts for a number of reasons, including delays in, or inability to, obtain project financing or licensing or abandonment of the project entirely. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that contracts included in backlog or remaining performance obligations will actually generate revenues or when the actual revenues will be generated. Net bookings and backlog are considered non-GAAP financial measures, and therefore, they should be considered in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, our GAAP measures for recognized revenue, deferred revenue and remaining performance obligations. Further, we can provide no assurance as to the profitability of our contracts reflected in remaining performance obligations, backlog and net bookings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Certain accounting policies are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. For information regarding our critical accounting policies as well as recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements.
Our management has discussed the development and selection of critical accounting estimates with the Board of Directors and the Board of Directors has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting estimates in this Annual Report. We believe the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Allowance for accounts receivable. Accounts receivables are recorded at the invoiced amount or based on revenue earned for items not yet invoiced, and generally do not bear interest. An allowance for doubtful accounts is established, as necessary, based on past experience and other factors, which, in management’s judgment, deserve current recognition in estimating bad debts. Based on its review, we establish or adjust the allowance for specific customers and the accounts receivable portfolio as a whole. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $181,942 and $165,098, respectively. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required.
Excess and obsolete inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The inventory is valued based on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis. Lower of cost or net realizable value is evaluated by considering obsolescence, excessive levels of inventory, deterioration and other factors. Adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, are made for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired inventory. Excess and obsolete inventory is charged to cost of revenue and a new lower-cost basis for that inventory is established; subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the allowance for excess and obsolete inventory was $91,379 and $93,045, respectively.
Goodwill impairment. Goodwill, defined as unidentified asset(s) acquired in conjunction with a business acquisition, is tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We recorded goodwill in connection with our acquisition of Hydro Innovations in July 2014. We perform a quantitative impairment test annually during the fourth quarter by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill is considered not impaired. An impairment charge would be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. We completed this assessment as of December 31, 2021 and concluded that no impairment existed.
Product warranty. We warrant the products that we manufacture for a warranty period equal to the lesser of 12 months from start-up or 18 months from shipment. Our warranty provides for the repair, rework, or replacement of products (at our option) that fail to perform within stated specification. Our third-party suppliers also warrant their products under similar terms, which are passed through to our customers. We assess the historical warranty claims on our manufactured products and, since 2016, warranty claims have been approximately 1% of annual revenue generated on these products. We continue to assess the need to record a warranty reserve at the time of sale based on historical claims and other factors. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had an accrued warranty reserve amount of $186,605 and $173,365, respectively, which are included in accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Income taxes. We account for deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Measurement of the deferred items is based on enacted tax laws. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities result in a deferred tax asset, we perform an evaluation of the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. A valuation allowance related to a net deferred tax asset is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the net deferred tax asset will not be realized. Management’s judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against the net deferred tax assets. We recorded a full valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020. Based on the available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that we will be unable to utilize our net deferred tax assets in the foreseeable future. We intend to maintain valuation allowances until sufficient evidence exists to support the reversal of such valuation allowances. We make estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the carrying value of our deferred tax assets could be materially impacted.
Share-based compensation. We recognize the cost resulting from all share-based compensation arrangements, including stock options, restricted stock awards and restricted stock units that we grant under our equity incentive plan in our consolidated financial statements based on their grant date fair value. The expense is recognized over the requisite service period or performance period of the award. The service inception date is typically the grant date, but the service inception date may be prior to the grant date. Awards with a graded vesting period based on service are expensed on a straight-line basis for the entire award. Awards with performance-based vesting conditions which require the achievement of a specific company financial performance goal at the end of the performance period and required service period are recognized over the performance period. Each reporting period, we reassess the probability of achieving the respective performance goal. If the goals are not expected to be met, no compensation cost is recognized, and any previously recognized amount recorded is reversed. If the award contains market-based vesting conditions, the compensation cost is based on the grant date fair value and expected achievement of market condition and is not subsequently reversed if it is later determined that the condition is not likely to be met or is expected to be lower than initially expected. The grant date fair value of stock options is based on the Black-Scholes Model. The Black-Scholes Model requires judgmental assumptions including volatility and expected term, both based on historical experience. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury interest rates whose term is consistent with the expected term of the option.
Allocation of transaction price; standalone selling price. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. When there are multiple performance obligations within a contract, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on standalone selling price. When estimating the selling price, we use various observable inputs. The best observable input is our actual selling price for the same good or service. For engineering services, we estimate the standalone selling price by reference to certain physical characteristics of the project, such as facility size and mechanical systems involved, which are indicative of the scope and complexity of the mechanical engineering services to be provided. For equipment sales, the standalone selling price is determined by forecasting the expected costs of the equipment and then adding an appropriate margin, based on a range of acceptable margins established by management. Depending on the nature of the performance obligations, we may use a combination of different methods and observable inputs if certain performance obligations have highly variable or uncertain standalone selling prices. Once the selling prices are determined, we apply the relative values to the total contract consideration and estimates the amount of the transaction price to be recognized as each performance obligation is fulfilled.
Remaining performance obligations. The revenue standard requires certain quantitative and qualitative disclosures about our remaining performance obligations, which are defined as performance obligations that are unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) as of the end of the reporting period, including (i) the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations, and (ii) when we expect to recognize as revenue with respect to such amounts on either: (x) a quantitative basis using appropriate time bands for the duration of the remaining performance obligations, or (y) by using qualitative information. Industry uncertainty, project financing concerns, and the licensing and qualification of our prospective customers, which are out of our control, make it difficult for us to predict when we will recognize revenue on our remaining performance obligations. There are risks that we may not realize the full contract value on customer projects in a timely manner or at all, and completion of a customer’s cultivation facility project is dependent upon the customer’s ability to secure funding and real estate, obtain a license and then build their cultivation facility so they can take possession of the equipment. Accordingly, the time it takes for customers to complete a project, which corresponds to when we are able to recognize revenue, is driven by numerous factors including: (i) the large number of first-time participants interested in the indoor cannabis cultivation business; (ii) the complexities and uncertainties involved in obtaining state and local licensure and permitting; (iii) local and state government delays in approving licenses and permits due to lack of staff or the large number of pending applications, especially in states where there is no cap on the number of cultivators; (iv) the customer’s need to obtain cultivation facility financing; (v) the time needed, and coordination required, for our customers to acquire real estate and properly design and build the facility (to the stage when climate control systems can be installed); (vi) the significant price and technical complexities of the climate control and air sanitation system; (vii) the availability of power; and (viii) delays that are typical in completing any construction project. Further, based on the current economic climate, the uncertainty regarding the COVID-19 virus, and the Company’s recent cost cutting measures, there is no assurance that the Company will be able to fulfill its backlog, and the Company may experience contract cancellations, project scope reductions and project delays.
There is significant uncertainty regarding the timing of our recognition on all remaining performance obligations as of December 31, 2021. Customer contracts for which we have only received an initial advance payment to cover the allocated value of our engineering services (“engineering only paid contracts”) carry enhanced risks that the equipment portion of these contracts will not be completed or will be delayed, which could occur if the customer is dissatisfied with the quality or timeliness of our engineering services or there is a delay or abandonment of the project due to the customer’s inability to obtain project financing or licensing. In contrast, after the customer has made an advance payment for a portion of the equipment to be delivered under the contract (“partial equipment paid contracts”), we are typically better able to estimate the timing of revenue recognition since the risks and delays associated with licensing, permitting and project funding are typically mitigated once the initial equipment payment is received.
Commitments and contingencies. In the normal course of business, we are subject to loss contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business, that cover a wide range of matters, including, among others, customer disputes, government investigations and tax matters. An accrual for a loss contingency is recognized when it is probable that an asset has been impaired, or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues and Cost of Goods Sold
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $13,639,000 compared to $8,514,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $5,125,000, or 60%. This revenue increase was partly the result of our increased net bookings in 2021 which grew from $7,405,000 in 2020 to $16,009,000 in 2021, or 116%. Our revenue conversion is largely dependent on customer-centric factors-outside of our control-such as industry uncertainty, project financing concerns, the licensing and qualification of our prospective customers, and other reasons such as a challenging business climate including an overall post-COVID-19 economic downturn, which makes it difficult for us to predict when we will recognize revenue on our backlog.
Cost of revenue increased by $3,751,000 from $6,961,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $10,713,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The factors impacting this change are discussed below.
The gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,926,000 compared to $1,553,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit margin increased by approximately 3 percentage points from 18.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 21.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to our fixed cost base, offset by a lower margin on equipment sales.
Our revenue cost structure is comprised of both fixed and variable components. The fixed cost component represents engineering, manufacturing and project management salaries and benefits and manufacturing overhead that totaled $1,342,000, or 9.8% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1,167,000, or 13.7% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $175,000 was primarily due to an increase in salaries and benefits (including stock-based compensation) of $191,000, offset by a decrease of $16,000 in fixed overhead. The variable cost component, which represents our cost of equipment, outside engineering costs, shipping and handling, travel and warranty costs, totaled $9,371,000, or 68.7% of total revenue, in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $5,795,000, or 68.1% of total revenue, in the year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, our cost of equipment increased by $3,821,000 primarily due to the increase in revenue and a decrease in our equipment margin of 4.9 percentage points. Additionally in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020: (i) our travel costs increased by $82,000 and, (ii) our outside engineering costs increased by $38,000, which were offset by (iii) a reduction in warranty expense of $275,000, (iv) a reduction in excess and obsolete inventory expense of $39,000, (v) a decrease in other overhead of $28,000 and, (vi) decreased shipping and handling costs of $23,000.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by 25% from $3,916,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $4,905,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $989,000. The operating expense increase consisted of: (i) an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A expenses”) of $567,000, (ii) an increase in advertising and marketing expenses of $342,000 and, (iii) an increase in product development expenses of $80,000.
The increase in SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was due primarily to: (i) an increase of $327,000 in salaries, benefits and other employee related costs, (ii) an increase of $184,000 in internal commissions and third-party referral fees, (iii) an increase in investor relations of $109,000, (iv) an increase in loss on fixed asset disposals of $63,000, (v) an increase of $52,000 for facility and office expenses, (vi) an increase in travel of $12,000, (vii) an increase in accounting and other professional fees of $8,000, offset by, (viii) a decrease of $75,000 for bad debt expense, (ix) a decrease in stock based compensation of $56,000, and (x) a decrease of $56,000 in depreciation.
The increase in marketing expenses were due primarily to: (i) an increase in advertising and promotion of $131,000, (ii) an increase of $125,000 for industry trade shows and events, (iii) an increase in salaries and benefits of $102,000, (iv) an increase of $13,000 for travel, offset by (v) a decrease of $15,000 in outside marketing services, and (vi) a decrease of $13,000 for web development and other marketing expenses.
The increase in product development costs was primarily due to (i) an increase for consulting of $56,000, and (ii) an increase in material costs of $26,000.
Operating Loss
We had an operating loss of $1,979,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to an operating loss of $2,363,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $384,000, or 16%. The operating loss included $324,000 of non-cash, stock-based compensation expenses and $58,000 for depreciation and amortization in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $406,000 for stock-based compensation and $114,000 of depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding these non-cash items, our operating loss decreased by $247,000.
Other Income (Expense)
Our other income (net) increased by $37,000 from $604,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $641,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The other income for 2021 primarily consisted of (i) $517,000 for loan forgiveness, (ii) $138,000 for ERC credits, (iii) $66,000 in rental income from the sub-lease of a portion of our previous facility, (iv) a $16,000 gain on lease termination, (v) a $13,000 gain from a contract cancellation from 2018, offset by (vi) expense for a legal settlement of $107,000. The 2020 income was primarily due to loan forgiveness of $557,000 and income from a legal judgement of $35,000.
Net Loss
Overall, we had a net loss of $1,338,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a net loss of $1,759,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $421,000. The net loss included $391,000 of non-cash, stock-based compensation costs and depreciation and amortization expense of $58,000 in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to non-cash, stock-based compensation expense of $406,000 and depreciation and amortization of $114,000 in the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding these non-cash items, our net loss decreased by $351,000.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Position
Cash and Cash Equivalents
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2,160,000, compared to cash and cash equivalents of $2,285,000 as of December 31, 2020, a decrease of 5%. The $125,000 decrease in cash and cash equivalents during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the result of cash used in our operating activities and cash provided by our financing activities. Our cash is held in bank depository accounts with certain financial institutions. We currently have deposits with financial institutions that exceed the federally insured amount.
On February 15, 2022, we received the net proceeds from the offering of shares of common stock and warrants to purchase common stock in the amount of $22,029,184.
As of December 31, 2021, we had accounts receivable (net of allowance for doubtful accounts) of $179,000, inventory (net of excess and obsolete allowance) of $378,000, and prepaid expenses and other of $1,274,000 (including $1,069,000 in advance payments on inventory purchases). While we typically require advance payment before we commence engineering services or ship equipment to our customers, we have made exceptions requiring us to record accounts receivable, which carry a risk of non-collectability, especially since most of our customers are funded on an as-needed basis to complete facility construction. We expect this exposure to accounts receivable risk to increase as we pursue larger projects.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no indebtedness, total accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1,346,000, deferred revenue of $2,840,000, accrued equity compensation of $84,000, and the current portion of operating lease liability of $100,000. As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of $415,000, compared to a working capital deficit of $2,220,000 as of December 31, 2020.
We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future earnings for use in the operation and expansion of our business. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Because of the economic situation that developed during 2021, we cannot predict the continuing level of working capital that we will have in the future. Additionally, we cannot predict that our future financial position will not deteriorate due to cancelled or delayed contract fulfillment, reduced sales and our ability to perform our contracts.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
We incurred a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $1,338,000 compared to a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $1,759,000. We had an accumulated deficit of $28,782,000 as of December 31, 2021.
Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3,207,000 compared to cash provided by operations of $818,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase in cash usage of $4,025,000. The increase was primarily attributable to: (i) an increase in cash used for working capital of $4,300,000, (ii) an increase in non-cash operating charges of $146,000, offset by, (iii) a decrease in net loss of $421,000. Significant non-cash items included: (i) a gain on note payable forgiveness of $517,000, (ii) stock-related compensation of $308,000, (iii) $68,000 for loss on disposal of assets, and (iv) depreciation and amortization expense of $65,000.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $57,000, compared to cash used in investing activities of $9,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was related to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash from financing activities was $3,139,000 and $554,000, respectively. Cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was the result of cash proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and warrants (net of issuance costs) of $2,625,000. Additionally, the Company entered into a note payable with its current bank in the principal amount of $514,000, for working capital purposes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company entered into a note payable with its current bank in the principal amount of $554,000, for working capital purpose. See Note 8 - Note Payable and Accrued Interest.
February Common Stock Issuance
As more specifically addressed in Note 16 - Subsequent Events in our consolidated financial statements below, the Company was able to raise approximately $22 million through a sale of common stock and warrants. That transaction closed on February 15, 2022.
Capital Raising
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and have funded our operations primarily through issuances of equity securities, debt, and operating revenue. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $28,781,566, a working capital deficit of $415,171, and negative stockholders’ equity of $3,570,533. On February 15, 2022, the Company issued 5,811,138 shares of its common stock together with 5,811,138 warrants for net proceeds of approximately $22 million. The Company issued a further 1,052,227 warrants to its placement agent: 290,557 in respect of their fees and 761,670 on the exercise of the substantial majority of the 15% overallotment available to them. The 290,557 warrants issued in respect of the placement agent’s fees vest after six months, have a term of 5 years and an exercise price of $5.1625. The 761,670 warrants issued in respect of the overallotment vest immediately, have a term of 5 years and an exercise price of $5.00.
We plan to use these funds to accelerate our organic growth through key employee hires and key investments in product development (such as our controls and preventative maintenance) as well as seek accretive growth through acquisitions and expand our geographic footprint.
Inflation
We have experienced and are likely to continue to face inflationary increases on the cost of products, which may adversely affect our margins. Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Contractual Payment Obligations
Refer to Note 3 - Leases of our consolidated financial statements, which are included as part of this Annual Report for further details on our obligations under a lease for our manufacturing and office space.
Commitments and Contingencies
Litigation
The Company settled a litigation with a former employee effective March 30, 2021. While the Company disputed the merits of the claims, the Company agreed to issue an aggregate of 6,667 shares of common stock of the Company, as part of the settlement. These shares were issued on April 8, 2021, as “restricted securities,” subject to a lock-up agreement of six months, without registration rights, and pursuant to a private placement exemption. The settlement agreement also included mutual releases and no admission of liability. The cost to the Company of this settlement, $107,000, in total, has been recognized in full in Other Expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021. The issuance of the 6,667 shares of common stock (valued at $67,000) has been recognized in common stock issued during the year ended December 31, 2021.
From time to time, in the normal course of our operations, we are subject to litigation matters and claims. Litigation can be expensive and disruptive to normal business operations. Moreover, the results of complex legal proceedings are difficult to predict, and our view of these matters may change in the future as the litigation and events related thereto unfold. An unfavorable outcome to any legal matter, if material, could have an adverse effect on our operations or our financial position, liquidity or results of operations.
Other Commitments
In the ordinary course of business, we may provide indemnifications of varying scope and terms to customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of our breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain of our officers and employees that will require us to, among other things, indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers, or employees. We maintain director and officer insurance, which may cover certain liabilities arising from our obligation to indemnify our directors and certain of our officers and employees, and former officers, directors, and employees of acquired companies, in certain circumstances.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are required to disclose any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to investors. As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements. During 2021 and 2020, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet financing activities.
Recent Developments
Refer to Note 16 - Subsequent Events of our consolidated financial statements, included as part of this Annual Report, for the more significant events occurring since December 31, 2021.