Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(Dollars in millions, unless otherwise noted)
Executive Overview
We are a supplier of clean energy. Our generating capacity consists of nuclear, wind, solar, natural gas and hydroelectric assets. Through our integrated business operations, we sell electricity, natural gas, and other energy related products and sustainable solutions to various types of customers, including distribution utilities, municipalities, cooperatives, and commercial, industrial, governmental, and residential customers in competitive markets across multiple geographic regions. We have five reportable segments: Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, ERCOT and Other Power Regions.
COVID-19. We have taken steps to mitigate the potential risks posed by the global outbreak (pandemic) of COVID-19. We provide a critical service to our customers which means that it is paramount that we keep our employees who operate our businesses safe and minimize unnecessary risk of exposure to the virus by taking extra precautions for employees who work in the field and in our facilities. We have implemented work from home policies where appropriate, and imposed travel limitations on employees.
We continue to implement strong physical and cyber-security measures to ensure that our systems remain functional in order to both serve our operational needs with a remote workforce and keep them running to ensure uninterrupted service to our customers.
There were no changes in internal control over financial reporting as a result of COVID-19 that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. See ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES for additional information.
Unfavorable economic conditions due to COVID-19 resulted in an estimated reduction to our Net income of approximately $170 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The impact was not material for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We assessed long-lived assets, goodwill, and investments for recoverability and there were no material impairment charges recorded in 2020 or 2021 as a result of COVID-19. See Note 12 - Asset Impairments of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to other impairment assessments.
We will continue to monitor developments affecting our workforce, customers, and suppliers and will take additional precautions that we determine to be necessary in order to mitigate the impacts. We cannot predict the full extent of the impacts of COVID-19, which will depend on, among other things, the rate, and public perceptions of the effectiveness, of vaccinations and rate of resumption of business activity.
Significant 2021 Transactions and Developments
Separation from Exelon
On February 21, 2021, Exelon’s Board of Directors approved a plan to separate its competitive generation and customer-facing businesses into a stand-alone publicly traded company ("the separation"). Exelon completed the separation on February 1, 2022. In order to govern the ongoing relationships between us and Exelon after the separation, and to facilitate an orderly transition, we and Exelon have entered into several agreements, including a Separation Agreement, Tax Matters Agreement, a Transition Services Agreement, and an Employee Matters Agreement and other ancillary agreements. See Note 24 - Separation from Exelon of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In connection with the separation, we incurred transaction costs of $49 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which are recorded in Operating and maintenance expense. We expect to incur incremental transaction costs of approximately $150 million and $60 million in 2022 and 2023, respectively. The transaction costs are primarily comprised of system-related costs, third-party costs paid to advisors, consultants, lawyers, and other experts assisting in the separation.
CENG Put Option
EDF had the option to sell its 49.99% equity interest in CENG to us exercisable beginning on January 1, 2016 and thereafter until June 30, 2022. On November 20, 2019, we received notice of EDF’s intention to exercise the put option and sell its 49.99% equity interest in CENG to us and the put automatically exercised on January 19, 2020 at the end of the sixty-day advance notice period. On August 6, 2021, we entered into a settlement agreement with EDF pursuant to which we, through a wholly owned subsidiary, purchased EDF’s equity interest in CENG for a net purchase price of $885 million, which includes, among other things, a credit for EDF’s share of the balance of the preferred distribution payable by CENG to us. The difference between the net purchase price and EDF’s noncontrolling interest as of the closing date was recorded to Membership Interest in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In connection with the settlement agreement, on August 6, 2021, we issued approximately $880 million under a term loan credit agreement to fund the transaction, which will expire on August 5, 2022.
See Note 2 - Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions and Note 17 - Debt and Credit Agreements of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Clean Energy Law
On September 15, 2021, the Illinois Public Act 102-0662 was signed into law by the Governor of Illinois (“Clean Energy Law”). The Clean Energy Law is designed to achieve 100% carbon-free power by 2045 to enable the state’s transition to a clean energy economy. The Clean Energy Law establishes decarbonization requirements for Illinois as well as programs to support the retention and development of emissions-free sources of electricity. Among other things, the Clean Energy Law authorized the IPA to procure up to 54.5 million CMCs from qualifying nuclear plants for a five-year period beginning on June 1, 2022 through May 31, 2027. CMCs are credits for the carbon-free attributes of eligible nuclear power plants in PJM. The Byron, Dresden, and Braidwood nuclear plants located in Illinois participated in the CMC procurement process and were awarded contracts that commit each plant to operate through May 31, 2027. Pursuant to these contracts, ComEd will procure CMCs based upon the number of MWhs produced annually by each plant, subject to minimum performance requirements. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Following enactment of the Clean Energy Law, we announced on September 15, 2021 that we reversed our previous decision to retire Byron and Dresden given the opportunity for additional revenue. In addition, we no longer consider the Braidwood or LaSalle nuclear plants to be at risk for premature retirement. See Note 7 - Early Plant Retirements of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and Early Retirement of Generation Facilities below.
Early Retirement of Generation Facilities
In August 2020, we announced the intention to retire the Byron Generating Station in September 2021, Dresden Generating Station in November 2021, and Mystic Units 8 and 9 at the expiration of the cost of service commitment in May 2024. As a result, we recognized a $500 million pre-tax impairment for the New England asset group along with certain one-time charges in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, in addition to ongoing annual financial impacts stemming from shortening the expected economic useful lives of these facilities primarily related to accelerated depreciation of plant assets (including any ARC) and accelerated amortization of nuclear fuel.
In the second quarter of 2021, an incremental decline in value resulted in an additional pre-tax impairment charge of $350 million for the New England asset group.
We recorded pre-tax charges of $53 million and $140 million in the second and third quarters of 2021, respectively, for decommissioning-related activities that were not offset for the Byron units due to the inability to recognize a regulatory asset at ComEd.
On September 15, 2021, we reversed our previous decision to early retire Byron and Dresden and the expected economic useful life for both facilities was updated to 2044 and 2046 for Byron Units 1 and 2, respectively, and to 2029 and 2031 for Dresden Units 2 and 3, respectively. Depreciation was therefore adjusted beginning September 15, 2021, to reflect these extended useful life estimates. In addition, in the third quarter of 2021, we reversed approximately $81 million of severance benefit costs and $13 million of other one-time charges initially recorded in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 associated with the early retirements.
We recognized pre-tax expenses for Byron, Dresden, and Mystic Units 8 and 9 of $1,458 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to accelerated depreciation and amortization of plant assets, partially offset by the reversal of one-time charges for Byron and Dresden.
See Note 7 - Early Plant Retirements, Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligations, and Note 12 - Asset Impairments of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement for additional information.
Impacts of February 2021 Extreme Cold Weather Event and Texas-based Generating Assets Outages
Beginning on February 15, 2021, our Texas-based generating assets within the ERCOT market, specifically Colorado Bend II, Wolf Hollow II, and Handley, experienced outages as a result of extreme cold weather conditions. In addition, those weather conditions drove increased demand for service, dramatically increased wholesale power prices, and also increased gas prices in certain regions.
The estimated impact to our Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 arising from these market and weather conditions was a reduction of approximately $800 million. The ultimate impact to our consolidated financial statements may be affected by a number of factors, including the impacts of customer and counterparty defaults and recoveries, any additional solutions to address the financial challenges caused by the event, and related litigation and contract disputes. See Note 3 - Regulatory Matters and Note 19 - Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
To offset a portion of the unfavorable impacts, we identified between $370 million and $450 million of enhanced revenue opportunities, deferral of selected non-essential maintenance, and primarily one-time cost savings, which was achieved in 2021.
Agreement for the Sale of a Biomass Facility
On April 28, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement with ReGenerate Energy Holdings, LLC ("ReGenerate"), under which ReGenerate agreed to purchase our interest in the Albany Green Energy biomass facility. As a result, in the second quarter of 2021, we recorded a pre-tax impairment charge of $140 million. The sale was completed on June 30, 2021 for a net purchase price of $36 million. See Note 2 - Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Agreement for Sale of Our Solar Business
On December 8, 2020, we entered into an agreement for the sale of a significant portion of our solar business, including 360 megawatts of generation in operation or under construction at more than 600 sites across the United States. Completion of the sale occurred on March 31, 2021 for a purchase price of $810 million. See Note 2 - Mergers, Acquisitions, and Dispositions of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other Key Business Drivers
Power Markets
Section 232 Uranium Petition
On January 16, 2018, two Canadian-owned uranium mining companies with operations in the U.S. jointly submitted a petition to the U.S. Department of Commerce ("DOC") seeking relief under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 from imports of uranium products, alleging that these imports threaten national security.
The United States Nuclear Fuel Working Group ("Working Group") report was made public on April 23, 2020. The Working Group report states that nuclear power is intrinsically tied to national security, and promises that the U.S. government will take bold actions to strengthen all parts of the nuclear fuel industry in the U.S. It recommends the Agreement Suspending the Antidumping Investigation on Uranium from the Russian Federation (the “Russian Suspension Agreement” or "RSA") be extended and to consider reducing the amount of Russian imports of nuclear fuel. The Russian Suspension Agreement is the historical resolution of a 1991 DOC investigation that found that the Russians had been selling or “dumping” cheap uranium products into the U.S. The RSA has been amended several times in the intervening years to allow Russia to supply limited amounts of uranium products into the U.S. It was set to expire at the end of 2020, but was amended on October 5, 2020 to extend for another 20 years.
The Working Group report should be viewed as policy recommendations that may be implemented by executive agencies, congress, and or regulatory bodies. We cannot predict the outcome of all of the policy changes recommended by the Working Group.
Complaint at FERC Seeking to Alter Capacity Market Default Offer Caps
On February 21, 2019, PJM's Independent Market Monitor (IMM) filed a complaint alleging that the number of performance assessment intervals used to calculate the default offer cap for bids to supply capacity in PJM is too high, resulting in an overstated default offer cap that obviates the need for most sellers to seek unit-specific approval of their offers. The IMM argued that this allows for the exercise of market power. The IMM asked FERC to require PJM to reduce the number of performance assessment intervals used to calculate the opportunity costs of a capacity supplier assuming a capacity obligation. This would, in turn, lower the default offer cap and allow the IMM to review more offers on a unit-specific basis. Several consumer advocates filed a complaint seeking similar relief several months after the IMM’s complaint. On March 18, 2021, FERC granted the complaints, finding the current estimate of performance assessment intervals to be excessive compared to the reasonably expected number of performance assessment intervals which results in an unjust and unreasonable default offer cap. FERC did not establish the number of performance assessment intervals that should be used to calculate the default offer cap and instead requested briefs on the matter, including alternative approaches to mitigation in the capacity market. We submitted initial and reply briefs on May 3, 2021 and June 9, 2021, respectively, and an answer to briefs filed by other parties on June 24, 2021. On September 2, 2021, FERC issued an order adopting the IMM's unit-specific avoidable cost offer review methodology and directed PJM to submit a compliance filing establishing new deadlines for offer review and related other activities leading up to the base residual auction for the 2023-2024 planning year and an additional compliance filing revising the PJM Tariff to comply with FERC's order. We filed at FERC for rehearing on this matter on October 4, 2021 which was deemed denied on November 4, 2021. A number of parties, including us, have filed petitions for review of FERC's orders in this proceeding, which remain pending before the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. We cannot predict the outcome of these proceedings or the financial statement impact.
Hedging Strategy
We are exposed to commodity price risk associated with the unhedged portion of our electricity portfolio. We enter into non-derivative and derivative contracts, including options, swaps, and forward and futures contracts, all with credit-approved counterparties, to hedge this anticipated exposure. For merchant revenues not already hedged via comprehensive state programs, such as the CMC in Illinois, we utilize a three-year ratable sales plan to align our hedging strategy with our financial objectives. The prompt three-year merchant revenues are hedged on an approximate rolling 90%/60%/30% basis. We may also enter into transactions that are outside of this ratable hedging program. As of December 31, 2021, the percentage of expected generation hedged for the Mid-Atlantic, Midwest, New York, and ERCOT reportable segments is 92%-95% and 73%-76% for 2022 and 2023,
respectively. We have been and will continue to be proactive in using hedging strategies to mitigate commodity price risk.
We procure natural gas through long-term and short-term contracts and spot-market purchases. Nuclear fuel assemblies are obtained predominantly through long-term uranium concentrate supply contracts, contracted conversion services, contracted enrichment services, or a combination thereof, and contracted fuel fabrication services. The supply markets for uranium concentrates and certain nuclear fuel services are subject to price fluctuations and availability restrictions. Approximately 50% of our uranium concentrate requirements from 2022 through 2026 are supplied by three suppliers. In the event of non-performance by these or other suppliers, we believe that replacement uranium concentrate can be obtained, although at prices that may be unfavorable when compared to the prices under the current supply agreements. Geopolitical developments have the potential to impact delivery from multiple suppliers in the international uranium industry. Non-performance by these counterparties could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements.
See Note 16 - Derivative Financial Instruments of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and