ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and expected financial results, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” discussed in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report.
OVERVIEW
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company seeking to extend the lives of cancer patients by pursing an integrated therapeutic (Rx) and companion diagnostic (CDx) strategy. Our therapeutic efforts are focused on developing potential first-in-class or best-in-class molecularly targeted therapies that address the same cancer driver a CELsignia companion diagnostic can identify. CELsignia is uniquely able to analyze live patient tumor cells to identify new groups of cancer patients likely to benefit from targeted therapies. This enables a CELsignia CDx to support advancement of new indications for already approved targeted therapies. We believe this integrated Rx and CDx strategy will maximize the impact our drug development efforts have on the treatment landscape for cancer patients.
The first drug candidate we are developing internally is gedatolisib, a potent, well-tolerated, small molecule dual inhibitor, administered intravenously, that selectively targets all class I isoforms of PI3K and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). In April 2021, we obtained exclusive global development and commercialization rights to gedatolisib under a license agreement with Pfizer, Inc. We believe gedatolisib’s unique mechanism of action, favorable pharmacokinetic properties, and intravenous formulation offer distinct advantages over currently approved and investigational therapies that target PI3K or mTOR alone or together.
● Overcomes limitations of therapies that only inhibit a single class I PI3K isoform or only one mTOR kinase complex
Gedatolisib is a pan-class I isoform PI3K inhibitor with low nanomolar potency for the p110α, p110β, p110γ, and p110δ isoforms. Each isoform is known to preferentially affect different signal transduction events that involve tumor cell survival, depending upon the aberrations associated with the linked pathway. When a therapy only inhibits a single class I isoforms (e.g., alpelisib, a PI3K-α inhibitor ) or only one mTOR kinase complex (e.g., everolimus, an mTORC1 inhibitor), numerous feedforward and feedback loops between the PI3K isoforms and mTOR cross-activates the uninhibited sub-units. This, in turn, induces compensatory resistance that reduces the efficacy of isoform specific PI3K or single mTOR kinase complex inhibitors. Inhibiting all four PI3K isoforms and both mTOR complexes, as gedatolisib does, thus prevents the confounding effect of isoform interaction that may occur with isoform-specific PI3K inhibitors and the confounding interaction between PI3K isoforms and mTOR.
● Better tolerated by patients than oral PI3K and mTOR drugs.
Gedatolisib is administered intravenously (IV) on a four-week cycle of three weeks-on, one week-off, in contrast to the orally administered pan-PI3K or dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitors that are no longer being clinically developed. Oral pan-PI3K or PI3K/mTOR inhibitors have repeatably been found to induce significant side effects that were not well tolerated by patients. This typically leads to a high proportion of patients requiring dose reductions or treatment discontinuation. The challenging toxicity profile of these drug candidates ultimately played a significant role in the decisions to halt their development, despite showing promising efficacy. By contrast, gedatolisib stabilizes at lower concentration levels in plasma compared to orally administered PI3K inhibitors, resulting in less toxicity, while maintaining concentrations sufficient to inhibit PI3K/mTOR signaling.
Isoform-specific PI3K inhibitors administered orally were developed to reduce toxicities in patients. While the range of toxicities associated with isoform-specific inhibitors is narrower than oral pan-PI3K or PI3K/mTOR inhibitors, administering them orally on a continuous basis still leads to challenging toxicities. The experience with an FDA approved oral p110-α specific inhibitor, Piqray, illustrates the challenge. In its Phase 3 pivotal trial Piqray was found to induce a Grade 3 or 4 adverse event (AE) related to hyperglycemia in 39% of patients evaluated. In addition, 26% of patients discontinued alpelisib due to treatment related adverse events. By contrast, in the 103-patient dose expansion portion of the Phase 1b clinical trial with gedatolisib, only 7% of patients experienced Grade 3 or 4 hyperglycemia and less than 10% discontinued treatment.
As of December 31, 2021, 492 patients with solid tumors have received gedatolisib in eight clinical trials sponsored by Pfizer. Of the 492 patients, 129 were treated with gedatolisib as a single agent in three clinical trials. The remaining 363 patients received gedatolisib in combination with other anti-cancer agents in five clinical trials. Additional patients received gedatolisib in combination with other anti-cancer agents in nine investigator sponsored clinical trials.
A Phase 1b trial (B2151009) evaluating patients with HR+/HER2- metastatic breast cancer was initiated in 2016 and subsequently enrolled 138 patients. Twelve patients from this study continue to receive study treatment, as of December 31, 2021, ten of whom have received study treatment for more than three years. The B2151009 clinical was an open label, multiple arm Phase 1b study that evaluated gedatolisib in combination with palbociclib (CDK4/6 inhibitor) and fulvestrant or letrozole in patients with HR+/HER2- advanced breast cancer. Thirty-five patients were enrolled in two dose escalation arms to evaluate the safety and tolerability and to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of gedatolisib when used in combination with the standard doses of palbociclib and endocrine therapy (letrozole or fulvestrant). The MTD was determined to be 180 mg administered intravenously once weekly. A total of 103 patients were subsequently enrolled in one of four expansion arms (A, B, C, D).
High objective overall response rates were observed in all four expansion arms and were comparable in each arm for PIK3CA WT and PIK3CA MT patients. In treatment-naïve patients (Arm A), ORR was 85%. In patients who received prior hormonal therapy alone or in combination with a CDK4/6 inhibitor (Arms B, C, and D), ORR ranged from 32% to 77%. Each arm achieved its primary endpoint target, which was reporting higher ORR in the study arm than ORR from either the PALOMA-2 (ORR=55%) study that evaluated palbociclib plus letrozole for Arm A or the PALOMA-3 study (ORR=25%) that evaluated palbociclib plus fulvestrant for Arms B, C, and D. For all enrolled patients, a clinical benefit rate (CBR) of ≥79% was observed. Median progression-free survival (PFS) was 31.1 months for patients receiving first-line treatment (Arm A) and 12.9 months for patients who received a prior CDK4/6 inhibitor and were treated in the study with the Phase 3 dosing schedule (Arm D).
Gedatolisib combined with palbociclib and endocrine therapy demonstrated a favorable safety profile with manageable toxicity. The majority of treatment emergent adverse events were Grade 1 and 2. The most frequently observed adverse events included stomatitis/mucosal inflammation, the majority of which were Grade 1 and 2. The most common Grade 4 AEs were neutropenia and neutrophil count decrease, which were assessed as related to treatment with palbociclib. No grade 5 events were reported in this study.
We are preparing to initiate VIKTORIA-1, a Phase 3, open-label, randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of two regimens in adults with HR+/HER2- advanced breast cancer whose disease has progressed after prior CDK4/6 therapy in combination with an aromatase inhibitor: 1) gedatolisib in combination with palbociclib and fulvestrant; and 2) gedatolisib in combination with fulvestrant. We expect to initiate the VIKTORIA-1 study in the first half of 2022.
The clinical trial will enable separate evaluation of subjects according to their PIK3CA status. Subjects who meet eligibility criteria and are PIK3CA WT will be randomly assigned (1:1:1) to receive a regimen of either gedatolisib, palbociclib, and fulvestrant (Arm A), gedatolisib and fulvestrant (Arm B), or fulvestrant (Arm C). Subjects who meet eligibility criteria and are PIK3CA MT will be randomly assigned (1:1) to receive a regimen of either gedatolisib, palbociclib, and fulvestrant (Arm D) or alpelisib and fulvestrant (Arm E).
On January 13, 2022, gedatolisib was granted Fast Track designation for the treatment of patients with ER+/HER2- metastatic breast cancer after progression on CDK4/6 therapy. Fast Track designation is granted by the FDA for products that are intended for the treatment of serious or life-threatening disease or conditions and which demonstrate the potential to address an unmet medical need. The designation offers the opportunity for frequent interactions with the FDA to discuss the drug’s development plan and to ensure collection of appropriate data needed to support drug approval, as well as eligibility for rolling submission of a New Drug Application.
Our proprietary CELsignia diagnostic platform is the only commercially ready technology we are aware of that uses a patient’s living tumor cells to identify the specific abnormal cellular process driving a patient’s cancer and the targeted therapy that best treats it. This enables us to identify patients whose tumors may respond to a targeted therapy, even though they lack a previously associated molecular mutation. By identifying cancer patients whose tumors lack an associated genetic mutation but have abnormal cellular activity a matching targeted therapeutic is designed to inhibit, CELsignia CDx can expand the markets for a number of already approved targeted therapies. Our current CDx identifies breast and ovarian cancer patients whose tumors have cancer drivers potentially responsive to treatment with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative (HER2), mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (c-MET), or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3K) targeted therapeutics. While U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approval or clearance is not currently required for CELsignia tests offered as a stand-alone laboratory developed test, if we are partnered with a drug company to launch a CELsignia test as a companion diagnostic for a new drug indication, we would be required to obtain premarket approval, or PMA, in conjunction with the pharmaceutical company seeking a new drug approval for the matching therapy.
We are supporting the advancement of new potential indications for four different targeted therapies, controlled by other pharmaceutical companies, that would rely on a CELsignia CDx to select patients. Five Phase 2 trials are underway to evaluate the efficacy and safety of these therapies in CELsignia selected patients. These patients are not currently eligible to receive these drugs and are not identifiable with a molecular test.
Supporting the development of a potential first-in-class targeted therapy for breast cancer, like gedatolisib, with our CELsignia platform is a natural extension of our strategy to use our CELsignia CDx to enable new indications for other companies’ targeted therapies. By combining companion diagnostics designed to enable proprietary new drug indications with targeted therapies that treat signaling dysregulation our CDx identifies, we believe we are uniquely positioned to improve the standard-of-care for many early and late-stage breast cancer patients. Our goal is to play a key role in the multiple treatment approaches required to treat breast cancer patients at various stages of their disease. With each program, we are:
● Leveraging the proprietary insights CELsignia provides into live patient tumor cell function
● Using a CELsignia CDx to identify new patients likely to respond to the paired targeted therapy
● Developing a new targeted therapeutic option for breast cancer patients
● Maximizing the probability of getting regulatory approval to market the targeted therapy indication
We have not generated any revenue from sales to date, and we continue to incur significant research and development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. As a result, we are not and have never been profitable and have incurred losses in each period since we began operations in 2012. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported a net loss of approximately $29.6 million and $9.5 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were approximately $84.3 million, and we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $55.9 million.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
A novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in Wuhan, China in December 2019, and subsequently declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is discussed in further detail below:
Health and Safety
To help protect the health and safety of our employees, suppliers and collaborators, we took proactive, aggressive action from the earliest signs of the outbreak. We enacted rigorous safety measures in our laboratory and administrative offices, including implementing social distancing protocols, allowing working from home for those employees that do not need to be physically present in a lab to perform their work, suspending travel, implementing temperature checks at the entrances to our facilities, extensively and frequently disinfecting our workspaces and providing masks to those employees who must be physically present. We expect to continue with these measures until the COVID-19 pandemic is contained and we may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees, suppliers, and collaborators.
Clinical Trials and Collaborations
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental authorities have implemented and are continuing to implement numerous and constantly evolving measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limits on gatherings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. As we continue to advance our clinical trial collaborations, we are in close contact with our current clinical sponsors, and principal investigators, as well as prospective pharmaceutical company and clinical collaborators, to assess the impact of COVID-19 on our trial enrollment timelines and collaboration discussions. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus of healthcare providers and hospitals on fighting the virus, and consistent with the FDA’s updated industry guidance for conducting clinical trials issued on March 18, 2020, we are experiencing delays in the enrollment of patients in our ongoing clinical trials. We now expect interim results from the FACT-1 and FACT-2 trials to be delayed until the first half of 2023 and final results approximately nine months later. As the impact of COVID-19 on our industry becomes clearer, we may need to reassess the timing of our anticipated clinical milestones. Prospective clinical trial collaborations with pharmaceutical companies and sponsors may also be delayed but the impact on the timing of finalizing agreements is not yet known.
Research and Development
While our facility currently remains operational, the evolving measures to try to contain the virus have impacted and may further impact our workforce and operations, as well as those of our vendors and suppliers. Our laboratory remains operational as of this date, but, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented protective policies that reduce the number of research and development staff operating in our laboratory at any one time. While governmental measures may be modified or extended, we expect that our research and development and clinical laboratory will remain operational. However, in light of the focus of healthcare providers and hospitals on fighting the virus, several of the clinical sites that provide us tumor tissue for research have halted this service, reducing the number of new tumor tissue specimens we would typically expect to receive. These various constraints may slow or diminish our research and development activities. In addition, cancer research-related industry meetings, such as the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR), were delayed for several months. Our submissions to present research results at these meetings were accepted, but the release of the results was postponed in conjunction with the delayed meeting schedules.
Liquidity
Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the recent COVID-19 outbreak on our future results, we believe our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our cash needs arising in the ordinary course of business for at least the next twelve months. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from federal, state and local public health authorities and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. In addition, see Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report for additional information on risks associated with pandemics in general and COVID-19 specifically and how those risks may impact our business and operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue. Initially, our ability to generate revenue will depend primarily upon our ability to obtain partnership agreements with pharmaceutical companies to provide companion diagnostics for such pharmaceutical partners’ existing or investigational targeted therapies. We expect these partnerships to generate significant revenue from the sale of tests to identify patients eligible for clinical trials, from milestone payments, and, potentially, from royalties on the incremental drug revenues our tests enable. Once a new drug indication is received that requires use of our companion diagnostic to identify eligible patients, we expect to generate revenues from sales of tests to treating physicians. With the execution of the Pfizer license agreement in April 2021, whereby we acquired exclusive world-wide licensing rights to develop and commercialize gedatolisib, we expect to conduct clinical trials to support potential regulatory approval to market gedatolisib. If we obtain regulatory approvals to market gedatolisib, we expect to generate revenue from sales of the drug for the treatment of breast cancer patients.
Research and Development
Since our inception, we have primarily focused on research and development of our CELsignia platform, development and validation of our CELsignia tests, and research related to the discovery of new cancer sub-types. Beginning in April 2021, we are also focusing on development of gedatolisib, a PI3K/mTOR targeted therapy. Research and development expenses primarily include:
● employee-related expenses related to our research and development activities, including salaries, benefits, recruiting, travel and stock-based compensation expenses;
● laboratory supplies;
● consulting fees paid to third parties;
● clinical trial costs;
● manufacturing validation costs for gedatolisib
● facilities expenses; and
● legal costs associated with patent applications.
Internal and external research and development costs are expensed as they are incurred. As we initiate a Phase 3 clinical trial for gedatolisib and continue to expand clinical trials to evaluate efficacy of targeted therapies in cancer patients selected with one of our CELsignia tests, the proportion of research and development expenses allocated to external spending will grow at a faster rate than expenses allocated to internal expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation related to our executive, finance and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include professional fees for auditing, tax, and legal services associated with being a public company, director and officer insurance and travel expenses for our general and administrative personnel.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of professional and consulting fees related to these functions. To date, we have incurred immaterial sales and marketing expenses as we continue to focus primarily on the development of our first drug, gedatolisib, development of our CELsignia platform and corresponding CELsignia tests. We expect to begin to incur increased selling and marketing expenses in anticipation of regulatory approval to market gedatolisib and the commercialization of our first CELsignia tests. These increased expenses are expected to include payroll-related costs as we add employees in the commercial departments, costs related to the initiation and operation of our sales and distribution network and marketing related costs.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is primarily due to a loan agreement and finance lease obligations.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our research and development expenses were approximately $25.8 million, representing an increase of approximately $18.1 million, or 235%, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase primarily resulted from a $10.0 million upfront license fee related to the execution of the Pfizer license agreement, which included $5.0 million of non-cash expense for the issuance of common stock. The remaining $8.1 million increase primarily resulted from expenses related to the support and development of gedatolisib. Employee related expenses, including consulting fees, accounted for a $3.4 million increase. The increase of $3.4 million included an increase of $0.6 million in non-cash stock-based compensation. The remaining increase of $4.7 million is related to clinical trials, costs associated with the transfer of the gedatolisib-related activities from Pfizer to Celcuity and patent legal fees.
Conducting a significant amount of research and development is central to our business model. We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we seek to develop gedatolisib, discover new cancer sub-types, and develop and validate additional CELsignia tests to diagnose such sub-types. We also expect to incur increased expenses to support companion diagnostic business development activities with pharmaceutical companies as we develop additional CELsignia tests and initiate a clinical trial for gedatolisib.
General and Administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our total general and administrative expenses were $2.6 million, representing an increase of approximately $0.7 million, or 39%, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase primarily resulted from a $0.4 million increase in compensation related expenses, including approximately $0.3 million of non-cash stock-based compensation. In addition, other general and administrative expenses increased $0.3 million primarily due to professional fees associated with being a public company and director and officer insurance.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods, reflecting both increased costs in connection with the potential future commercialization of gedatolisib and CELsignia tests, an expanding infrastructure, and increased professional fees associated with being a public company.
Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense was $1.3 million and represents an increase of $1.3 million compared to the same period in 2020. The increase is due to the loan agreement that was executed in April 2021 and includes $0.6 million of non-cash interest expense.
Interest Income
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest income decreased approximately $0.1 million compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily the result of lower market interest rates.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Since our inception, we have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations. Through December 31, 2021, we raised capital of approximately $13.7 million and $7.5 million through private placements of common equity and unsecured convertible notes, respectively. On September 22, 2017, we closed on the IPO of our common stock, which generated approximately $23.3 million of additional cash after taking into account underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. On June 5, 2020, we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement with B. Riley, FBR, Inc (the “ATM Agreement”). The ATM Agreement allowed us to sell shares of common stock up to an aggregate offering price of $10.0 million. Through December 31, 2021, we generated approximately $0.1 million of additional cash through sales pursuant to the ATM Agreement, after taking into account commissions and offering expenses. On February 26, 2021, we completed a follow-on offering of our common stock, which generated approximately $25.8 million of additional cash after taking into account underwriting discounts and offering expenses. In conjunction with the follow-on offering, the ATM Agreement was terminated. On April 8, 2021, we entered into a loan agreement with Innovatus Life Sciences Lending Fund I, LP (“Innovatus”), whereby Innovatus agreed to loan up to $25 million in three tranches consisting of (i) a $15.0 million non-contingent term A loan that was funded on April 8, 2021, (ii) a $5 million term B loan to be funded upon our request no later than March 31, 2022, and (iii) a $5 million term C loan to be funded upon our request no later than March 31, 2023. Funding of the term B and C loan is subject to our ability to achieve certain milestones. Net proceeds generated from the loan agreement were $14.4 million. On July 1, 2021, we completed a follow-on offering of our common stock, which generated approximately $52.8 million of additional cash after taking into account underwriting discounts of and offering expenses.
Cash from these capital raising activities has been our primary source of funds for our operations since inception. As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were approximately $84.3 million, and we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $55.9 million.
In February of 2022, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies LLC, as agent (“Jefferies”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Jefferies, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50,000,000. We will pay Jefferies a commission equal to 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of such shares. To date, we have not yet made any sales under this arrangement.
We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue development of gedatolisib, development and validation of our CELsignia platform and additional CELsignia tests, conduct research related to the discovery of new cancer sub-types, conduct clinical trials, and pursue other business development activities. We will also start to incur sales and marketing expenses as we commercialize our CELsignia tests and gedatolisib. We expect to use cash on hand to fund our research and development expenses, capital expenditures, working capital, sales and marketing expenses, and general corporate expenses, as well as for the increased costs associated with being a public company.
Based on our current business plan, we believe that our current cash on hand will provide sufficient cash to finance operations and pay obligations when due for at least the next twelve months.
We may seek to raise additional capital to expand our business, pursue strategic investments, and take advantage of financing or other opportunities that we believe to be in the best interests of the Company and our stockholders. Additional capital may be raised through the sale of common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, entry into debt facilities or other third-party funding arrangements. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. Agreements entered into in connection with such capital raising activities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations or require us to relinquish certain rights. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of approximately $29.6 million, offset by non-cash expense items of approximately $8.5 million and working capital changes of $0.8 million. Non-cash expense items of approximately $8.5 million primarily consisted of $5.0 million for issuance of common stock related to a license agreement, $2.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, non-cash interest expense of $0.6 million and depreciation expense of $0.3 million. The approximately $0.8 million of working capital changes was primarily due to an increase in accounts payable, slightly offset by an increase in prepaid assets.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of approximately $9.5 million, adjusted for non-cash items of approximately $2.2 million and working capital changes of approximately $0.2 million. Non-cash expense items of approximately $2.2 million consisted of stock-based compensation expense of approximately $1.8 million and of depreciation of approximately $0.4 million. The working capital change was primarily due to approximately $0.2 million in accrued expenses.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were flat at approximately $0.1 million and consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $93.0 million. The $93.0 million primarily consisted of net proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock through two follow-on offerings totaling $78.5 million and $14.4 million from net proceeds related to the closing of a loan agreement. The remaining $0.1 million was the result of proceeds from the exercise of common stock warrants and employee stock options and proceeds from employee stock purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $0.1 million and primarily reflects net proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock through the ATM Agreement and employee stock purchases.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
From time-to-time new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, or other standard setting bodies and adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND USE OF ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or Generally Accepted Accounted Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances; the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Of our significant accounting policies, we believe that the following are the most critical:
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock-based compensation consists of common stock options and restricted stock issued to certain employees and nonemployees and our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). We recognize compensation expense based on an estimated grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option-pricing method. We have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur.
The inputs for the Black-Scholes valuation model require management’s significant assumptions. Prior to our IPO, the price per share of common stock was determined by our board based on recent prices of common stock sold in private offerings. Subsequent to the IPO, the price per share of common stock is determined by using the closing market price on the Nasdaq Capital Market on the grant date. The risk-free interest rates are based on the rate for U.S. Treasury securities at the date of grant with maturity dates approximately equal to the expected life at the grant date. The expected life was based on the simplified method in accordance with SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Nos. 107 and 110. The expected volatility was estimated based on historical volatility information of peer companies that are publicly available in combination with our calculated volatility since being publicly traded.
All assumptions used to calculate the grant date fair value of nonemployee options are generally consistent with the assumptions used for options granted to employees. In the event we terminate any of our consulting agreements, the unvested options issued in connection with such agreements would also be cancelled.
For grants of restricted stock, we record compensation expense based on the quoted fair value of the shares on the grant date over the requisite service period. Compensation expense for ESPP rights is recorded in line with each respective offering period.
Clinical Trial Costs
The Company records prepaid assets or accrued expenses for prepaid or estimated clinical trial costs conducted by third-party service providers, which includes the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials. These costs can be a significant component of the Company’s research and development expenses. The Company accrues for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with service agreements with its third-party service providers. The Company makes significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, the Company adjusts its prepaid assets or accrued expenses. The Company has not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed, number of patients enrolled, and the rate of patient enrollments may vary from the Company’s estimates, resulting in an adjustment to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to the Company’s prepaid assets or accrued expenses could materially affect the Company’s results of operations.