Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided as a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this 2021 Form 10-K to enhance the understanding of our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
The comparison of 2020 to 2019 results has been omitted from this Form 10-K and is incorporated by reference from our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020-“Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” filed on February 10, 2021.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company is a global biopharmaceutical company whose mission is to discover, develop and deliver innovative medicines that help patients prevail over serious diseases. Refer to the Summary of Abbreviated Terms at the end of this 2021 Form 10-K for terms used throughout the document.
In 2021, we obtained more than 20 approvals for new medicines and additional indications and formulations of currently marketed medicines in major markets (the U.S., EU and Japan), including regulatory approvals of Breyanzi and Abecma in hematology malignancies, the first approvals of our cell therapy portfolio. In support of our continued investment in our cell therapy portfolio, we are expanding our manufacturing capabilities through the construction of new state-of-the-art cell therapy manufacturing facilities in Devens, Massachusetts, and Leiden, Netherlands. We continue to see momentum in our immuno-oncology portfolio with additional approvals for both Opdivo and Opdivo+Yervoy in various indications (e.g. adjuvant bladder, gastric cancer, gastroesophageal junction cancer, esophageal adenocarcinoma and RCC) and the return to growth of Opdivo. Our portfolio in immunology has expanded with the FDA approval of Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC and we have an important opportunity for deucravacitinib, our TYK2 inhibitor, for the treatment of psoriasis and other immune-mediated diseases. We bolstered our leading cardiovascular franchise by adding mavacamten with the acquisition of MyoKardia in 2020. In 2021, the FDA accepted the NDA for mavacamten for patients with symptomatic obstructive HCM and assigned a revised PDUFA goal date of April 28, 2022.
In 2021, our revenues increased 9%, due to Eliquis, Opdivo/Yervoy, our recently launched new products, Revlimid and foreign exchange. The GAAP EPS of $3.12 in 2021 as compared to the GAAP loss per share of $3.99 in 2020 was primarily due to (i) IPRD and other charges resulting from the MyoKardia asset acquisition in 2020, (ii) other specified items including lower unwinding of inventory purchase price adjustments and other income related to equity investments and contingent value rights and (iii) internal transfers of certain intangible and other assets to streamline our legal entity structure subsequent to the Celgene acquisition resulting in a tax benefit in 2021 and a tax charge in 2020. After adjusting for specified items, non-GAAP EPS increased $1.07 due to higher revenues, partially offset by higher expenses to support product launches and the overall portfolio.
Highlights
The following table summarizes our financial information:
Our non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP earnings and related EPS information, are adjusted to exclude specified items that represent certain costs, expenses, gains and losses and other items impacting the comparability of financial results. For a detailed listing of all specified items and further information and reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures refer to “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Economic and Market Factors
COVID-19
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, international, federal, state and local public health and governmental authorities have taken, and continue to take, a number of actions to limit the spread of COVID-19 and address related disruptions in the U.S. and global economy. While we continue to experience impacts on revenues from COVID-19 primarily due to lower new patient starts and patient visits, the pandemic has not significantly impacted our results of operations. The situation remains dynamic and it is difficult to reasonably assess or predict the full extent of the negative impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. The future financial and operational impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on BMS will depend on future developments such as the ultimate duration and the severity of the spread of COVID-19 and any variant strains in the U.S. and globally, the effectiveness and outreach of vaccines, the effectiveness of federal, state, local and international government's mitigation actions, the pandemic's impact on the U.S. and global economies, changes in the behavior of patients and medical professionals and the timing for resumption to our normal operations, as well as developments affecting healthcare and the delivery of medicines to patients. See “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors-General Risks-The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our business and could have a material adverse effect on us.”
As the COVID-19 pandemic affected global healthcare systems as well as major economic and financial markets, we adopted several procedures focused on ensuring the continued supply of our medicines to our patients and protecting the health, wellbeing and safety of our workforce:
Workplace and Community
•We are maintaining our steadfast commitment to protecting our workforce, communities and patients, and ensuring the continued supply of life-saving medicines.
•As a science-based company, we have a social responsibility to help reduce the spread of the virus. Vaccinations are required for generally all of our employees in the U.S. and Puerto Rico subject to any local regulations which limit or restrict vaccine mandates, and we are encouraged that as of January 5, 2022 approximately 99% of our employees in these regions are vaccinated against COVID-19. Requests for medical or religious accommodations are also considered on an individual basis. Although local regulations and conditions in other ex-U.S. jurisdictions may limit or restrict vaccine mandates, we are committed to implementing similar requirements in other markets wherever possible.
•As we return workers to the office, we will continue to assess the need to require weekly asymptomatic testing, mask wearing, and physical distancing of all colleagues onsite at our facilities in the U.S. and Puerto Rico. We also keep our workforce safe by conducting regular deep cleaning of our sites.
•Our manufacturing sites have remained open throughout the pandemic supported by on site personnel. We have taken a thoughtful and phased approach to bringing the rest of our workforce back to our 195 plus sites around the world, guided by the following principles:
◦Serving the needs of our patients and customers
◦Prioritizing health and safety
◦Following medical advice and government direction
◦Leading with compassion and flexibility
◦Modeling key learnings
•No single approach fits for every site or market - our timelines and circumstances have varied across the globe. We are monitoring local conditions and government direction closely and adjusting our plans as appropriate.
Supply of Our Medicines and Support to Patients, Physicians and Advocacy Groups
•An important element of keeping our promise to patients, their families and our healthcare providers is to ensure that our supply chain is robust and carefully managed. Our clinical and commercial supply chain teams have proactively used mitigation plans to ensure our products reach our markets, clinical sites and patients over the past months. Thanks to these efforts, we have not seen any significant disruptions in our clinical or commercial supply chain due to the pandemic.
•We recognize this remains a challenging time for everyone, and we know patients may be facing additional hardships. Our existing patient support programs are available to help eligible patients in the U.S. who have been prescribed a Bristol Myers Squibb medicine and have lost employment and health insurance due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under these programs, eligible patients are provided certain Bristol Myers Squibb medicines for free.
•All of our U.S. and Puerto Rico personnel are currently required to be vaccinated to interact with customers, vendors and people at our clinical trial sites. We are also continuing to employ remote interactions as appropriate to ensure continued support for healthcare professionals, patient care, and access to our medicines across our global markets.
Our Clinical Trials and Research
•We are working with health authorities and investigators to protect our trial participants and personnel at BMS and our clinical trial sites, while ensuring regulatory compliance and the integrity of our science.
•We have provided clinical trial investigators with overarching principles and guidance regarding the conduct of BMS clinical trials worldwide in light of COVID-19, and are taking into account guidance from health authorities, where applicable.
Governmental Actions
Our products continue to be subject to increasing pressures across the portfolio from pharmaceutical market access and pricing controls and discounting, changes to tax and importation laws and other restrictions in the U.S., the EU and other regions around the world that result in lower prices, lower reimbursement rates and smaller populations for whom payers will reimburse, which can negatively impact our results of operations (including intangible asset impairment charges), operating cash flow, liquidity and financial flexibility. For example, Congress is currently considering a number of different proposals that would potentially: (i) allow the government to set or negotiate prices for prescription drugs, including benchmarking those prices to prices paid in other countries, (ii) penalize manufacturers for price increases beyond inflationary measures, (iii) redesign the Part D benefit with new out of pocket limits for patients and new mandated discounts for manufacturers, and (iv) change U.S. income tax laws resulting in an increase to our income tax expense, including through increased taxation of our international operations. The outcome of these Congressional actions remains highly uncertain. In addition, the OECD recently reached agreement on a global minimum tax pursuant to which countries are expected to implement changes to their tax laws and updates to international tax treaties. See risk factor on the Company’s risk factors on these items included under “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors-Product, Industry and Operational Risks-Increased pricing pressure and other restrictions in the U.S. and abroad continue to negatively affect our revenues and profit margins” and “-Changes to tax regulations could negatively impact our earnings.”
Significant Product and Pipeline Approvals
The following is a summary of the significant approvals received in 2021:
Product Date Approval
Orencia December 2021 FDA approval of Orencia for the prevention, of aGvHD, in combination with a calcineurin inhibitor and methotrexate, in adults and pediatric patients two years of age and older undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from a matched or one allele-mismatched unrelated donor.
Opdivo December 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Opdivo for the treatment of cancer of unknown primary.
Opdivo November 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Opdivo for the first-line treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent gastric cancer in combination with chemotherapy.
Opdivo November 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of esophageal cancer.
Zeposia November 2021 EC approval for Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC.
Opdivo October 2021 EC approval of Opdivo in combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based combination chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with HER2-negative advanced or metastatic gastric, gastroesophageal junction, or esophageal adenocarcinoma whose tumors express PD-L1 with a combined positive score ≥ 5.
Opdivo September 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Opdivo for first line gastric cancer and adjuvant esophageal cancer.
Opdivo August 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Opdivo for the treatment of pediatric patients with recurrent or refractory classical Hodgkin lymphoma.
Opdivo August 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of the combination therapy Opdivo and CABOMETYX* for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic RCC.
Opdivo August 2021 FDA approval of Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of patients with urothelial carcinoma who are at high risk of recurrence after undergoing radical resection, regardless of prior neoadjuvant chemotherapy, nodal involvement or PD-L1 status.
Abecma August 2021 EC approval for Abecma for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma, who have received at least three prior therapies, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor and an anti-CD38 antibody and have demonstrated disease progression on the last therapy.
Opdivo July 2021 EC approval of Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of adult patients with esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer who have residual pathologic disease following prior neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy.
Opdivo+Yervoy June 2021 EC approval of Opdivo plus Yervoy for the treatment of adult patients with mismatch repair deficient or microsatellite instability-high metastatic CRC after prior fluoropyrimidine-based combination chemotherapy.
Onureg June 2021 EC approval of Onureg as a maintenance therapy in adult patients with AML who achieved complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery following induction therapy with or without consolidation treatment and who are not candidates for, including those who choose not to proceed to, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Opdivo+Yervoy June 2021 EC approval of Opdivo plus Yervoy for the first-line treatment of adults with unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma.
Zeposia May 2021 FDA approval of Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC.
Opdivo+Yervoy May 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Opdivo and Yervoy in combination therapy for the first-line treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent malignant pleural mesothelioma.
Product Date Approval
Opdivo May 2021 FDA approval of Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of patients with completely resected esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer with residual pathologic disease after neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy.
Opdivo April 2021 FDA approval of Opdivo in combination with chemotherapy for patients with advanced or metastatic gastric cancer, gastroesophageal junction cancer, and esophageal adenocarcinoma, regardless of PD-L1 expression status.
Opdivo April 2021 EC approval of Opdivo in combination with CABOMETYX* for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC.
Abecma March 2021 FDA approval of Abecma for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma after four or more prior lines of therapy, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor, and an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody.
Breyanzi March 2021 Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Breyanzi for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma and relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma.
Inrebic February 2021 EC approval of Inrebic for the treatment of disease-related splenomegaly or symptoms in adult patients with primary myelofibrosis, post-polycythaemia vera myelofibrosis or post-essential thrombocythaemia myelofibrosis, who are Janus Associated Kinase inhibitor naïve or have been treated with ruxolitinib.
Breyanzi February 2021 FDA approval of Breyanzi for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma after two or more lines of systemic therapy.
Opdivo January 2021 FDA approval of Opdivo in combination with CABOMETYX* for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC.
The following is a summary of the significant approvals received in 2022:
•In January 2022, Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approved Abecma for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma, who have received at least three prior therapies.
Refer to “-Product and Pipeline Developments” for all of the developments in our marketed products and late-stage pipeline in 2021 and in early 2022.
Strategy
Our principal strategy is to combine the resources, scale and capability of a pharmaceutical company with the speed and focus on innovation of the biotech industry. Our focus as a biopharmaceutical company is on discovering, developing and delivering transformational medicines for patients facing serious diseases in areas where we believe that we have an opportunity to make a meaningful difference: oncology (both solid tumors and hematology), immunology, cardiovascular and neurology. Our priorities are to continue to renew and diversify our portfolio through launching our new product portfolio, advancing our early, mid and late-stage pipeline, and executing disciplined business development. We remain committed to reducing our debt and returning capital to shareholders.
We are developing new medicines in the following core therapeutic areas: (i) oncology with a priority in certain tumor types; (ii) hematology with opportunities to broaden our franchise and potentially sustain a leadership position in multiple myeloma; (iii) immunology with priorities in relapsing multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, lupus, RA and inflammatory bowel disease; (iv) cardiovascular disease and; (v) fibrotic disease with priorities in lung and liver. We continue to advance the next wave of innovative medicines by investing significantly in our pipeline both internally and through business development activities. We have expanded our oncology, hematology and immunology portfolios with several near-term assets and additional external partnerships. We have invested in our oncology portfolio by pursuing both monotherapy and combination approaches and advancing our next wave of early assets and to explore new collaboration opportunities across our therapeutic areas of focus. We remain focused and well-resourced in our cancer development programs and seek to broaden the use of Opdivo in earlier lines of therapy, expand into new tumors, accelerate next wave oncology mechanisms and develop treatment options for refractory oncology patients. We are further strengthening our IO portfolio with another opportunity of relatlimab in a fixed dose combination with nivolumab for the treatment of melanoma and expanded opportunities in adjuvant melanoma, lung, liver and CRC. For hematology, we have opportunities to launch several new medicines in the near-term with additional pipeline opportunities in the longer term. There is a broad effort to continue to address the unmet medical need in multiple myeloma and we are working across multiple modalities and mechanisms of action such as cereblon modulators (“CELMoDs”), T-cell Engagers and CAR T-cell therapies.
Beyond cancer, we continue to advance our early stage portfolio in immunology, cardiovascular and neuroscience diseases and strengthen our partnerships with a diverse group of companies and academic institutions in new and expanded research activities. We believe our differentiated internal and external focus contributes to the advancing of our pipeline of potentially transformational medicines. For immunology with deucravacitinib, our selective TYK2, there is opportunity to be a medicine that could treat multiple immune-mediated diseases. The FDA has accepted our NDA for deucravacitinib for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis and has set a PDUFA goal date of September 10, 2022. We are expanding our portfolio for cardiovascular disease with our alliance partnership with Janssen where we are advancing a next-generation antithrombotic medicine in milvexian. Additionally, through the acquisition of MyoKardia, we have added mavacamten, which has the potential to be a first-in-class medicine to treat the underlying cause of obstructive HCM. The FDA has accepted the NDA for mavacamten for this indication and assigned a revised PDUFA goal date of April 28, 2022.
Our commercial model has been successful with revenues from our key brands continuing to grow, which demonstrates strong execution of our strategy. We continue to drive adoption of Opdivo by expanding into additional indications and tumor types both as a monotherapy and in combination with Yervoy and other anti-cancer agents. Eliquis continues to grow, leveraging its best in class clinical profile and extensive real world data and is now the number one novel oral anticoagulant in total prescriptions globally. Revlimid and Pomalyst have not only transformed the treatment of multiple myeloma, but as we gained deeper understanding of the mechanism of action of Revlimid and Pomalyst, we have leveraged that knowledge to intentionally design novel CELMoD agents, iberdomide and CC-92480, to improve upon these earlier treatments. We are able to leverage our leading capabilities in hematological malignancies and our robust pipeline to provide opportunities for long-term growth to offset the impact of future patent expires for Revlimid and Pomalyst. We are building on the continued success of our other key brands and remain strongly committed to Orencia and Sprycel. We are also optimistic on the future growth and near-term opportunities of Reblozyl, Inrebic, Zeposia, Onureg, Breyanzi and Abecma. Through our operating model transformation, our commercial infrastructure is leveraged for potential growth.
We expect the growth in our in-line and new product portfolio will enable us to more than offset the expected decline in Revlimid, Abraxane and other products revenues due to their loss of market exclusivity through 2025.
Our operating model continues to evolve and we have been successful in focusing commercial, R&D and manufacturing resources on key brands and markets, strengthening our R&D capabilities in tumor biology, patient selection and new biomarkers, delivering leaner administrative functions and streamlining our manufacturing network to reflect the importance of biologics in our current and future portfolio. The evolution in our operating model, which focuses on maintaining a disciplined approach in marketing, selling and administrative expenses, will enable us to deliver the necessary strategic, financial and operational flexibility to invest in the highest priority opportunities within our portfolio. Through our Celgene acquisition restructuring activities, we expect to realize approximately $3.0 billion of synergies resulting from cost savings and avoidance through 2022 and our integration efforts across general and administrative, manufacturing, R&D, procurement and streamlining the Company's pricing and information technology infrastructure.
Looking ahead, we will continue to implement our biopharma strategy by driving the growth of key brands, executing product launches, investing in our diverse and innovative pipeline, aided by strategic business development, focusing on prioritized markets, increasing investments in our biologics manufacturing capabilities and maintaining a culture of continuous improvement.
Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements
Significant acquisitions, divestitures, licensing and other arrangements during 2021 are summarized below. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data -Note 3. Alliances” and “-Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements” for further information.
Agenus - We obtained a global exclusive license to Agenus’ proprietary bispecific antibody program, AGEN1777, that blocks TIGIT and an additional target. AGEN1777 is currently in a Phase I clinical trial.
Eisai - We commenced an exclusive global strategic collaboration with Eisai for the co-development and co-commercialization of MORAb-202, a selective folate receptor alpha antibody-drug conjugate being investigated in endometrial, ovarian, lung and breast cancers. MORAb-202 is currently in Phase I/II clinical trials for solid tumors.
Prothena - We exercised our option under the global neuroscience research and development collaboration for the exclusive U.S. rights to PRX005, an anti-tau antibody that specifically targets an area within the microtubule binding region for the potential treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. PRX005 is currently in a Phase I clinical trial.
Rockefeller University - We obtained a global exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize Rockefeller University’s novel monoclonal antibody duo treatment that neutralizes the SARS-CoV-2 virus for treatment and potentially for prevention of COVID-19. Phase I clinical trials to assess dosing for IV and subcutaneous formulations and to assess safety have been completed by Rockefeller University. In May 2021, enrollment initiated in the Phase II study within the NIH ACTIV-2 protocol at a network of sites within the U.S. Phase II enrollment was completed in August 2021 and topline data is expected in the first quarter of 2022.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Regional Revenues
The composition of the changes in revenues was as follows:
(a) Other revenues include royalties and alliance-related revenues for products not sold by our regional commercial organizations.
(b) Foreign exchange impacts were derived by applying the prior period average currency rates to the current period revenues.
United States
•U.S. revenues in 2021 increased due to Eliquis, our recently launched new products, Revlimid and Opdivo/Yervoy. Average net selling prices increased by approximately 2% in 2021 compared to the same period a year ago.
Europe
•Europe revenues in 2021 increased due to Eliquis, Revlimid, Opdivo/Yervoy and foreign exchange, partially offset by lower demand for Mature and other brands. Average net selling prices were lower in 2021 compared to the same period a year ago.
Rest of the World
•Rest of the World revenues in 2021 increased due to Opdivo/Yervoy, Pomalyst/Imnovid and Eliquis, partially offset by lower revenues for Abraxane, due to manufacturing delays, and Mature and other brands. Average net selling prices were lower in 2021 compared to the same period a year ago.
No single country outside the U.S. contributed more than 10% of total revenues in 2021 and 2020. Our business is typically not seasonal.
GTN Adjustments
We recognize revenue net of GTN adjustments that are further described in “-Critical Accounting Policies.”
The activities and ending reserve balances for each significant category of GTN adjustments were as follows:
The reconciliation of gross product sales to net product sales by each significant category of GTN adjustments was as follows:
Reductions to provisions for product sales made in prior periods resulting from changes in estimates were $319 million and $106 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The reductions to provisions in 2021 was primarily related to Eliquis coverage gap discounts. GTN adjustments are primarily a function of product sales volume, regional and payer channel mix, contractual or legislative discounts and rebates. U.S. GTN adjustments percentage increased primarily due to higher government channel mix, which has higher GTN adjustment percentages.
Product Revenues
** Change in excess of 100%.
Revlimid (lenalidomide) - an oral immunomodulatory drug that in combination with dexamethasone is indicated for the treatment of patients with multiple myeloma. Revlimid as a single agent is also indicated as a maintenance therapy in patients with multiple myeloma following autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
•U.S. revenues increased 5% in 2021 due to higher average net selling prices and higher demand.
•International revenues increased 8% in 2021 due to higher demand and foreign exchange impacts of 3%. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues increased by 5%.
•In the U.S., certain third parties have been granted volume-limited licenses to sell generic lenalidomide beginning in March 2022 or thereafter. In the EU, licenses have been granted to third parties to market generic lenalidomide products prior to expiry of our patent and supplementary protection certificate rights beginning in the UK in January 2022 and in various other major market European countries (e.g. France, Germany, Italy and Spain) where our supplementary protection certificate is in force beginning in February 2022. In Japan, the estimated minimum market exclusivity date is based on a composition of matter patent, which expires in July 2022. Global revenues for Revlimid are expected to decline to approximately $9.5 billion to $10.0 billion in 2022.
Eliquis (apixaban) - an oral Factor Xa inhibitor, indicated for the reduction in risk of stroke/systemic embolism in NVAF and for the treatment of DVT/PE and reduction in risk of recurrence following initial therapy.
•U.S. revenues increased 18% in 2021 due to higher demand. A majority of Eliquis patients enter the coverage gap during the third and fourth quarters which result in lower revenues during the second half of the year.
•International revenues increased 17% in 2021 due to higher demand and foreign exchange impacts of 3%. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues increased by 14%.
•In September 2021, the Bristol Myers Squibb-Pfizer Alliance announced that the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed the U.S. District Court’s August 2020 decision finding the composition of matter patent and formulation patent covering Eliquis valid and infringed. Given the decision, the earliest that generic manufacturers are permitted to launch their apixaban products is April 1, 2028, subject to additional challenges.
Following the May 2021 expiration of regulatory exclusivity for Eliquis in Europe, generic manufacturers may seek to market generic versions of Eliquis in Europe prior to the expiration of our patents, which may lead to additional, infringement and invalidity actions involving our Eliquis patents being filed in various countries in Europe. We believe in the innovative science behind Eliquis and the strength of our intellectual property, which we will defend against infringement. Refer to “Item 1. Financial Statements-Note 19. Legal Proceedings and Contingencies-Intellectual Property” for further information.
Opdivo (nivolumab) - a fully human monoclonal antibody that binds to the PD-1 on T and NKT cells that has been approved for several anti-cancer indications including bladder, blood, CRC, head and neck, RCC, HCC, lung, melanoma, MPM and stomach. The Opdivo+Yervoy regimen also is approved in multiple markets for the treatment of NSCLC, melanoma, MPM, RCC, CRC and various gastric and esophageal cancers. There are several ongoing potentially registrational studies for Opdivo across other tumor types and disease areas, in monotherapy and in combination with Yervoy and various anti-cancer agents.
•U.S. revenues increased 7% in 2021 due to higher demand across multiple therapies including the Opdivo+Yervoy combinations in NSCLC, Opdivo+CABOMETYX* combination in kidney cancer and Opdivo in various gastric and esophageal cancers and higher average net selling prices, partially offset by declining second-line eligibility across tumor indications and increased competition.
•International revenues increased 9% in 2021 due to higher demand and foreign exchange impacts of 2%, partially offset by lower average net selling prices. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues increased by 7%.
Pomalyst/Imnovid (pomalidomide) - a proprietary, distinct, small molecule that is administered orally and modulates the immune system and other biologically important targets. Pomalyst/Imnovid is indicated for patients with multiple myeloma who have received at least two prior therapies including lenalidomide and a proteasome inhibitor and have demonstrated disease progression on or within 60 days of completion of the last therapy.
•U.S. revenues increased 5% in 2021 due to higher average net selling prices and higher demand.
•International revenues increased 16% in 2021 due to higher demand and foreign exchange impacts of 2% partially offset by lower average net selling prices. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues increased by 14%.
Orencia (abatacept) - a fusion protein indicated for adult patients with moderately to severely active RA and PsA and is also indicated for reducing signs and symptoms in certain pediatric patients with moderately to severely active polyarticular JIA.
•U.S. revenues increased 6% in 2021 due to higher demand.
•International revenues remained consistent in 2021 due to foreign exchange impacts of 2%, offset by lower demand. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues decreased by 1%.
•In the U.S. and EU, estimated minimum market exclusivity dates were previously based on method of use patents that expired in 2021. Formulation and additional patents expire in 2026 and beyond. There are no Orencia biosimilars on the market in the U.S., EU or Japan.
Sprycel (dasatinib) - an oral inhibitor of multiple tyrosine kinase indicated for the first-line treatment of patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML in chronic phase and the treatment of adults with chronic, accelerated, or myeloid or lymphoid blast phase CML with resistance or intolerance to prior therapy, including Gleevec* (imatinib mesylate) and the treatment of children and adolescents aged 1 year to 18 years with chronic phase Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML.
•U.S. revenues remained consistent in 2021 due to higher demand offset by lower average net selling prices.
•International revenues decreased 3% in 2021 due to lower demand as a result of increased generic competition in certain indications and lower average net selling prices, partially offset by foreign exchange impacts of 1%. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues decreased by 4%.
Yervoy (ipilimumab) - a monoclonal antibody for the treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma. The Opdivo+Yervoy regimen also is approved in multiple markets for the treatment of NSCLC, melanoma, MPM, RCC, and CRC.
•U.S. revenues increased 13% in 2021 due to higher demand primarily from the Opdivo+Yervoy combination for NSCLC and higher average net selling prices.
•International revenues increased 36% in 2021 due to higher demand and foreign exchange impacts of 2% partially offset by lower average net selling prices. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues increased by 34%.
Abraxane (paclitaxel albumin-bound particles for injectable suspension) - a solvent-free protein-bound chemotherapy product that combines paclitaxel with albumin using our proprietary Nab® technology platform, and is used to treat breast cancer, NSCLC and pancreatic cancer, among others.
•U.S. revenues increased 3% in 2021 due to higher average net selling prices and higher demand.
•International revenues decreased 24% in 2021 due to manufacturing delays and lower demand resulting from generic competition, partially offset by foreign exchange impacts of 3%. Excluding foreign exchange impacts, revenues decreased by 27%.
•We expect that the manufacturing delays in the U.S. and International will continue into the first quarter 2022.
•In the U.S., based on settlements reached we anticipate generic entry beginning in March 2022. In the EU, generics have entered the market. In Japan, the estimated minimum market exclusivity date is 2023 based on a method of use patent. Global revenues for Abraxane are expected to decline by approximately 25% to 30% starting in 2022.
Reblozyl (luspatercept-aamt) - an erythroid maturation agent indicated for the treatment of anemia in adult patients with beta thalassemia who require regular red blood cell transfusions and for the treatment of anemia failing an ESA in adult patients with very low- to intermediate-risk MDS who have ring sideroblasts and require RBC transfusions.
•U.S. revenues increased 87% in 2021 due to higher demand primarily from the launch of Reblozyl in April 2020 for the treatment of adult patients with MDS previously treated with ESA.
Empliciti (elotuzumab) - a humanized monoclonal antibody for the treatment of multiple myeloma.
Abecma (idecabtagene vicleucel) - is a B-cell maturation antigen-directed genetically modified autologous CAR T cell therapy indicated for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma after four or more prior lines of therapy, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor, and an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody. Abecma was launched in May 2021.
Zeposia (ozanimod) - an oral immunomodulatory drug used to treat relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis, to include clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing-remitting disease, and active secondary progressive disease, in adults and to treat moderately to severely active UC in adults. Zeposia was launched in June 2020.
Breyanzi (lisocabtagene maraleucel) - is a CD19-directed genetically modified autologous CAR T cell therapy indicated for the treatment of adult patients with certain types of relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma after two or more lines of systemic therapy. Breyanzi was launched in April 2021.
Inrebic (fedratinib) - an oral kinase inhibitor indicated for the treatment of adult patients with intermediate-2 or high-risk primary or secondary (post-polycythemia vera or post-essential thrombocythemia) myelofibrosis. Inrebic was launched in August 2019.
Onureg (azacitidine) - an oral hypomethylating agent that incorporates into DNA and RNA, indicated for continued treatment of adult patients with AML who achieved first complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery following intensive induction chemotherapy and are not able to complete intensive curative therapy. Onureg was launched in September 2020.
Mature and other brands - includes all other brands, including those which have lost exclusivity in major markets, OTC brands and royalty revenue.
•International revenues decreased due to lower demand and lower average net selling prices resulting from generic competition.
Estimated End-User Demand
Pursuant to the SEC Consent Order described under “-SEC Consent Order”, we monitor the level of inventory on hand in the U.S. wholesaler distribution channel and outside of the U.S. in the direct customer distribution channel. We are obligated to disclose products with levels of inventory in excess of one month on hand or expected demand, subject to a de minimis exception. Estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel in excess of one month on hand for the following products were not material to our results of operations as of the dates indicated.
Abraxane had 1.4 months of inventory on hand internationally in the distribution channel at September 30, 2021 compared to 1.9 months of inventory on hand at June 30, 2021 due to on-going business transition from a distributor and to avert a forecasted back order in Latin America.
In the U.S., we generally determine our months on hand estimates using inventory levels of product on hand and the amount of out-movement provided by our three largest wholesalers, which account for approximately 76% of total gross sales of U.S. products for the year ended December 31, 2021. Factors that may influence our estimates include generic competition, seasonality of products, wholesaler purchases in light of increases in wholesaler list prices, new product launches, new warehouse openings by wholesalers and new customer stockings by wholesalers. In addition, these estimates are calculated using third-party data, which may be impacted by their recordkeeping processes.
Revlimid and Pomalyst are distributed in the U.S. primarily through contracted pharmacies under the Lenalidomide REMS and Pomalyst REMS programs, respectively. These are proprietary risk-management distribution programs tailored specifically to provide for the safe and appropriate distribution and use of Revlimid and Pomalyst. Internationally, Revlimid and Imnovid are distributed under mandatory risk-management distribution programs tailored to meet local authorities’ specifications to provide for the products’ safe and appropriate distribution and use. These programs may vary by country and, depending upon the country and the design of the risk-management program, the product may be sold through hospitals or retail pharmacies.
Our non-U.S. businesses have significantly more direct customers. Information on available direct customer product level inventory and corresponding out-movement information and the reliability of third-party demand information varies widely. We limit our direct customer sales channel inventory reporting to where we can influence demand. When this information does not exist or is otherwise not available, we have developed a variety of methodologies to estimate such data, including using historical sales made to direct customers and third-party market research data related to prescription trends and end-user demand. Given the difficulties inherent in estimating third-party demand information, we evaluate our methodologies to estimate direct customer product level inventory and to calculate months on hand on an ongoing basis and make changes as necessary. Factors that may affect our estimates include generic competition, seasonality of products, price increases, new product launches, new warehouse openings by direct customers, new customer stockings by direct customers and expected direct customer purchases for governmental bidding situations. As such, all of the information required to estimate months on hand in the direct customer distribution channel for non-U.S. business for the year ended December 31, 2021 is not available prior to the filing of this 2021 Form 10-K. We will disclose any product with levels of inventory in excess of one month on hand or expected demand, subject to a de minimis exception, in the next quarterly report on Form 10-Q.
Expenses
(a) Excludes amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Cost of products sold
Cost of products sold include material, internal labor and overhead costs from our owned manufacturing sites, third-party product supply costs and other supply chain costs managed by our global manufacturing and supply organization. Cost of products sold also includes royalties and profit sharing, certain excise taxes, foreign currency hedge settlement gains and losses and impairment charges. Cost of products sold typically vary between periods as a result of product mix and volume (particularly royalties and profit sharing), and to a lesser extent changes in foreign currency, price, inflation, costs attributed to manufacturing site exits and impairment charges. Cost of products sold excludes amortization from acquired intangible assets.
•Cost of products sold decreased by $1.8 billion in 2021 primarily due to lower unwinding of inventory purchase price adjustments ($2.4 billion), lower impairments of acquired marketed product rights ($260 million), partially offset by higher profit sharing and royalties due to Eliquis revenue growth and expiration of Sprycel co-promotion fee ($539 million) and higher product and manufacturing related costs.
Marketing, selling and administrative
Marketing, selling and administrative expenses primarily include salary and benefit costs, third-party professional and marketing fees, outsourcing fees, shipping and handling costs, advertising and product promotion costs. Expenses are managed through regional commercialization organizations or global enabling functions such as finance, legal, information technology and human resources. Certain expenses are shared with alliance partners based upon contractual agreements.
•Marketing, selling and administrative expenses remained unchanged in 2021 primarily due to higher advertising and promotion expenses and costs to support new product launches, offset by a cash settlement of MyoKardia unvested stock awards ($241 million) in 2020 and acceleration of charitable giving ($280 million) in 2020.
Research and development
Research and development activities include research and early discovery, preclinical and clinical development, drug formulation and medical support of marketed products. Expenses include salary and benefit costs, third-party grants and fees paid to clinical research organizations, supplies, up-front and contingent milestone payments for licensing and asset acquisitions of investigational compounds, IPRD impairment charges and proportionate allocations of enterprise-wide costs. The allocations include facilities, information technology, employee stock compensation costs and other appropriate costs. Certain expenses are shared with alliance partners based upon contractual agreements. Expenses typically vary between periods for a number of reasons, including the timing of license and asset acquisition charges and IPRD impairment charges.
•Research and development expense increased $211 million in 2021 primarily due to higher costs associated with the overall portfolio and the impact of significant charges summarized below.
Significant charges included in Research and development expense were as follows:
License and acquisition charges are related to obtaining rights to investigational compounds that will be developed further by the company. These acquisition costs include the initial up-front payment and additional contingent payments if substantive development and regulatory milestones are achieved prior to regulatory approval. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3. Alliances” and “-Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements” for further information on these charges. IPRD impairment charges relate to orva-cel in 2020 and two other programs in 2021 being studied as potential treatments in hematologic and fibrotic diseases. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 14. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” for further information on these charges. Employee compensation charges resulted from the cash settlement of MyoKardia unvested stock awards in 2020. Site exit costs resulted from Celgene integration activities in 2020.
IPRD charge - MyoKardia acquisition
IPRD charges represents the costs of IPRD assets acquired in a transaction other than a business combination.
•The MyoKardia acquisition was accounted for as an asset acquisition because substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired (excluding cash and deferred taxes) was allocated to a single asset, mavacamten. The IPRD charge related to the MyoKardia transaction is presented separately due to the significance of the charge.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets primarily relates to Revlimid, Pomalyst/Imnovid and other marketed product rights obtained in the Celgene acquisition.
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets increased by $335 million in 2021 due to additional product approvals.
Other (income)/expense, net
•Other (income)/expense, net changed by $1.6 billion in 2021, primarily due to contingent value rights, equity investments and other items discussed below.
Components of Other (income)/expense, net were as follows:
•Royalties and licensing income includes diabetes business royalties, Keytruda* royalties, Tecentriq* royalties, up-front licensing fees and milestones for products that have not obtained commercial approval. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures, Licensing and Other Arrangements” for further information.
•Equity investment gains includes fair value adjustments for investments that have readily determinable fair value and observable price changes for investments without readily determinable fair values resulting primarily from initial public offerings or third-party acquisitions of entities which we held an ownership interest. Our share of income from equity method investments are primarily due to fair value adjustments attributed to limited partnerships. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 9. Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements” for more information.
•Integration expenses primarily includes consulting fees to implement Celgene integration initiatives related to processes and systems.
•Contingent consideration primarily includes fair value adjustments resulting from the change in the traded price of contingent value rights issued with the Celgene acquisition. The contractual obligation to pay the contingent value rights terminated in January 2021 because the FDA did not approve liso-cel (JCAR017) by December 31, 2020.
•A loss on debt redemption resulted from the early redemption of $3.5 billion long-term debt obligations in 2021.
•Provision for restructuring includes exit and other costs primarily related to the Celgene acquisition plan. We have achieved approximately $2.6 billion of annualized pre-tax cost savings in 2020 related to the Celgene Acquisition Plan and are on track to achieve the annualized pre-tax cost savings of approximately $3.0 billion through 2022 as detailed in the restructuring activities. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 6. Restructuring” for further information.
•Litigation and other settlements includes BMS's share of a patent-infringement settlement related to Roche Group's PD-L1 antibody Tecentriq* in 2020.
•Investment income decreased in 2021 primarily due to lower interest rates.
•Reversion excise tax resulted from the transfer of the retiree medical plan assets back to the Company in 2020.
Income Taxes
The tax impact attributed to specified items was primarily due to low jurisdictional tax rates attributed to the unwinding of inventory purchase price adjustments and intangible asset amortization, IPRD impairment charges, contingent value rights fair value adjustments that are not taxable or deductible and internal transfers of intangible assets. In 2021, a $1.0 billion income tax benefit was recognized due to a revaluation of the tax basis of certain intangible and other assets that were internally transferred to streamline our legal entity structure subsequent to the Celgene acquisition. In 2020, an $853 million deferred tax charge resulting from an internal transfer of certain intangible assets to the U.S. to streamline our legal entity structure subsequent to the Celgene acquisition and an additional $266 million GILTI tax charge upon finalization of the Otezla* divestiture tax consequences with tax authorities was recognized. The 0.3% increase in the effective tax rate excluding specified items during 2021 was due to favorable discrete tax adjustments of approximately $140 million in 2020 primarily resulting from finalization of prior year tax returns, partially offset by jurisdictional earnings mix. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 7. Income Taxes” for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our non-GAAP financial measures, such as non-GAAP earnings and related EPS information, are adjusted to exclude certain costs, expenses, gains and losses and other specified items that are evaluated on an individual basis. These items are adjusted after considering their quantitative and qualitative aspects and typically have one or more of the following characteristics, such as being highly variable, difficult to project, unusual in nature, significant to the results of a particular period or not indicative of future operating results. Similar charges or gains were recognized in prior periods and will likely reoccur in future periods including (i) amortization of acquired intangible assets, including product rights that generate a significant portion of our ongoing revenue and will recur until the intangible assets are fully amortized, (ii) unwind of inventory purchase price adjustments, (iii) acquisition and integration expenses, (iv) restructuring costs, (v) accelerated depreciation and impairment of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, (vi) R&D charges or other income resulting from up-front or contingent milestone payments in connection with the acquisition or licensing of third-party intellectual property rights, (vii) divestiture gains or losses, (viii) stock compensation resulting from accelerated vesting of Celgene awards and certain retention-related employee compensation charges related to the Celgene transaction, (ix) pension, legal and other contractual settlement charges, (x) equity investment and contingent value rights fair value adjustments, including adjustments attributed to limited partnership equity method investments and (xi) amortization of fair value adjustments of debt acquired from Celgene in our 2019 exchange offer, among other items. Deferred and current income taxes attributed to these items are also adjusted for considering their individual impact to the overall tax expense, deductibility and jurisdictional tax rates. Certain other significant tax items are also excluded such as the impact resulting from internal transfers of intangible and other assets to streamline our legal entity structure subsequent to the Celgene acquisition and the GILTI tax charge upon finalization of the Otezla* divestiture in 2020. We also provide international revenues for our priority products excluding the impact of foreign exchange. We calculate foreign exchange impacts by converting our current-period local currency financial results using the prior period average currency rates and comparing these adjusted amounts to our current-period results. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures to the most comparable GAAP measures are included in Exhibit 99.2 to our Form 8-K filed on February 4, 2022 and are incorporated herein by reference.
Non-GAAP information is intended to portray the results of our baseline performance, supplement or enhance management, analysts and investors’ overall understanding of our underlying financial performance and facilitate comparisons among current, past and future periods. For example, non-GAAP earnings and EPS information is an indication of our baseline performance before items that are considered by us to not be reflective of our ongoing results. In addition, this information is among the primary indicators that we use as a basis for evaluating performance, allocating resources, setting incentive compensation targets and planning and forecasting for future periods. This information is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net earnings or diluted EPS prepared in accordance with GAAP and may not be the same as or comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies due to possible differences in method and in the items being adjusted. We encourage investors to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.
Specified items were as follows:
(a) Includes amortization of purchase price adjustments to Celgene debt.
The reconciliations from GAAP to Non-GAAP were as follows:
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our net debt position was as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We regularly assess our anticipated working capital needs, debt and leverage levels, debt maturities, capital expenditure requirements, dividend payouts, potential share repurchases and future investments or acquisitions in order to maximize shareholder return, efficiently finance our ongoing operations and maintain flexibility for future strategic transactions. We also regularly evaluate our capital structure to ensure financial risks, adequate liquidity access and lower cost of capital are efficiently managed, which may lead to the issuance of additional debt securities, the repurchase of debt securities prior to maturity or the issuance or repurchase of common stock. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable debt securities together with cash generated from operations and, if required, from the issuance of commercial paper will be sufficient to satisfy our anticipated cash needs for at least the next few years, including dividends, capital expenditures, milestone payments, working capital, restructuring initiatives, business development, repurchase of common stock, debt maturities of approximately $15.1 billion through 2025 as well as any debt repurchases through redemptions or tender offers.
We have a share repurchase program authorized by our Board of Directors allowing for repurchases of our shares. The specific timing and number of shares repurchased will be determined by our management at its discretion and will vary based on market conditions, securities law limitations and other factors. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number of shares, does not have a specific expiration date and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. The repurchases may be effected through a combination of one or more open market repurchases, privately negotiated transactions, transactions structured through investment banking institutions and other derivative transactions, relying on Rule 10b-18 and Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act. The outstanding share repurchase authorization under the program was $4.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. Our Board of Directors approved an increase to the share repurchase authorization of our common stock of $2.0 billion in January 2021 and $15.0 billion in December 2021. We repurchased approximately 102 million shares of our common stock for $6.2 billion in 2021. The remaining share repurchase capacity under the share repurchase program was approximately $15.2 billion as of December 31, 2021. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 16. Equity” for additional information.
In February 2022, we executed accelerated share repurchase (“ASR”) agreements to repurchase an aggregate $5.0 billion of our common stock. These ASR agreements were funded with cash on-hand and are expected to settle during the second and third quarters of 2022. The total number of shares to be repurchased under the ASR agreements will be based on volume-weighted average prices of our common stock during the terms of the ASR transactions less a discount and subject to adjustments pursuant to the terms and conditions of the ASR agreements..
Dividend payments were $4.4 billion in 2021 and $4.1 billion in 2020. Dividends are authorized on a quarterly basis by our Board of Directors.
Under our commercial paper program, we may issue a maximum of $5 billion unsecured notes that have maturities of not more than 366 days from the date of issuance. There were no commercial paper borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
In 2021, we purchased an aggregate principal amount of $3.5 billion of certain debt securities for approximately $4.0 billion of cash in a series of tender offers and “make whole” redemptions and $2.0 billion of notes matured and were repaid.
At December 31, 2021, we had four separate revolving credit facilities totaling $6.0 billion, which consisted of a 364-day $2.0 billion facility which expired in January 2022, a three-year $1.0 billion facility which expired in January 2022 and two five-year $1.5 billion facilities that were extended to September 2025 and July 2026, respectively. No borrowings were outstanding under any revolving credit facility at December 31, 2021 or 2020.
In January 2022, we entered into a five-year $5.0 billion facility expiring in January 2027, which is extendable annually by one year with the consent of the lenders. This facility provides for customary terms and conditions with no financial covenants and may be used to provide backup liquidity for our commercial paper borrowings. Concurrently with the entry into this facility, the commitments under our existing five-year $1.5 billion facilities were terminated and the three-year $1.0 billion facility and 364-day $2.0 billion facility expired in accordance with their terms in January 2022.
Our investment portfolio includes marketable debt securities, which are subject to changes in fair value as a result of interest rate fluctuations and other market factors. Our investment policy establishes limits on the amount and time to maturity of investments with any institution. The policy also requires that investments are only entered into with corporate and financial institutions that meet high credit quality standards. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 9. Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements” for further information.
Capital Expenditures
Annual capital expenditures were approximately $970 million in 2021, $750 million in 2020 and $800 million in 2019 and are expected to be approximately $1.2 billion in both 2022 and 2023. We continue to make capital expenditures in connection with the expansion of our cell therapy and other manufacturing capabilities, research and development and other facility-related activities.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and commitments that obligate us to make payments in the future. Information regarding our obligations relating to debt, income taxes and lease arrangements are provided in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 7. Income Taxes”, “-Note 9. Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements” and “-Note 13. Leases”, respectively.
We are committed to an aggregate $21.1 billion of potential contingent future research and development milestone payments to third parties for in-licensing, asset acquisitions and development programs including early-stage milestones of $7.4 billion (milestones achieved through Phase III clinical studies) and late-stage milestones of $13.7 billion (milestones achieved post Phase III clinical studies). Payments generally are due and payable only upon achievement of certain developmental and regulatory milestones for which the specific timing cannot be predicted. Certain agreements also provide for sales-based milestones aggregating to $15.0 billion that we would be obligated to pay upon achievement of certain sales levels in addition to royalties. We also have certain manufacturing, development and commercialization obligations in connection with alliance arrangements. It is not practicable to estimate the amount of these obligations. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 3. Alliances” for further information regarding our alliances.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are material or reasonably likely to become material to our financial condition or results of operations.
Credit Ratings
Our current long-term and short-term credit ratings assigned by Moody’s Investors Service are A2 and Prime-1, respectively, with a stable long-term credit outlook, and our current long-term and short-term credit ratings assigned by Standard & Poor’s are A+ and A-1, respectively with a negative long-term credit outlook. The long-term ratings reflect the agencies’ opinion that we have a low default risk but are somewhat susceptible to adverse effects of changes in circumstances and economic conditions. The short-term ratings reflect the agencies’ opinion that we have good to extremely strong capacity for timely repayment. Any credit rating downgrade may affect the interest rate of any debt we may incur, the fair market value of existing debt and our ability to access the capital markets generally.
Cash Flows
The following is a discussion of cash flow activities:
Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities represents the cash receipts and disbursements from all of our activities other than investing and financing activities. Operating cash flow is derived by adjusting net earnings for noncontrolling interest, non-cash operating items, gains and losses attributed to investing and financing activities and changes in operating assets and liabilities resulting from timing differences between the receipts and payments of cash and when the transactions are recognized in our results of operations. As a result, changes in cash from operating activities reflect the timing of cash collections from customers and alliance partners; payments to suppliers, alliance partners and employees; customer discounts and rebates; and tax payments in the ordinary course of business.
The $2.2 billion change in cash flow from operating activities compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher cash collections and timing of payments in the ordinary course of business, lower Celgene restructuring and integration payments ($400 million) and cash settlement of MyoKardia unvested stock awards in 2020 ($500 million), partially offset by reversion of post-retirement plan assets ($300 million) in 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash requirements from investing activities include cash used for acquisitions, manufacturing and facility-related capital expenditures and purchases of marketable securities with original maturities greater than 90 days at the time of purchase, proceeds from business divestitures (including royalties), the sale and maturity of marketable securities, sale of equity investments and upfront and contingent milestones from licensing arrangements.
The $10.3 billion change in cash flow from investing activities compared to 2020 was due to lower licensing and asset acquisition payments of $11.5 billion primarily resulting from the MyoKardia acquisition in 2020 and higher proceeds from sales of equity investments of approximately $2.4 billion in 2021, partially offset by changes in the amount of marketable debt securities held of $3.4 billion.
Financing Activities
Cash requirements from financing activities include cash used to pay dividends, repurchase common stock and repay long-term debt and other borrowings reduced by proceeds from the exercise of stock options and issuance of long-term debt and other borrowings.
The $15.1 billion change in cash flow from financing activities compared to 2020 was primarily due to debt issuances of approximately $7.0 billion to partially fund the MyoKardia acquisition in 2020, higher debt repayments of $3.3 billion, including a series of tender offer and “make whole” redemptions, and higher share repurchases of $4.7 billion in 2021.
SEC Consent Order
As previously disclosed, on August 4, 2004, we entered into a final settlement with the SEC, concluding an investigation concerning certain wholesaler inventory and accounting matters. The settlement was reached through a Consent, a copy of which was attached as Exhibit 10 to our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the period ended September 30, 2004.
Under the terms of the Consent, we agreed, subject to certain defined exceptions, to limit sales of all products sold to our direct customers (including wholesalers, distributors, hospitals, retail outlets, pharmacies and government purchasers) based on expected demand or on amounts that do not exceed approximately one month of inventory on hand, without making a timely public disclosure of any change in practice. We also agreed in the Consent to certain measures that we have implemented including: (a) establishing a formal review and certification process of our annual and quarterly reports filed with the SEC; (b) establishing a business risk and disclosure group; (c) retaining an outside consultant to comprehensively study and help re-engineer our accounting and financial reporting processes; (d) publicly disclosing any sales incentives offered to direct customers for the purpose of inducing them to purchase products in excess of expected demand; and (e) ensuring that our budget process gives appropriate weight to inputs that come from the bottom to the top, and not just from the top to the bottom, and adequately documenting that process.
We have established a company-wide policy concerning our sales to direct customers for the purpose of complying with the Consent, which includes the adoption of various procedures to monitor and limit sales to direct customers in accordance with the terms of the Consent. These procedures include a governance process to escalate to appropriate management levels potential questions or concerns regarding compliance with the policy and timely resolution of such questions or concerns. In addition, compliance with the policy is monitored on a regular basis.
We maintain DSAs with our U.S. pharmaceutical wholesalers, which account for nearly 100% of our gross U.S. revenues. Under the current terms of the DSAs, our wholesaler customers provide us with weekly information with respect to months on hand product-level inventories and the amount of out-movement of products. The three largest wholesalers currently account for approximately 76% of our gross U.S. revenues. The inventory information received from our wholesalers, together with our internal information, is used to estimate months on hand product level inventories at these wholesalers. We estimate months on hand product inventory levels for our U.S. business’s wholesaler customers other than the three largest wholesalers by extrapolating from the months on hand calculated for the three largest wholesalers. In contrast, our non-U.S. business has significantly more direct customers, limited information on direct customer product level inventory and corresponding out-movement information and the reliability of third-party demand information, where available, varies widely. Accordingly, we rely on a variety of methods to estimate months on hand product level inventories for these business units.
We believe the above-described procedures provide a reasonable basis to ensure compliance with the Consent.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For recently issued accounting standards, refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1. Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards.”
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. Our critical accounting policies are those that significantly affect our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Because of this uncertainty, actual results may vary from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Our accounting policy for revenue recognition has a substantial impact on reported results and relies on certain estimates. Revenue is recognized following a five-step model: (i) identify the customer contract; (ii) identify the contract’s performance obligation; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation; and (v) recognize revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied. Revenue is also reduced for GTN sales adjustments discussed below, all of which involve significant estimates and judgment after considering legal interpretations of applicable laws and regulations, historical experience, payer channel mix (e.g. Medicare or Medicaid), current contract prices under applicable programs, unbilled claims and processing time lags and inventory levels in the distribution channel. Estimates are assessed each period and adjusted as required to revise information or actual experience.
The following categories of GTN adjustments involve significant estimates, judgments and information obtained from external sources. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 2. Revenue” for further discussion and analysis of each significant category of GTN sales adjustments.
Charge-backs and cash discounts
Our U.S. business participates in programs with government entities, the most significant of which are the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, and other parties, including covered entities under the 340B Drug Pricing Program, whereby pricing on products is extended below wholesaler list price to participating entities. These entities purchase products through wholesalers at the lower program price and the wholesalers then charge us the difference between their acquisition cost and the lower program price. Accounts receivable is reduced for the estimated amount of unprocessed charge-back claims attributable to a sale (typically within a two to four week time lag).
In the U.S. and certain other countries, customers are offered cash discounts as an incentive for prompt payment, generally approximating 2% of the invoiced sales price. Accounts receivable is reduced for the estimated amount of cash discount at the time of sale and the discount is typically taken by the customer within one month.
Medicaid and Medicare rebates
Our U.S. business participates in state government Medicaid programs and other qualifying Federal and state government programs requiring discounts and rebates to participating state and local government entities. All discounts and rebates provided through these programs are included in our Medicaid rebate accrual. Medicaid rebates have also been extended to drugs used in managed Medicaid plans. The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled rebates is presented as a liability.
Rebates and discounts are offered to managed healthcare organizations in the U.S. managing prescription drug programs and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans covering the Medicare Part D drug benefit. We also pay a 70% point of service discount to the CMS when the Medicare Part D beneficiaries are in the coverage gap. The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled rebates and discounts is presented as a liability.
Other rebates, returns, discounts and adjustments
Other GTN sales adjustments include sales returns and all other programs based on applicable laws and regulations for individual non-U.S. countries as well as rebates offered to managed healthcare organizations in the U.S. to a lesser extent. The non-U.S. programs include several different pricing schemes such as cost caps, volume discounts, outcome-based pricing schemes and pricing claw-backs that are based on sales of individual companies or an aggregation of all companies participating in a specific market. The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled rebates and discounts is presented as a liability.
Estimated returns for established products are determined after considering historical experience and other factors including levels of inventory in the distribution channel, estimated shelf life, product recalls, product discontinuances, price changes of competitive products, introductions of generic products, introductions of competitive new products and lower demand following the loss of market exclusivity. Estimated returns for new products are determined after considering historical sales return experience of similar products, such as those within the same product line, similar therapeutic area and/or similar distribution model and estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel and projected demand. The estimated amount for product returns is presented as a liability.
Use of information from external sources
Information from external sources is used to estimate GTN adjustments. Our estimate of inventory at the wholesalers is based on the projected prescription demand-based sales for our products and historical inventory experience, as well as our analysis of third-party information, including written and oral information obtained from certain wholesalers with respect to their inventory levels and sell-through to customers and third-party market research data, and our internal information. The inventory information received from wholesalers is a product of their recordkeeping process and excludes inventory held by intermediaries to whom they sell, such as retailers and hospitals.
We have also continued the practice of combining retail and mail prescription volume on a retail-equivalent basis. We use this methodology for internal demand forecasts. We also use information from external sources to identify prescription trends, patient demand and average selling prices. Our estimates are subject to inherent limitations of estimates that rely on third-party information, as certain third-party information was itself in the form of estimates, and reflect other limitations including lags between the date as of which third-party information is generated and the date on which we receive third-party information.
Long-lived Assets
Intangible Assets Valuations
A significant amount of the purchase price for the Celgene acquisition was allocated to intangible assets, including acquired marketed product rights and IPRD assets. Our intangible assets were $42.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 and $53.2 billion as of December 31, 2020.
Identifiable intangible assets are measured at their respective fair values as of the acquisition date. We engaged an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in determining the fair values of these assets as of the acquisition date. The fair value of these assets were estimated using discounted cash flow models. These models required the use of the following significant estimates and assumptions among others:
•Identification of product candidates with sufficient substance requiring separate recognition;
•Estimates of revenues and operating profits related to commercial products or product candidates;
•Eligible patients, pricing and market share used in estimating future revenues;
•Probability of success for unapproved product candidates and additional indications for commercial products;
•Resources required to complete the development and approval of product candidates;
•Timing of regulatory approvals and exclusivity;
•Appropriate discount rate by products;
•Market participant income tax rates; and
•Allocation of expected synergies to products.
We believe the estimated and preliminary fair value assigned to intangible assets acquired used reasonable estimates and assumptions considering the facts and circumstances as of the acquisition date.
Impairment and Amortization of Long-lived Assets, including Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets include intangible assets and property, plant and equipment and are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable or at least annually for IPRD. Intangible assets are highly vulnerable to impairment charges, particularly newly acquired assets for recently launched products or IPRD. These assets are initially measured at fair value and therefore any reduction in expectations used in the valuations could potentially lead to impairment. Some of the more common potential risks leading to impairment include changes in competitive landscape, earlier than expected loss of market exclusivity, pricing reductions, adverse regulatory changes or clinical study results, delay or failure to obtain regulatory approval for initial or follow on indications and unanticipated development costs, inability to achieve expected synergies resulting from cost savings and avoidance, higher operating costs, changes in tax laws and other macro-economic changes. The complexity in estimating the fair value of intangible assets in connection with an impairment test is similar to the initial valuation. If the carrying value of long-lived assets exceeds its fair value, then the asset is written-down to its fair value. Expectations of future cash flows are subject to change based upon the near and long-term production volumes and margins generated by the asset as well as any potential alternative future use. The estimated useful lives of long-lived assets is subjective and requires significant judgment regarding patent lives, future plans and external market factors. Long-lived assets are also periodically reviewed for changes in facts or circumstances resulting in a reduction to the estimated useful life of the asset, requiring the acceleration of depreciation or amortization. In 2021, an impairment charge of $315 million was recognized in Cost of products sold as the carrying value of Inrebic EU regulatory approval milestones exceeded the projected undiscounted cash flows of the assets. Additionally, impairment charges of $840 million were recorded in Research and development expense relating to two IPRD assets. Refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 14. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” for further discussion and analysis of these impairment charges.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill was $20.5 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We assess the goodwill balance within our single reporting unit annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable to determine whether any impairment in this asset may exist and, if so, the extent of such impairment. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment by assessing qualitative factors, including comparing our market capitalization to the carrying value of our assets. Events or circumstances that might require an interim evaluation include unexpected adverse business conditions, economic factors, unanticipated technological changes or competitive activities and acts by governments and courts.
Income Taxes
Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. The assessment of whether or not a valuation allowance is required often requires significant judgment including long-range forecasts of future taxable income and evaluation of tax planning initiatives. Adjustments to the deferred tax valuation allowances are made to earnings in the period when such assessments are made. Our deferred tax assets were $2.7 billion at December 31, 2021 (net of valuation allowances of $1.1 billion) and $3.5 billion at December 31, 2020 (net of valuation allowances of $2.8 billion).
The U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards were $585 million at December 31, 2021. These carryforwards were acquired as a result of certain acquisitions and are subject to limitations under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. The net operating loss carryforwards expire in varying amounts beginning in 2022. The foreign and state net operating loss carryforwards expire in varying amounts beginning in 2021 (certain amounts have unlimited lives).
Prior to the Mead Johnson split-off in 2009, the following transactions occurred: (i) an internal spin-off of Mead Johnson shares while still owned by us; (ii) conversion of Mead Johnson Class B shares to Class A shares; and (iii) conversion of Mead Johnson & Company to a limited liability company. These transactions as well as the split-off of Mead Johnson through the exchange offer should qualify as tax-exempt transactions under the Internal Revenue Code based upon a private letter ruling received from the Internal Revenue Service related to the conversion of Mead Johnson Class B shares to Class A shares, and outside legal opinions.
Certain assumptions, representations and covenants by Mead Johnson were relied upon regarding the future conduct of its business and other matters which could affect the tax treatment of the exchange. For example, the current tax law generally creates a presumption that the exchange would be taxable to us, if Mead Johnson or its shareholders were to engage in transactions that result in a 50% or greater change in its stock ownership during a four year period beginning two years before the exchange offer, unless it is established that the exchange offer were not part of a plan or series of related transactions to effect such a change in ownership. If the internal spin-off or exchange offer were determined not to qualify as a tax exempt transaction, the transaction could be subject to tax as if the exchange was a taxable sale by us at market value.
In addition, a negative basis or excess loss account (“ELA”) existed in our investment in stock of Mead Johnson prior to these transactions. We received an opinion from outside legal counsel to the effect that it is more likely than not that we eliminated the ELA as part of these transactions and do not have taxable income with respect to the ELA. The tax law in this area is complex and it is possible that even if the internal spin-off and the exchange offer is tax exempt under the Internal Revenue Code, the Internal Revenue Service could assert that we have additional taxable income for the period with respect to the ELA. We could be exposed to additional taxes if this were to occur. Based upon our understanding of the Internal Revenue Code and opinion from outside legal counsel, a tax reserve of $244 million was established reducing the gain on disposal of Mead Johnson included in discontinued operations in 2009.
We agreed to certain tax related indemnities with Mead Johnson as set forth in the tax sharing agreement, including certain taxes related to its business prior to the completion of the initial public offering and created as part of the restructuring to facilitate the IPO. Mead Johnson has also agreed to indemnify us for potential tax effects resulting from the breach of certain representations discussed above as well as certain transactions related to the acquisition of Mead Johnson’s stock or assets.
Liabilities are established for possible assessments by tax authorities resulting from known tax exposures including, but not limited to, transfer pricing matters, tax credits and deductibility of certain expenses. Such liabilities represent a reasonable provision for taxes ultimately expected to be paid and may need to be adjusted over time as more information becomes known.
For discussions on income taxes, refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1. Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards-Income Taxes” and “-Note 7. Income Taxes.”
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are subject to contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business, that cover a wide range of matters, including, among others, government investigations, shareholder lawsuits, product and environmental liability, contractual claims and tax matters. We recognize accruals for such contingencies when it is probable that a liability will be incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. These estimates are subject to uncertainties that are difficult to predict and, as such, actual results could vary from these estimates.
For discussions on contingencies, refer to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Note 1. Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards-Contingencies,” “-Note 7. Income Taxes” and “-Note 19. Legal Proceedings and Contingencies.”
Product and Pipeline Developments
Our R&D programs are managed on a portfolio basis from early discovery through late-stage development and include a balance of early-stage and late-stage programs to support future growth. Our late stage R&D programs in Phase III development include both investigational compounds for initial indications and additional indications or formulations for marketed products. Spending on these programs represent approximately 40% of our annual R&D expenses in the last three years. Opdivo was the only investigational compound or marketed product that represented greater than 10% of our R&D expenses in the last three years. Our late-stage development programs could potentially have an impact on our revenue and earnings within the next few years if regulatory approvals are obtained and products are successfully commercialized. The following are the developments in our marketed products and our late-stage pipeline:
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo Bladder August 2021 Announced FDA approval for Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of patients with urothelial carcinoma who are at high risk of recurrence after undergoing radical resection, regardless of prior neoadjuvant chemotherapy, nodal involvement or PD-L1 status. The approval is based on the Phase III CheckMate-274 trial.
March 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced the submission of a supplemental application for Opdivo to expand its use as adjuvant therapy of resected urothelial cancer, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval. The application is based on results from the global Phase III CheckMate-274 (ONO-4538-33) trial.
March 2021 Announced that the EMA validated the type II variation application for Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of patients with surgically resected, high-risk muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma. The application is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-274 trial.
Gastric and Esophageal Cancers November 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approved Opdivo for expanded use for the first-line treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent gastric cancer in combination with chemotherapy, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval. The approval is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-649 (ONO-4538-44) trial.
November 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approved Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of esophageal cancer, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval. The approval is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-577 (ONO-4538-43) trial.
October 2021 Announced EC approval of Opdivo in combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-based combination chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of adult patients with HER2-negative advanced or metastatic gastric, gastroesophageal junction, or esophageal adenocarcinoma whose tumors express PD-L1 with a combined positive score ≥ 5. The approval is based on results from the Phase III Checkmate-649 trial.
July 2021 Announced EC approval of Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of adult patients with esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer who have residual pathologic disease following prior neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. The approval is based on results from the Phase 3 CheckMate-577 trial.
May 2021 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo for the adjuvant treatment of patients with completely resected esophageal or gastroesophageal junction cancer with residual pathologic disease who have received neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. The approval is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-577 trial.
April 2021 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo in combination with combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-containing chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with advanced or metastatic gastric cancer, gastroesophageal junction cancer, and esophageal adenocarcinoma, regardless of PD-L1 expression status. The approval is based on the Phase III CheckMate-649 trial.
April 2021 Announced positive topline results from the Phase III CheckMate-648 trial evaluating treatment with Opdivo plus chemotherapy or Opdivo plus Yervoy in patients with unresectable advanced or metastatic ESCC. Opdivo plus chemotherapy met primary and secondary endpoints of overall survival in patients with tumors expressing PD-L1 and in the all-randomized patient population, and also the primary endpoint of progression free survival in the PD-L1+ population. Opdivo plus Yervoy met primary and secondary endpoints of overall survival in both populations, whereas the other primary endpoint of progression free survival in the PD-L1+ population was not met.
HCC July 2021 Announced that in consultation with the FDA, we withdrew the U.S. indication for Opdivo in HCC following treatment with sorafenib. Opdivo was granted accelerated approval for this indication in 2017 based on tumor responses from the Phase I/II CheckMate-040 trial. CheckMate-459, the confirmatory randomized study of Opdivo versus sorafenib in the first-line setting, did not achieve statistical significance for its primary endpoint of overall survival per the pre-specified analysis.
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo Hodgkin Lymphoma September 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approved Opdivo for the treatment of pediatric patients with recurrent or refractory classical Hodgkin lymphoma, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval. The approval is based on results from the Phase I PENGUIN trial.
NSCLC November 2021 Announced the Phase III CheckMate-816 trial met the primary endpoint of improved event-free survival in patients with resectable stage IB to IIIA NSCLC. In a prespecified interim analysis, Opdivo plus chemotherapy showed a statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvement in event-free survival compared to chemotherapy alone when given before surgery.
RCC August 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approved the combination therapy of Opdivo and CABOMETYX* for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic RCC, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval. The approval is based on results from the Phase III Checkmate-9ER trial.
April 2021 Announced EC approval of Opdivo in combination with CABOMETYX* for the first-line treatment of adults with advanced RCC. The approval is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-9ER trial.
January 2021 Announced FDA approval of Opdivo in combination with CABOMETYX* for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced RCC. The approval is based on the Phase III CheckMate-9ER trial.
Opdivo + Yervoy CRC June 2021 Announced EC approval of Opdivo plus Yervoy for the treatment of adult patients with mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) or microsatellite instability-high mCRC after prior fluoropyrimidine-based combination chemotherapy. The approval is based on results from the Phase II CheckMate-142 trial.
Melanoma May 2021 Announced new six-and-a-half year data from the Phase III CheckMate-067 trial demonstrating durable improvement in survival with first-line Opdivo plus Yervoy therapy and Opdivo monotherapy, versus Yervoy alone, in patients with advanced melanoma.
Esophageal September 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted the sBLA for Opdivo in combination with Yervoy and Opdivo in combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-containing chemotherapy as first-line treatments for adult patients with unresectable advanced, recurrent or metastatic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The FDA assigned a PDUFA goal date of May 28, 2022. The sBLA submissions were based on the Phase III Checkmate-648 trial.
September 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the companies have submitted supplemental applications in Japan for Opdivo in combination with Yervoy and Opdivo in combination with chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of unresectable, advanced or recurrent esophageal cancer, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approvals in Japan. The applications are based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-648 trial.
August 2021 Announced that the EMA validated its MAA for both Opdivo in combination with Yervoy and Opdivo in combination with fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-containing chemotherapy as first-line treatments for adult patients with unresectable advanced, recurrent or metastatic esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. Validation of these applications confirm that the submissions are complete and begins the EMA’s centralized review process. The applications are based on results from the pivotal Phase III CheckMate-648 trial.
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma September 2021 Announced three-year data from the CheckMate-743 trial that demonstrated a durable survival benefit with first-line treatment with Opdivo plus Yervoy compared to platinum-based standard-of-care chemotherapy in patients with unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma, regardless of histology.
June 2021 Announced EC approval of Opdivo plus Yervoy for the first line treatment of adults with unresectable malignant pleural mesothelioma. The approval is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-743 trial.
May 2021 Ono, our alliance partner for Opdivo in Japan, announced that the companies received approval for combination therapy of Opdivo and Yervoy in Japan for the first-line treatment of unresectable advanced or recurrent malignant pleural mesothelioma, for a partial change in approved items of the manufacturing and marketing approval. The approval is based on results from the Phase III CheckMate-743 trial.
Product Indication Date Developments
Opdivo + Yervoy RCC September 2021 Announced that Opdivo plus Yervoy continued to demonstrate durable, long-term survival in the Phase III CheckMate-214 trial, with a five-year survival rate of 48% in patients with previously untreated advanced or metastatic RCC. After a median follow-up of 67.7 months, Opdivo plus Yervoy maintained superior overall survival and response benefits versus sunitinib in both patients with intermediate- and poor-risk prognostic factors, the primary endpoint population, and across all randomized patients.
NSCLC May 2021 Announced that Part 1 of the Phase III CheckMate-227 trial continues to demonstrate the long-term survival benefits of first-line treatment with Opdivo plus Yervoy compared to chemotherapy in patients with advanced NSCLC, regardless of PD-L1 expression level or histology, with a minimum follow-up of over four years.
May 2021 Announced that Opdivo plus Yervoy with two cycles of chemotherapy showed a durable survival benefit compared to four cycles of chemotherapy alone after two years of follow-up in previously untreated patients with advanced NSCLC in the Phase III CheckMate-9LA trial.
SCCHN July 2021 Announced an update on the Phase III CheckMate-651 trial comparing Opdivo plus Yervoy to the EXTREME regimen (cetuximab, cisplatin/carboplatin and fluorouracil) as a first-line treatment in platinum-eligible patients with recurrent or metastatic SCCHN. Although Opdivo plus Yervoy showed a clear, positive trend towards overall survival in patients whose tumors express PD-L1 with a combined positive score ≥ 20, the study did not meet its primary endpoints.
Orencia aGvHD December 2021 Announced FDA approval of Orencia for the prevention, of aGvHD, in combination with a calcineurin inhibitor and methotrexate, in adults and pediatric patients two years of age and older undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation from a matched or one allele-mismatched unrelated donor. The approval is based on results from the Phase II ABA2 trial.
Reblozyl Beta Thalassemia December 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted for priority review the sBLA for Reblozyl for the treatment of anemia in adults with non-transfusion dependent beta thalassemia. The FDA has set a PDUFA goal date of March 27, 2022. The sBLA is based on results from the Phase II BEYOND trial.
December 2021 Announced that the EMA validated its MAA for Reblozyl for the treatment of anemia in adults with non-transfusion dependent beta thalassemia. Validation of the application confirms that the submission is complete and begins the EMA’s centralized review process. The application is based on results from the pivotal Phase II BEYOND trial.
June 2021 Announced with Acceleron, that Phase II BEYOND study evaluating Reblozyl plus best supportive care in adult patients with non-transfusion dependent beta thalassemia demonstrated that 77.7% of patients treated with Reblozyl achieved a hemoglobin increase (≥1.0 gram/deciliter) compared to 0% of patients in the placebo arm.
Zeposia UC November 2021 Announced EC approval of Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC who have had an inadequate response, lost response, or were intolerant to either conventional therapy or a biologic agent. The approval is based on data from the pivotal Phase III True North trial.
May 2021 Announced FDA approval of Zeposia for the treatment of adults with moderately to severely active UC. The approval is based on data from the pivotal Phase III True North trial.
MS October 2021 Announced interim results from the Phase III open-label extension trial DAYBREAK, demonstrating the long-term efficacy and safety profile of Zeposia in patients with relapsing forms of MS. In the DAYBREAK extension study, safety was consistent with prior findings and no new safety signals emerged during the reporting period with long-term use of Zeposia. Treatment with Zeposia demonstrated a low annualized relapse rate of 0.103. At months 36 and 48, 75% and 71% of participants were relapse-free and 3- and 6-month confirmed disability progression was observed in 13.9% and 11.4% of participants in the trial, respectively.
Inrebic Myelofibrosis February 2021 Announced EC approval of Inrebic for the treatment of disease-related splenomegaly (enlarged spleen) or symptoms in adult patients with primary myelofibrosis, post-polycythaemia vera myelofibrosis or post-essential thrombocythaemia myelofibrosis, who are JAK inhibitor naïve or have been treated with ruxolitinib.
Onureg AML June 2021 Announced EC approval of Onureg as a maintenance therapy in adult patients with AML who achieved complete remission or complete remission with incomplete blood count recovery following induction therapy with or without consolidation treatment and who are not candidates for, including those who choose not to proceed to, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. The approval is based on data from the Phase III QUAZAR AML-001 study.
Product Indication Date Developments
Breyanzi Lymphoma January 2022 Received a positive CHMP opinion of Breyanzi for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, and follicular lymphoma grade 3B after two or more lines of systemic therapy. The opinion is based on data from the TRANSCEND NHL 001 trial.
June 2021 Announced positive topline results from the Phase III TRANSFORM trial evaluating Breyanzi as a second-line treatment in adults with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma compared to salvage therapy followed by high-dose chemotherapy and hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Results of a pre-specified interim analysis conducted by an independent review committee showed the study met its primary endpoint of demonstrating a clinically meaningful and highly statistically significant improvement in event-free survival, as well as key secondary endpoints of complete response rate and progression-free survival compared to standard of care.
March 2021 Announced Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Breyanzi for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma1 and relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma.
February 2021 Announced FDA approval of Breyanzi, for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory large B-cell lymphoma after two or more lines of systemic therapy, including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (including DLBCL arising from indolent lymphoma), high-grade B-cell lymphoma, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, and follicular lymphoma grade 3B.
Abecma Multiple Myeloma January 2022 Announced Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare approval of Abecma for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma, who have received at least three prior therapies, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor and an anti-CD38 antibody, and have either experienced disease progression on the last therapy or relapse after the last therapy. The approval is based on results from the Phase II BB2121-MM-001 and Phase I CRB-401 trials.
August 2021 Announced EC approval for Abecma for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma, who have received at least three prior therapies, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor and an anti-CD38 antibody and have demonstrated disease progression on the last therapy. The approval is based on results from the pivotal KarMMa study.
March 2021 Announced with bluebird FDA approval of Abecma (idecabtagene vicleucel; ide-cel) for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma after four or more prior lines of therapy, including an immunomodulatory agent, a proteasome inhibitor, and an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody. The approval is based on results from the pivotal Phase II KarMMA study.
deucravacitinib
UC October 2021 Announced the Phase II LATTICE-UC study evaluating deucravacitinib compared to placebo in moderate to severe UC did not meet the primary efficacy endpoint of clinical remission at Week 12, nor secondary efficacy endpoints. The safety profile of deucravacitinib was consistent with previously reported studies in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis, and no new safety signals were observed. The potential of deucravacitinib in UC continues to be evaluated in IM011-127, a second Phase II trial that also includes a higher dose.
Plaque Psoriasis November 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted the NDA for deucravacitinib for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. The FDA has set a PDUFA goal date of September 10, 2022. The NDA is based on results from the Phase III POETYK PSO-1 and POETYK PSO-2 trials.
November 2021 Announced that the EMA validated its MAA for deucravacitinib for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. Validation of the application confirms that the submission is complete and begins the EMA’s centralized review process. The application is based on results from the Phase III POETYK PSO-1 and POETYK PSO-2 trials.
November 2021 Announced Japan's Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare has accepted the NDA for deucravacitinib for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, pustular psoriasis and erythrodermic psoriasis. The application is based on results from the Phase III POETYK PSO-1 and POETYK PSO-2 trials.
February 2021 Announced positive results from POETYK PSO-2, the second pivotal Phase III trial evaluating deucravacitinib (tyrosine kinase 2 inhibitor) for the treatment of patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. POETYK PSO-2 met both co-primary endpoints versus placebo, with significantly more patients achieving Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI 75), defined as at least a 75 percent improvement of baseline PASI, and a static Physician's Global Assessment (sPGA) score of clear or almost clear (sPGA 0/1) after 16 weeks of treatment.
Product Indication Date Developments
mavacamten
Obstructive HCM November 2021 Announced that the FDA has extended the review of the NDA for mavacamten for the treatment of patients with symptomatic obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy to April 28, 2022 to allow sufficient time to review information pertaining to updates to the proposed REMS.
October 2021 Announced that the EMA validated its MAA for mavacamten for the treatment of patients with obstructive HCM. Validation of the application confirm that the submission is complete and begins the EMA’s centralized review process. The application is based on results from the pivotal Phase III EXPLORER-HCM trial.
May 2021 Announced a new analysis of data from the Phase III EXPLORER-HCM study evaluating mavacamten, an investigational, first-in-class cardiac myosin inhibitor, in patients with oHCM. At 30 weeks, the change in Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire Overall Summary Score (KCCQ OSS) was greater in mavacamten patients than placebo, with similar benefits across all KCCQ subscales
March 2021 Announced that the FDA accepted the NDA for mavacamten, an investigational, novel, oral, allosteric modulator of cardiac myosin, for patients with symptomatic obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The FDA has assigned a PDUFA goal date of January 28, 2022.
relatlimab
Melanoma October 2021 Announced that the EMA validated its MAA for relatlimab and nivolumab fixed-dose combination for first-line treatment of adult and pediatric patients with advanced (unresectable or metastatic) melanoma. Validation of the application confirm that the submission is complete and begins the EMA’s centralized review process. The application is based on results from the pivotal Phase II/III RELATIVITY-047 trial.
September 2021 Announced that the FDA has accepted for priority review the BLA for the fixed dose combination of relatlimab and nivolumab for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma. The FDA assigned a PDUFA goal date of March 19, 2022. The BLA submission was based on the Phase II/III RELATIVITY-047 trial.
March 2021 Announced primary results from the Phase II/III RELATIVITY-047 (CA224-047) trial evaluating the fixed-dose combination of relatlimab, an anti-LAG-3 antibody, and Opdivo versus Opdivo alone in patients with previously untreated metastatic or unresectable melanoma. The trial met its primary endpoint of progression-free survival. Follow up for overall survival, a secondary endpoint, is ongoing. The fixed-dose combination was well-tolerated and there were no new safety signals reported in either the relatlimab and Opdivo combination arm or the Opdivo arm.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This 2021 Form 10-K (including documents incorporated by reference) and other written and oral statements we make from time to time contain certain “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. You can identify these forward-looking statements by the fact they use words such as “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “target,” “may,” “project,” “guidance,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “will” and other words and terms of similar meaning and expression in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. One can also identify forward-looking statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. Such forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and projections about our future financial results, goals, plans and objectives and involve inherent risks, assumptions and uncertainties, including internal or external factors that could delay, divert or change any of them in the next several years, and could cause our future financial results, goals, plans and objectives to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, the statements. These statements are likely to relate to, among other things, our goals, plans and objectives regarding our financial position, results of operations, cash flows, market position, product development, product approvals, sales efforts, expenses, performance or results of current and anticipated products, our business development strategy and in relation to our ability to realize the projected benefits of our acquisitions of Celgene and MyoKardia, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and the development and commercialization of our products, potential laws and regulations to lower drug prices, market actions taken by private and government payers to manage drug utilization and contain costs, the expiration of patents or data protection on certain products, including assumptions about our ability to retain marketing exclusivity of certain products, and the outcome of contingencies such as legal proceedings and financial results. No forward-looking statement can be guaranteed. We have included important factors in the cautionary statements included in this 2021 Form 10-K, particularly under “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” that we believe could cause actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statement.
Although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions, no assurance can be given that any goal or plan set forth in forward-looking statements can be achieved and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such statements, which speak only as of the date made. Additional risks that we may currently deem immaterial or that are not presently known to us could also cause the forward-looking events discussed in this 2021 Form 10-K not to occur. Except as otherwise required by federal securities law, we undertake no obligation to release publicly any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or otherwise after the date of this 2021 Form 10-K.