Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Such forward-looking statements, which represent our intent, belief, or current expectations, involve risks and uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan,” “predict,” “potential,” “believe,” “should” and similar expressions. Factors that could cause or contribute to differences in results include, but are not limited to, those set forth under Item 1.B. “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company leading the next evolution in cellular medicine by developing off-the-shelf placental-derived allogeneic cell therapies for the treatment of cancer and immune and infectious diseases. We are developing a pipeline of off-the-shelf placental-derived allogenic cell therapy product candidates including T cells engineered with a CAR, NK cells, and mesenchymal-like ASCs. These therapeutic candidates target indications across cancer, infectious and degenerative diseases. We believe that by harnessing the placenta’s unique biology and ready availability, we will be able to develop therapeutic solutions that address a significant unmet global need for effective, accessible and affordable therapeutics. We currently have three active clinical trials and plan to submit two additional IND applications in 2022.
Our Celularity IMPACT platform capitalizes on the benefits of placenta-derived cells to target multiple diseases, and provides seamless integration, from bio sourcing through manufacturing cryopreserved and packaged allogeneic cells, in our purpose-built U.S.-based approximately 150,000 square foot facility. We believe the use of placental-derived cells, sourced from the placentas of full-term healthy informed consent donors, has potential inherent advantages, from a scientific and an economic perspective. First, relative to adult-derived cells, placental-derived cells demonstrate greater stemness, meaning the ability to expand and persist. Second, placental-derived cells are immunologically naïve, meaning the cells have never been exposed to a specific antigen, and suggesting the potential for less toxicity and for low or no GvHD in transplant. Third, our placental-derived cells are allogeneic, meaning they are intended for use in any patient, as compared to autologous cells, which are derived from an individual patient for that patient’s sole use. We believe this a key difference that will enable readily available off-the-shelf treatments that can be delivered faster, more reliably, at greater scale and to more patients.
From a single source material, the postpartum human placenta, we derive four allogeneic cell types: T cells, unmodified NK cells, genetically modified NK cells and ASCs, which are used in five key cell therapeutic programs-CYCART-19, CYNK-001, CYNK-101, APPL-001, and PDA-002-that in turn are focused on six initial indications. CYCART-19 is a placental-derived CAR-T cell therapy, in development for the treatment of B-cell malignancies, initially targeting the CD19 receptor, the construct and related CARs for which are in-licensed from Sorrento. We plan to submit an IND and to commence a Phase 1 clinical trial of CYCART-19 in the first half of 2022. CYNK-001 is a placental-derived unmodified NK cell in development for the treatment of AML, a blood cancer, and for GBM, a solid tumor cancer. CYNK-001 is currently in Phase 1 trial for AML and a Phase 1/2a trial for GBM, respectively. CYNK-101 is genetically modified version of a placental-derived NK-cell. We initiated a Phase 1 trial of CYNK-101 in patients with HER2+ gastric and gastroesophageal cancers during the fourth quarter. CYNK-101 will be evaluated in combination with mAbs to target HER2+ (traztuzumab) and PDl-1 (pembrolizumab). APPL-001 is a placenta-derived ASC being developed for the treatment of Crohn’s disease, a degenerative disease. PDA-002 is a placenta-derived ASC being developed for the treatment of Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, or FSHD.
Our Celularity IMPACT manufacturing process is a seamless, fully integrated process designed to optimize speed and scalability from the sourcing of placentas from full-term healthy informed consent donors through the use of proprietary processing methods, cell selection, product-specific CMC, advanced cell manufacturing and cryopreservation. The result is a suite of allogeneic inventory-ready, on demand placental-derived cell therapy products. In addition, we have non-core legacy operations that are complementary to our work in placenta-derived cell therapeutics, including biobanking operations that include the collection, processing and cryogenic storage of certain birth byproducts for third-parties, and our degenerative disease business consists of the manufacture and sale of our Biovance and Interfyl products, directly and through our third-party distribution agreement. See “- Commercial Businesses” for more information regarding these operations.
Our current science is the product of the cumulative background and effort over two decades of our seasoned and experienced management team. We have our roots in Anthrogenesis, a company founded under the name Lifebank in 1998 by Robert J. Hariri, M.D., Ph.D., our founder and Chief Executive Officer, and acquired in 2002 by Celgene. The team continued to hone their expertise in the field of placental-derived technology at Celgene through August 2017, when we, acquired Anthrogenesis. Celularity has a robust global intellectual property portfolio comprised of over 1,500 patents and patent applications protecting our Celularity IMPACT platform, our processes, technologies and current key cell therapy programs. We believe this know-how, expertise and intellectual property will drive the rapid development and, if approved, commercialization of these potentially lifesaving therapies for patients with unmet medical needs.
Since inception, we have had significant operating losses. We had net losses of $100.1 million and $208.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $663.7 million at December 31, 2021. Our primary use of cash is to fund operations, which consist primarily of research and development expenses, and to a lesser extent, selling, general and administrative expenses. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when it pays these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and expect our research and development expenses, selling, general and administrative expenses, and capital expenditures will continue to increase. In particular, we expect our expenses and losses to increase as we continue development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our therapeutic candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved therapeutics, as well as hire additional personnel, develop commercial infrastructure for therapeutics, pay fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, and incur increased costs associated with being a public company such as expenses related to services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, insurance and investor relations costs. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
Based upon our current operating plan, we do not believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, along with the $46.5 million received in March 2022 related to the exercise of warrants, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the next twelve months. To date, we have not had any cellular therapeutics approved for sale and have not generated any revenues from the sale of our cellular therapeutics. We generate limited revenues from our biobanking and degenerative disease businesses. We do not expect to generate any revenues from cellular therapeutic product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our therapeutic candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our therapeutic candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to therapeutic sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution as our current commercialization efforts are limited to our biobanking and degenerative disease businesses. As a result, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from therapeutics, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Any failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies. If we are unable to raise capital, we will need to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities to reduce costs.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in increased unemployment, commodity and stock market volatility during the acute phase of the epidemic. Increases in vaccination rates and lower levels of reported cases suggest that the worst part of the pandemic may have passed. Should a new or mutated variant arise that results in further measures to combat its spread, there could be an adverse material impact to our financial condition, operating results, and timing and amounts of cash flows.
Although we were able to operate continuously throughout 2020 and 2021, we implemented “work from home” policies as needed following local health recommendations for non-essential employees and employees whose roles are able to be performed remotely. Management of remote workers can present special challenges and productivity may not be as high for remote workers. Because certain elements of our operations (such as processing placental tissue, certain biological assays, translational research and storage of cord blood) cannot be performed remotely, we instituted controls and protocols including mandatory temperature checking, symptom assessment forms, incremental cleaning and sanitization of common surfaces to mitigate risks to employees. Although we have not experienced any material disruption to date, there can be no assurance that our mitigation measures will continue to be effective and that there will not be a disruption to an important element of our business in the future.
Due to a broad decline in economic activity and restrictions on physical access to certain medical facilities, we did experience a decrease in the net revenues of our degenerative disease business due to the pandemic. As for clinical trials, we did not cancel or postpone enrollment solely due to the risks of COVID-19. However, enrollment in the clinical trial evaluating CYNK-001 for AML experienced some delays in the first half of 2020 and in mid 2021 as sites assessed their safety protocols and experienced high volumes of COVID-19 patients. We had a year-over-year increase in research and development expenses in 2021 notwithstanding the enrollment delays.
The extent to which COVID-19 or any other health epidemic may impact our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. Accordingly, COVID-19 could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition, and prospects.
Business Segments
Prior to the third quarter of 2020, we managed our operations as one segment. In the third quarter of 2020, we began to manage our operations through an evaluation of three distinct business segments: Cell Therapy, Degenerative Disease, and BioBanking. The reportable segments were determined based on the distinct nature of the activities performed by each segment. Cell Therapy broadly refers to cellular therapies we are researching and developing, which are unproven and in various phases of development. All of the cell
therapy programs fall into the Cell Therapy segment. We have no approved cell therapy product and have not generated revenue from the sale of cellular therapies to date. Degenerative Disease produces, sells and licenses products used in surgical and wound care markets, such as Biovance and Interfyl. We sell products in this segment both using our own sales force as well as independent distributors. We are developing additional tissue-based products for the Degenerative Disease segment. BioBanking collects stem cells from umbilical cords and placentas and provides storage of such cells on behalf of individuals for future use. We operate in the biobanking business primarily under the LifebankUSA brand. For more information about our reportable business segments refer to Note 18, “Segment Reporting” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report.
Acquisitions and Divestitures
Our current operations reflect strategic acquisitions and divestures that we have made since formation. Additional details regarding the following acquisitions can be found in Note 1, “Nature of Business and Basis of Presentation” to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this annual report.
Human Longevity
In May 2017, we acquired HLI CT from HLI. HLI CT operated LifebankUSA, a private umbilical cord blood stem cell and cord tissue bank that offers parents the option to collect, process and cryogenically preserve newborn umbilical cord blood stem cells and cord tissue units. The HLI CT acquisition also provided us with rights to a portfolio of biomaterial assets, including Biovance and Interfyl, as well other assets that we are no longer pursuing. In aggregate, the fair value of the consideration to acquire HLI CT was $28.9 million. The acquisition led to goodwill and intangible assets including in-process research and development, or IPR&D, and a licensing agreement.
At the time of the HLI CT acquisition, Biovance and Interfyl were subject to an exclusive distribution arrangement with Alliqua Biomedical, Inc., or Alliqua. In May 2018, we acquired certain assets from Alliqua, including Alliqua’s biologic wound care business, which included the marketing and distribution rights to Biovance and Interfyl as well as a Class II medical device, the MIST and UltraMIST Therapy Systems. In connection with the Alliqua asset purchase agreement, we paid cash consideration of $29.0 million. The Alliqua acquisition led to goodwill and intangible assets.
In August 2020, we (i) sold the assets comprising our MIST/UltraMIST business to Sanuwave Health, Inc., or Sanuwave, and (ii) entered into a five-year licensing agreement with Sanuwave for total consideration of $24.5 million, of which $20.0 million was paid at or prior to closing. The remaining $4.5 million of the purchase price was financed through a convertible promissory note due on or before August 6, 2021. The convertible promissory note can be converted into common shares of Sanuwave stock at our election any time on or after January 1, 2021 which we have not elected to do as of the date of this filing.
The five-year licensing arrangement with Sanuwave includes: (i) an exclusive Biovance license for distribution and commercialization in the wound care market and (ii) a non-exclusive license for the distribution and commercialization of Interfyl in the wound care market. Under the licensing agreement, we were to receive a quarterly license fee and a defined royalty on each product sale. A credit was provided to Sanuwave for Biovance royalties up to the quarterly license fee. We terminated the license in the third quarter of 2021.
Anthrogenesis
In August 2017, we acquired Anthrogenesis, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Celgene. The Anthrogenesis acquisition included a portfolio of pre-clinical and clinical stage assets, including key cellular therapeutic assets in that we continue to develop. The Anthrogenesis acquisition gives us access to Anthrogenesis’ proprietary technologies and processes for the recovery of large quantities of high-potential stem cells and cellular therapeutic products derived from postpartum human placentas, each an “Anthrogenesis Product”. As part of the Anthrogenesis acquisition, some of the inventors of the Anthrogenesis Products and other key members of the Anthrogenesis Product development team joined us. In aggregate, the fair value of the consideration to acquire Anthrogenesis was $346.4 million. The acquisition led to goodwill and intangible assets including IPR&D and a licensing agreement and contingent value rights agreement. See “- Licensing Agreements” below.
CariCord
In October 2018, we acquired CariCord, a family cord blood bank established by ClinImmune Labs University of Colorado Cord Blood Bank and the Regents of the University of Colorado, a body corporate, for and on behalf of the University of Colorado School of Medicine. In the aggregate, the fair value of the consideration to acquire CariCord was $9.3 million. The acquisition led to goodwill and intangible assets.
Licensing Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we license in intellectual property and other rights from third parties and have also outlicensed our intellectual property and other rights, including in connection with our acquisitions and divestitures, described above. Additional details regarding our licensing agreements can be found in Note 15, “License and Distribution Agreements” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Sorrento
In September 2020, we entered into a license and transfer agreement, with Sorrento Henry Ji, Ph.D., a former member of Legacy Celularity’s board of directors, currently serves as President and Chief Executive Officer of Sorrento. Sorrento is also a significant stockholder of ours and invested in the PIPE. Pursuant to the Sorrento Agreement, we obtained a worldwide license, with the right to grant sublicenses with Sorrento’s consent, under certain of Sorrento’s intellectual property rights, including patent rights that would be infringed by the use of certain CD19 CAR constructs, to research, develop, use, reproduce, modify, and create derivative works in the field of placenta-derived cells and/or cord blood-derived cells for the treatment of any disease or disorder, and to make, have made, use, sell, offer for sale, import, export, and distribute products that consist of a combination of certain specified CAR constructs and placenta-derived cells and/or cord blood-derived cells in the field of placenta-derived cells and/or cord blood-derived cells for the treatment of any disease or disorder. The foregoing license is exclusive with respect to certain specified patent rights and non-exclusive with respect to all other intellectual property rights of Sorrento. The CD19 CAR construct licensed from Sorrento forms the basis of the genetic modification for CYCART-19.
Under the Sorrento Agreement, we have sole responsibility for the development and commercialization of licensed products, subject to certain reserved rights of Sorrento with respect to CD19 CAR-T therapeutics. Additionally, we are obligated to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize licensed products.
Under the Sorrento Agreement, we are obligated to pay Sorrento a low double-digit percentage of non-royalty sublicensing income payments received by it in connection with a grant of any sublicense for CD19 CAR-T licensed products. Additionally, we are obligated to pay Sorrento a low single-digit royalty on net sales of CD19 CAR-T licensed products in perpetuity. See Item 1 “Business - Licensing Agreements - Sorrento Therapeutics, Inc.” for more information regarding the Sorrento Agreement and the proposed supply agreement.
Celgene (now part of Bristol Myers Squibb)
In August 2017, in connection with the Anthrogenesis acquisition, we entered into a license agreement, with Celgene, which has since been acquired by Bristol Meyers Squibb. Pursuant to the license, we granted Celgene a worldwide, royalty-free, fully-paid up, non-exclusive license, without the right to grant sublicenses (other than to its affiliates), under Anthrogenesis’ intellectual property in existence as of the date of the license or as developed by Celgene in connection with any transition services activities related to the merger for non-commercial pre-clinical research purposes, as well as to develop, manufacture, commercialize and fully exploit products and services that relate to the construction of any CAR, the modification of any T-cell or NK cell to express such a CAR, and/or the use of such CARs or T-cells or NK cells for any purpose, which commercial license is sublicensable. Either party may terminate the license upon an uncured material breach of the agreement by the other party or insolvency of the other party.
In August 2017, Legacy Celularity also issued shares of its Series X Preferred Stock to Celgene as merger consideration and entered into the CVR Agreement with Celgene pursuant to which we issued one CVR in respect of each share of Series X Preferred Stock issued to Celgene in connection with the Anthrogenesis acquisition. The CVR Agreement entitles the holders of the CVRs to an aggregate amount, on a per program basis, of $50 million in regulatory milestones and an aggregate $125 million in commercial milestone payments with respect to certain of our investigational therapeutic programs, which would include the current CYNK-001 CYNK-101 and PDA-002 pipeline candidates and the legacy PDA-001 program (certain placenta-derived adherent cells, proprietary to Anthrogenesis, that are formulated for intravenous delivery, that is no longer in development. Such payments under the CVR Agreement also expressly cover PNK-007 (which includes certain NK cells proprietary to Anthrogenesis, produced by a process proprietary to Anthrogenesis as of the closing of the Anthrogenesis transaction) and certain PNK-007 cells with a genetic modification (but not including NK cells with a chimeric receptor, including a CAR), along with any derivatives, parts, subparts, or progeny of any of the foregoing, or any therapeutic based or derived (in whole or in part) on certain related development programs as they existed as of the closing of the Anthrogenesis transaction. Accordingly, as we expand our NK cell type franchise into new indications and, as a general matter, because these payments are not payable until a later stage of development, we expect to continue to evaluate our present and future therapeutic candidates as they develop and evolve in light of the specific terms in the CVR Agreement to determine the specific therapeutics on which such amounts will be payable. In addition, with respect to each such program and calendar year, the CVR holders will be entitled to receive a royalty equal to a mid-teen percentage of the annual net sales for such program’s therapeutics from the date of the first commercial sale of such program’s therapeutic in a particular country until the latest to occur of the expiration of the last to expire of any valid patent claim covering such program therapeutic in such country, the expiration of marketing exclusivity with respect to such therapeutic in such country, and August 2027 (i.e., the tenth anniversary of the closing of the acquisition of Anthrogenesis). No
payments under the CVR Agreement have been made to date. We estimate the liability associated with the CVR quarterly. Changes to that liability include but are not limited to changes in our clinical programs, assumptions about the commercial value of those programs and the time value of money.
See Item 1 “Business - Our Team and Corporate History - Celgene Corporation” for more information regarding the Celgene license and the CVR Agreement.
Components of Operating Results
Net revenues
Net revenues include: (i) sales of HCT/P’s, including Biovance, Biovance 3L, Interfyl and MIST/UltraMIST Therapy System equipment and single-use applicators, collectively, Product Sales and Rentals; (ii) the collection, processing and storage of umbilical cord and placental blood and tissue after full-term pregnancies, collectively, Services; and, (iii) license fees and royalties received under our various license and distribution agreements, collectively, License, Royalty and Other. MIST/UltraMIST revenues are only included within 2020 as the business was divested in August 2020.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold consists of labor, material and overhead costs associated with our two existing commercial business segments, biobanking and degenerative disease. Biobanking costs include the cost of storage and transportation kits for newly banked materials as well as tank and facility overhead costs for cord blood and other units in storage. Degenerative disease costs include costs associated with procuring placentas, qualifying the placental material and processing the placental tissue into a marketable product. Costs in the degenerative disease segment include labor and overhead costs associated with the production of the Biovance, Biovance 3L and Interfyl product lines. License, royalty and other costs reflect expenses incurred related to our distribution agreements.
Research and development expense
Our research and development expenses primarily relate to basic scientific research into placentally derived allogeneic cells, pre-clinical studies to support our current and future clinical programs in cellular medicine, clinical development of our NK cell programs and facilities, depreciation and other direct and allocated expenses incurred as a result of research and development activities. We incur expenses for third party CROs, that assist in running clinical trials, personnel expenses for research scientists, specialized chemicals and reagents used to conduct biologic research, expense for third party testing and validation and various overhead expenses including rent and facility maintenance expense. Basic research, research collaborations involving partners and research designed to enable successful regulatory submissions is critical to our current and future success in cell therapy. We anticipate that our research and development expenditures will increase as we engage in further clinical trials, investigate incremental CAR constructs for our allogeneic T-cell and NK cell platforms and conduct further pre-clinical studies on CYNK-101 in conjunction with various antibody candidates. The amount of increase will depend on numerous factors, including the timing of clinical trials, preliminary evidence of efficacy in clinical trials and the number of indications that we choose to pursue.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs including salaries, bonuses, stock compensation and benefits for specialized staff that support our core business operations. Executive management, finance, legal, human resources and information technology are key components of general and administrative expense and those expenses are recognized when incurred. We expect that as we engage in more clinical trials and potentially prepares for commercialization of any approved therapies that our general and administrative costs will increase over time. The magnitude and timing of any increase in general and administrative expense will depend on the progress of clinical trials, the release of new products within the degenerative disease portfolio, changes in the regulatory environment or incremental staffing needs to support the growth of the business as well as any incremental expenses associated with being a public company.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration liability
Because the acquisitions of Anthrogenesis from Celgene and HLI CT from HLI were accounted for as business combinations, we recognized acquisition-related contingent consideration on the balance sheet in accordance with the acquisition method of accounting. See “- Acquisitions and Divestitures” for more information. The fair value of contingent consideration liability is determined based on a probability-weighted income approach derived from revenue estimates and a probability assessment with respect to the likelihood of achieving regulatory and commercial milestone obligations and royalty obligations. The fair value of acquisition related contingent consideration is remeasured each reporting period with changes in fair value recorded in the consolidated statement of operations. Changes in contingent consideration fair value estimates result in an increase or decrease in our contingent consideration obligation and a corresponding charge or reduction to operating results. Key elements of the contingent consideration are regulatory milestone
payments, sales milestone payments and royalty payments. Regulatory payments are due on regulatory approval of certain cell types in the United States and the European Union. Regulatory milestone payments are one time but are due prior to any potential commercial success of a cell type in a specific indication. Royalty payments are a percentage of net sales. Sales milestone payments are due when certain aggregate sales thresholds have been met. Management must use substantial judgement in evaluating the value of the contingent consideration. Estimates used by management include but are not limited to: (i) the number and type of clinical programs that we are likely to pursue based on the quality of our preclinical data, (ii) the time required to conduct clinical trials, (iii) the odds of regulatory success in those trials, (iv) the potential number of patients treatable for the indications in which we are successful and (v) the pricing of treatments that achieve commercial status. All of these areas involve substantial judgement on the part of management and are inherently uncertain.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020
Net Revenue and Cost of Goods Sold
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $21.3 million, an increase of $7.1 million, or 49.4%, compared to the prior year period. The increase was due to an increase of $10.1 million in license, royalty and other revenues primarily driven by (i) recognition of previously deferred revenue as a result of the termination of the Sanuwave license agreement of $6.8 million and (ii) an increase in revenues from supply and distribution agreements recognized during 2021 of $1.4 million, partially offset by a decrease in product sales and rentals revenues of $3.1 million resulting from the sale of the MIST/UltraMIST assets in August 2020. Services revenues were flat compared to the prior period.
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $4.7 million, or 95.7%, compared to the prior year period. The increase was due to (i) higher license, royalty and other costs of $2.0 million driven by sales under new supply and distribution agreements including Arthrex and Evolution and (ii) higher services costs of $1.4 million resulting from increased labor and overhead costs as well as allocated expenses. Costs related to product sale and rentals increased by $1.2 million due to changes in product mix driven by the sale of the MIST/UltraMIST assets in August 2020, increased material and labor costs and higher allocated costs associated with higher Interfyl production volumes in the second half of the year.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $88.4 million, an increase of $35.6 million, or 67.6%, compared to the prior year period. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to higher stock-based compensation expense of $9.7 million related to awards granted to senior management (for more information about stock-based compensation refer to Note 13, “Stock-Based Compensation” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K), higher cell therapy process development and research expenses related to the CYCART-19 program, and higher personnel costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $71.3 million, an increase of $40.0 million, or 127.7%, compared to the prior year period, primarily due to higher stock-based compensation expense of $25.9 million related to awards granted to our board of directors and senior management (for more information about stock-based compensation refer to Note 13, “Stock-Based Compensation” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K), a charge related to an estimated legal settlement with CTH Biosourcing LLC and higher personnel costs and professional fees as we began operating as a public company.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Liability
For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 the fair value of the contingent consideration liability decreased resulting in net gains of $41.1 million and $55.6 million, respectively. The change in fair value of the contingent consideration liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 resulted from changes in market-based assumptions and underlying projections (for more information about changes in the fair value of contingent consideration liability refer to Note 4, “Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K).
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
Amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.2 million, which decreased 35.4%, compared to the prior year period, primarily due to the sale of UltraMIST to Sanuwave in August 2020.
Impairment of Acquired Intangible Assets
In 2020, the development of PDA-001 was discontinued for an indefinite period of time as we opted to pursue an alternative clinical program. As a result, we fully impaired our IPR&D asset for PDA-001 (acquired from Celgene) totaling $129.4 million during the third quarter of 2020 (see Note 8, “Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net” in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K).
Other Income (Expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income (expense), net changed by $70.0 million compared to the prior year period. The change was primarily due to a gain recognized in 2021 related to our warrants to purchase common stock compared to a loss recognized in 2020, which resulted from changes in the fair value of the corresponding liabilities (see Note 4, “Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K). Other (expense) income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 also included expense of $2.8 million resulting from the change in fair value of the convertible note receivable obtained in connection with the disposition of the UltraMIST business (see Note 4, “Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K), partially offset by net proceeds of $1.4 million from the sale of unused New Jersey net operating losses, or NOLs, and unused research and development, or R&D, tax credits. Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $3.8 million in net proceeds from the sale of unused New Jersey NOLs and unused R&D tax credits and a $4.4 million loss on sale of business related to the sale of UltraMIST.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
From inception through December 31, 2021, we have raised aggregate net cash proceeds of $483.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $37.0 million of cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $663.7 million. In March 2022, we received approximately $46.4 million of cash proceeds from the exercise of warrants to acquire an aggregate of 13,281,386 shares at $3.50 per share. Our primary use of our capital resources is funding our operating expenses, which consist primarily of funding the research and development of our cellular therapeutic candidates, and to a lesser extent, selling, general and administrative expenses.
Based upon our current operating plan, we do not believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the next twelve months. We are seeking additional funding through public or private equity and/or debt financings. We may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms, or at all, and the terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our stockholders. Based on our recurring losses from operations incurred since inception, expectation of continuing operating losses for the foreseeable future, and need to raise additional capital to finance our future operations, we have concluded that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We expect to incur substantial expenses in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our cellular therapeutic candidates and ongoing internal research and development programs. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or aggregate amount of costs for our development, potential commercialization, and internal research and development programs. However, to complete our current and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, and to complete the process of obtaining regulatory approval for our therapeutic candidates, as well as to build the sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure that we believe will be necessary to commercialize its cellular therapeutic candidates, if approved, we may require substantial additional funding in the future.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
We used $110.1 million of net cash in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $63.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in operating activities in 2021 reflected our net loss of $100.1 million as well as noncash charges of $1.4 million and a net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $11.3 million. Cash used in operating activities in 2020 reflected our net loss of $208.2 million, which was slightly offset by noncash charges of $141.4 million and a net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $3.6 million. The noncash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization, impairment charges, stock-based compensating expense, issuance of common stock to settle a liability, change in fair value of our warrants and contingent consideration.
Investing Activities
We used $6.2 million and $27.8 million on capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, we received $0.3 million from the sale of a promissory note. In 2020, we received proceeds of $15.0 million from the August 2020 sale of UltraMIST.
Financing Activities
We generated $98.6 million of net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of $108.8 million in cash proceeds from the merger with GX, the PIPE financing and Palantir investment, partially offset by payments for professional services related to the aforementioned transactions of $10.9 million. We also received and paid back $5.0 million in short-term loans and received $0.6 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options. We generated $102.0 million of net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted primarily of proceeds from the issuance of Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock and warrants in March 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” included in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and
assumptions reflected in these consolidated financial statements include, but are not limited to, assumptions related to the accounting for business combinations, goodwill and intangible impairment assessment, the valuation of inventory and of contingent consideration, accrual of research and development expenses, and the valuations of stock options and preferred stock warrants. We based our estimates on historical experience, known trends and other market-specific or other relevant factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates these estimates when there are changes in circumstances, facts and experience. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when control of the products and services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from our customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied.
A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once it has transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. Transaction prices of products or services are typically based on contracted rates with customers and to the extent that the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value method or the most likely amount, depending on the circumstances, to which it expects to be entitled.
Products within our Degenerative Disease segment generally do not contain multiple elements. We allow for a right of return for those products but to date returns have been minimal.
Under the license agreement with Sanuwave, we received a quarterly license fee and a defined royalty on each product sold. A credit was provided to Sanuwave for Biovance royalties up to the quarterly license fee. We recognized the quarterly license fee over each quarterly term based on the actual sales occurring over the period (until we terminated the license in the third quarter of 2021).
Accounting for Business Combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed and pre-acquisition contingencies. We use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as the useful lives of those acquired intangible assets. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets and goodwill we have acquired include but are not limited to developed technologies and IPR&D. Our estimates may also impact its deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We have acquired and may continue to acquire significant intangible assets in connection with business combinations, which we record at fair value. The determination of fair value requires the use of forecasts, estimates and assumptions, which requires significant judgment by management. Each of these factors are subject to uncertainty and can significantly affect the value of the intangible asset.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually or when an event occurs that could result in an impairment. The impairment analysis requires the exercise of significant judgment by management and can involve both the assessment of qualitative factors (which are subject to uncertainty and can change significantly from period to period), as well as a quantitative. For our quantitative impairment tests, we use an estimated future cash flow approach that requires significant judgment with respect to future volume, revenue and expense growth rates, the selection of an appropriate discount rate, asset groupings and other assumptions and estimates. The estimates and assumptions used are subject to uncertainty. The use of alternative estimates and assumptions could increase or decrease the estimated fair value of the assets and could potentially impact our results of operations. Actual results may differ from our estimates.
Contingent Consideration
We have acquisition-related contingent consideration, which consists of potential milestone and royalty obligations, which was recorded in the consolidated balance sheets at our acquisition-date estimated fair value. We remeasure the fair value each reporting period, with changes recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. The determination of fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment and estimates by management. These include estimates and assumptions regarding the achievement and timing of
milestones, forecasted revenues and assumptions utilized in calculating a discount rate. If management’s assumptions prove to be inaccurate, it could result in changes to the contingent consideration liability and have a material effect on our results of operations.
Warrant Liability
Accounting for liability classified warrants requires management to exercise judgment and make estimates and assumptions regarding their fair value (for more information about the material inputs and assumptions used to value the liability classified warrants refer to Note 4, “Fair Value of Financial Assets and Liabilities” of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K). The warrant liability was initially recorded at fair value upon the date of issuance and is subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes recognized in the consolidated statement of operations. Changes in the fair value of the liability classified warrants will continue to be recognized until the warrants are exercised, expire or qualify for equity classification.
Convertible Note Receivable
We have a convertible note receivable from the August 2020 disposition of the UltraMIST business. We use a bond valuation that employs a credit default model, which requires the use of estimates and judgement by management regarding: (i) the fair value and volatility of the issuer’s common stock, (ii) probability and timing of converting the note, and (iii) risk-free interest rate. If our assumptions and estimates prove to be inaccurate, it could result in changes to the convertible note receivable and have a material effect on our results of operations.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize compensation expense related to stock options granted to employees and nonemployees based on the estimated grant date fair value and recognizes forfeitures as they occur. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for service-based and performance based awards. For awards with market conditions, we utilize a Monte-Carlo model to estimate the fair value of those awards. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is typically the vesting period of the respective awards. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model and Monte-Carlo model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. See Note 12 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of stock options granted during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent it has made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We expect to remain an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable it to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that it (i) is no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.