ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We develop and commercialize point-of-care diagnostic tests used for the rapid detection and diagnosis of infectious diseases, including sexually transmitted disease, insect vector and tropical disease, COVID-19 and other viral and bacterial infections, enabling expedited treatment.
Our product portfolio is based upon our proprietary DPP technology, a diagnostic platform that provides high-quality, cost-effective results in 15 to 20 minutes using fingertip blood, nasal swabs and other sample types. The DPP technology platform addresses the rapid diagnostic test market, which includes infectious diseases, cardiac markers, cholesterol and lipids, pregnancy and fertility, and drugs of abuse. Compared with traditional lateral flow technology, the DPP technology platform can provide enhanced sensitivity and specificity, advanced multiplexing capabilities and, with the DPP Micro Reader, quantitative results.
We target the market for rapid diagnostic test solutions for infectious diseases, which is driven by the high prevalence of infectious diseases globally, an increase in the geriatric population, growing demand for rapid test results, and advancements in multiplexing. We have a broad portfolio of infectious disease products, which prior to 2020 were focused principally on sexually transmitted disease and fever and tropical disease. In February 2020 we began the process of shifting substantially all of our resources to seek to leverage the DPP technology platform to address the acute and escalating need for diagnostic testing for COVID-19. We are continuing to pursue:
•
an emergency use authorization, or EUA, from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, as well as 510(k) clearance from the FDA, for the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Antigen test system;
•
an EUA from the FDA for the DPP Respiratory Panel; and
•
a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment, or CLIA, waiver from the FDA for the DPP HIV-Syphilis test system.
Our products are sold globally, directly and through distributors, to medical laboratories and hospitals, governmental and public health entities, nongovernmental organizations, medical professionals, and retail establishments. We continue to seek to expand our commercial distribution channels.
Global Competitiveness Program
We have achieved significant revenue growth in recent years while profitability has not been at levels as expected. We have taken steps including investments in automation to mitigate headwinds including labor availability, volatile capacity planning and implementation of operational efficiency targets to proactively monitor production with the overarching goal for profitable growth. To further accelerate and aggressively execute towards this goal to improve profitability, in the first quarter of 2022 we have initiated a Global Competitiveness Program. Our Global Competitiveness Program has been developed with the support of the Company’s executive leadership team to ensure cross-functional alignment, commitment and accountability throughout the organization. The main pillars of the Global Competitiveness Program include the following:
•
Focus on higher margin business in growth markets: Our pursuit of growth in markets with higher selling prices remains unchanged. We have recently completed an in-depth analysis of our product portfolio and profitability on both a product and regional basis. With this increased transparency at a product-level, we now have visibility to support customer pricing, marketing strategies and evaluate opportunities to increase prices. Furthermore, focus will be on recurring revenue streams of our core business by leveraging more recently established distributor and direct customer channels in the US and other key markets.
•
Lower manufacturing costs: Automation and labor management is essential to scale unit volumes while also seeking additional ways to drive our manufacturing costs down. With improved visibility on our labor and material costs at a product-level, we will primarily target optimization of our lower margin business.
•
Reduce infrastructure costs: This includes an in-depth evaluation of all support functions and external spend to reduce costs. Research & Development will be further aligned with our future innovation centered on core strategy, including DPP and expansion of product pipeline with a more disciplined approach to cost-benefit analysis, target markets, and competitor landscape.
•
Strategic review of non-core businesses and assets: Our prior acquisitions have not achieved the business plans as originally planned. More specifically, emphasis will be on both our German and Brazilian subsidiaries with a reorientation for those businesses to achieve an independent path to profitability and alignment with the long-term strategic roadmap.
While these pillars establish a framework to improve our profitability, successful execution is dependent on many factors including future regulatory approvals, key relationships with long term customers and expansion in large markets including the US. We plan to aggressively implement these actions that underpin fundamentals for long-term profitable growth and sustainable shareholder value.
Substantial Doubt as to Going Concern Status
Factors and considerations with respect to our liquidity raised substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern through one year after the date that our financial statements are being issued.
Revenues during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 did not meet our expectations. Our increase in cash and cash equivalents over the year reflected our issuance of common stock in at-the-market offerings for net proceeds of $38.8 million (see “Note 9 - Stockholder’s Equity” to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference).
We continued to experience market, clinical trial and regulatory complications in seeking to develop and commercialize a portfolio of COVID-19 test systems during the continuing, but evolving, uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the year ending on December 31, 2021, we continued to incur significant expenses in connection with pending legal matters (see “Note 12 - Commitments, Contingencies, and Concentrations: Litigation” to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference), delayed achievement of milestones associated with government grant income, investments in inventory, and the continuing automation of manufacturing.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we undertook measures to increase our total revenues and improve our liquidity position. These measures included:
•
On July 19, 2021, we entered into an At the Market Offering Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC, or Craig-Hallum, pursuant to which we may sell from time to time, at our option, up to an aggregate of $60,000,000 of shares of common stock through Craig-Hallum, as sales agent. As of the filing date of this report, we have issued and sold pursuant to the ATM Agreement a total of 9,709,328 shares of common stock at a volume-weighted average price of $4.20 per share for gross proceeds of $40.8 million and net proceeds, after giving effect to placement fees and other transaction costs, of $38.8 million.
•
We also received significant purchase orders from two customers, which we refer to as the July Purchase Orders. We had pursued the July Purchase Orders for an extended period of time. The July Purchase Orders consist of the following:
o
On July 20, 2021, we received a $28.3 million purchase order from Bio-Manguinhos for the purchase of DPP SARS-CoV-2 Antigen tests for delivery during 2021 to support the needs of Brazil’s Ministry of Health in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic. Bio-Manguinhos is responsible for the development and production of vaccines, diagnostics, and biopharmaceuticals, primarily to meet demands of Brazil’s national public health system. As of December 31, 2021 $16.8 million was recognized in connection with this order.
o
On July 22, 2021, we received a $4.0 million purchase order from the Partnership for Supply Chain Management, supported by The Global Fund, for the purchase of HIV 1/2 STAT-PAK Assays for shipment to Ethiopia into early 2022. As of December 31, 2021 $1.2 million was recognized in connection with this order.
These measures and other plans and initiatives have been designed to provide us with adequate liquidity to meet our obligations for at least the twelve-month period following the filing date of this report, when the Accompanying Financial Statements are being issued. Our execution of those measures and our other plans and initiatives continue to depend, however, on factors that are beyond our control, or that may not be addressable on terms acceptable to us or at all. We have considered in particular how:
•
The ongoing healthcare and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global customer base for our non-COVID-19 products continue to negatively affect the timing and rate of recovery of our revenues from those products by, for example, decreasing the allocation of funding for HIV testing, thereby continuing to adversely affect our liquidity.
•
Although we have entered into agreements to distribute third-party COVID-19 products in the United States, our ability to sell those products could be constrained because of staffing and supply chain limitations affecting the suppliers of those products.
We further considered how these factors and uncertainties could impact our ability over the next year to meet the obligations specified in the Credit Agreement and Guaranty, or the Credit Agreement, that we and certain of our subsidiaries, as guarantors, entered into with Perceptive Credit Holdings II, LP, or the Lender. Those obligations include (a) covenants requiring: i) minimum cash balance of $3 million and ii) minimum total revenue amounts for the twelve months preceding each quarter end. For the next year, the minimum total revenue requirements range from $42.0 million for the twelve months ending March 31, 2022 to $47.4 million for the twelve months ending December 31, 2022 and (b) an obligation requiring the payment of principal installments, commencing with the payment of $300,000 on September 30, 2022. Upon an event of default under the Credit Agreement, the Lender could elect to declare all amounts outstanding thereunder, together with accrued interest, to be immediately due and payable. In such an event, there can be no assurance that we would have sufficient liquidity to fund payment of the amounts that would be due under the Credit Agreement or that, if such liquidity were not available, we would be successful in raising additional capital on acceptable terms, or at all, or in completing any other endeavor to continue to be financially viable and continue as a going concern. Our inability to raise additional capital on acceptable terms in the near future, whether for purposes of funding payments required under the Credit Agreement or providing additional liquidity needed for our operations, could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
Accordingly, management determined we could not be certain that our plans and initiatives would be effectively implemented within one year after the filing date of this report, when the Accompanying Financial Statements are being issued. Without giving effect to the prospect of raising additional capital pursuant to our at-the-market offerings, increasing product revenue in the near future or executing other mitigating plans, many of which are beyond our control, it is unlikely that we will be able to generate sufficient cash flows to meet our required financial obligations, including our debt service and other obligations due to third parties. The existence of these conditions raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the twelve-month period following the filing date of this report.
The Accompanying Financial Statements have been prepared assuming we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business for the twelve-month period following the date the accompanying consolidated financial statements are issued. As such, the Accompanying Financial Statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of assets and their carrying amounts, or the amount and classification of liabilities that may result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Percentages in the table reflect the percent of total revenues.
Total Revenues
Total revenues during 2021 were $47.8 million, an increase of $15.3 million, or 47.3%, compared to 2020. The increase in total revenues reflected a $10 million, or 40.3%, increase in net product sales, which was principally comprised of (a) higher sales in Latin America, US and Africa, offset by lower sales in Europe and Asia; (b) decrease in R&D revenue of $3.7 million due to the completion of agreements in the early part of 2021; and (c) increase in grant income related to the BARDA $12.7 million agreement in the amount of $8.9 million.
Gross Product Margin
Cost of product sales is primarily comprised of material, labor, manufacturing overhead, depreciation and amortization, and freight and distribution costs. Gross product margin is net product sales less cost of product sales, and gross product margin percentage is gross product margin as a percentage of net product sales.
Gross product margin decreased by $0.7 million, or 73% compared to 2020. The following schedule calculates gross product margin:
In 2021, we invested in developing and offering products to address the COVID-19 pandemic, which we expected to have average selling prices greater than those of our legacy products. We also continued to invest in automation in order to reduce our reliance on manual labor and improve our product margins. The $0.7 million decrease in gross product margin was comprised of (a) $1.0 million from unfavorable product margins offset by (b) $0.3 million favorable product sales volume as described under “-Total Revenues” above. The $1.0 million decrease from unfavorable product margins principally reflected the increased labor and overhead costs and unfavorable mix of average selling prices.
Research and Development
This category includes costs incurred for clinical and regulatory affairs and other research and development, as follows:
The increase in clinical and regulatory affairs costs for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily associated with increased clinical trial costs related to the BARDA $12.7 million agreement which was completed on December 2, 2021. The decrease in other research and development costs was primarily related to the completion of R&D agreements in the early part of 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expenses include administrative expenses, sales and marketing costs (including commissions), and other corporate items. The $3.8 million, or 18.1%, increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily reflected increased legal costs associated with the ongoing litigations, recruiting fees due to the ramp up in production that took place in the later part of 2021 and higher insurance costs.
Impairment, restructuring. severance and related costs
The Company recorded an impairment loss of $1.3 million during the second quarter of 2021, as the result of its write-off of the intangible assets, net, leasehold improvements, net and right-of-use assets for leases, net associated with its Malaysian operations that underwent a retrenchment during the second quarter of 2020.
In addition, the Company recorded an impairment loss of $4.6 million during the fourth quarter of 2021, as the result of a write down of finite-lived intangible assets ($2.0 million) and goodwill ($2.6 million) due to the substantial decrease in share price as of December 31, 2021. The low price per share value on December 31, 2021 caused the book value of the Company to exceed its market cap.
In light of the uncertainty of the timing and any receipt of those regulatory approvals, the timing of progress on and results of clinical trial programs, and the timing and any receipt of product orders from the commercialization of the COVID-19 Diagnostic Test Systems and other diagnostic test systems both within and outside the United States, during the second quarter of 2021, the Company engaged the services of an independent financial advisory firm (the “Financial Advisor”). The Financial Advisor worked with management to develop a forecast model to assess the amount and timing of the Company’s liquidity needs, assuming various business cases, and together with legal counsel advised the Company regarding alternative approaches to enhancing its liquidity position, participating in discussions with the Lender, and related matters. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred $1.1 and $0.4 million, respectively, related to these restructuring matters.
In order to address challenging economic conditions and implement its business strategy, in the first quarter of 2021 the Company continued to execute a program to reduce operating expenses and better align its costs with revenues, including by eliminating positions that were no longer aligned with its strategy, and recognized severance charges of $0.1 million.
Acquisition Costs
Acquisition costs include legal, due diligence, audit, and related costs associated with acquisitions. The $0.1 million decrease in acquisition costs for 2021 as compared to 2020 reflected the fact that we completed acquisitions in 2020.
Other (Expense) / Income
Other (expense) / income was principally comprised of interest expense net of interest income. Interest expense increased by $0.1 million for 2021 as compared to 2020, due to the interest paid on the term loan debt we incurred in September 2019.
Income Tax Benefit
For 2021 we recognized a tax benefit of $0.1 primarily attributable to the loss generated by Chembio Diagnostics Germany. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $28.8 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $5.7 million from $23.1 million at December 31, 2020. We are obligated to maintain aggregate unrestricted cash of not less than $3,000,000 at all times under a covenant in the Credit Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we funded our business operations, including capital expenditures and working capital requirements, principally from cash and cash equivalents and issuance of common stock in at-the-market offerings. Our operations used $30.9 million of cash during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. In the first half of 2021, revenues did not meet our expectations, and the shortfall in revenues from the first two quarters was one of the principal reasons we issued common stock in the at-the-market offerings during the year ended December 31, 2021, which provided us with net proceeds of $38.8 million. This increase in cash and cash equivalents was offset in part as the result of (a) market, clinical trial and regulatory complications we faced in seeking to develop and commercialize a portfolio of COVID-19 test systems during the continuing, but evolving, uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic and (b) significant continuing expenses incurred in connection with pending legal matters (see “Note 12(e) - Commitments, Contingencies, and Concentrations - Litigation” in the Accompanying Financial Statements), delayed achievement of milestones associated with government grant income, investments in inventory, and, the continuing automation of U.S. manufacturing.
In light of the uncertainty of the timing and any receipt of regulatory approvals, the timing of progress on and results of clinical trial programs, and the timing and any receipt of product orders from the commercialization of our COVID-19 and other diagnostic test systems both within and outside the United States, during the year we engaged the services of an independent financial advisory firm. The financial advisory firm worked with management to develop a forecast model to assess the amount and timing of our liquidity needs, assuming various business cases and, together with legal counsel, advised us regarding alternative approaches to enhancing our liquidity position, participating in discussions with the Lender under our credit facility and related matters. We incurred fees related to these restructuring matters totaling $1.1 million in during the year.
Factors and considerations with respect to our liquidity raised substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern through one year after the date that the Accompanying Financial Statements are being issued. See “-Substantial Doubt as to Going Concern Status” above.
We have undertaken plans and initiatives, including fulfillment of the July Purchase Orders (see “- Substantial Doubt as to Going Concern Status” above) and fundraising through “at-the-market” offerings (see “-Substantial Doubt as to Going Concern Status” above), designed to provide us with adequate liquidity to meet our obligations for at least the twelve-month period following the filing date of this report, when the Accompanying Financial Statements are being issued. Our execution of those plans and initiatives is dependent, however, on a number of operational performance factors, such as the effectiveness of our automated manufacturing operations, as well as numerous other factors that are beyond our control or that may not be addressable on terms acceptable to us, or at all. We have considered how the uncertainties around the delivery of the full number of tests covered by customer orders may be affected by limitations of our staffing, supply chain and liquidity, uncertainties regarding the achievement of milestones and related recognition of revenue under government grants from BARDA, and other matters outside our control. We further considered how those uncertainties could impact our ability to meet the obligations specified in the Credit Agreement over the next twelve months, which include (a) a covenant requiring minimum total revenues for the twelve months preceding each quarter end, which requirements range from $40.3 million for the twelve months ending December 31, 2021 to $47.4 million for the twelve months ending December 31, 2022 and (b) an obligation requiring the payment of principal installments, commencing with the payment of $300,000 on September 30, 2022. Upon an event of default under the Credit Agreement, the Lender could elect to declare all amounts outstanding thereunder, together with accrued interest, to be immediately due and payable. In such an event, there can be no assurance that we would have sufficient liquidity to fund payment of the amounts that would be due under the Credit Agreement or that, if such liquidity were not available, we would be successful in raising additional capital on acceptable terms, or at all, or in completing any other endeavor to continue to be financially viable and continue as a going concern. Our inability to raise additional capital on acceptable terms or to otherwise generate cash in the near future, whether for purposes of funding payments required under the Credit Agreement or providing additional liquidity needed for our operations, could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition.
We cannot be certain that our plans and initiatives would be effectively implemented within one year after the filing date of this report, when the Accompanying Financial Statements are being issued. Without giving effect to the prospect of raising additional capital pursuant to our at-the-market offerings, increasing product revenue in the near future or executing other mitigating plans, many of which are beyond our control, it is unlikely that we will be able to generate sufficient cash flows to meet our required financial obligations, including our debt service and other obligations due to third parties. The existence of these conditions raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the twelve-month period following the date of this report.
Please see note 2 to the Accompanying Financial Statements for additional information regarding our going concern assessment in connection with the Accompanying Financial Statements. You are urged to read carefully the information provided in “Because of our liquidity limitations, we have concluded there is a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and we may require additional capital to fund our operations, which capital may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all,” “Because of our liquidity and operational limitations, including the availability of staffing and supply chain resources that are necessary but outside of our control, we may not be able to timely fulfill some of the requirements of the July Purchase Orders without additional capital to fund our operations, which capital may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all,” and “The failure to comply with the terms of the Credit Agreement could result in a default under its terms and, if uncured, could result in action against our pledged assets and dilution of our stockholders” under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of Part I of this report.
We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future earnings for use in the operation of our business and do not anticipate paying any cash dividends. We have not entered into, and do not expect to enter into, investments for trading or speculative purposes. Our accounts receivable, accounts payable and inventory balances fluctuate from period to period, which affects our cash flow from operating activities. The amounts of these fluctuations vary depending on cash collections, client mix, raw material lead times, the mix of vendor terms, the timing of shipment of our products and the invoicing of our research and development activities. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
We continually evaluate our liquidity requirements, capital needs and availability of capital resources based on our operating needs and our planned growth initiatives. Our future working capital needs will depend on many factors, including the rate of our business and revenue growth, the availability and cost of human, material and other resources required to build and deliver products in accordance with our existing or future product orders, the timing of our continuing automation of U.S. manufacturing, and the timing of our investment in research and development as well as sales and marketing. If we are unable to increase our revenues and manage our expenses in accordance with our operating plan, we may need to reduce the level or slow the timing of the growth plans contemplated by our operating plan, which would likely curtail or delay the growth in our business contemplated by our operating plan and could impair or defer our ability to achieve profitability and generate cash flow, or to seek to raise additional funds through debt or equity financings, strategic relationships, or other arrangements. There can be no assurance that we would be able to complete any proposed financing on terms acceptable to us, or at all, or that we otherwise will be successful in any of our other endeavors to continue to be financially viable and continue as a going concern. Our inability to raise additional capital on acceptable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business, prospects, results of operations, liquidity and financial condition. If we were to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible securities, the issuance could result in substantial dilution to existing stockholders, and the holders of those new securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of the holders of common stock. Furthermore, any decline in the market price of our common stock could make it more difficult for us to sell equity or equity-related securities in the future at a time and price that we deem appropriate.
Sources of Funds
Equity and Equity-Related Securities. On July 19, 2021, we entered into the ATM Agreement with Craig-Hallum, pursuant to which we may sell from time to time, at our option, up to an aggregate of $60,000,000 of shares of common stock through Craig-Hallum, as sales agent. Any sales of shares made pursuant to the ATM Agreement will be made pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-254261) and the related prospectus previously declared effective by the SEC on May 5, 2021, as supplemented by a prospectus supplement dated July 19, 2021 that we filed with the SEC, pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5) under the Securities Act, on July 19, 2021, as such prospectus supplement may be amended or supplemented from time to time.
Prior to any sale of shares of common stock under the ATM Agreement, we may deliver a sales notice to Craig-Hallum that will set the parameters for such sale, including the number of shares to be issued and sold, the time period during which such sale is requested to be made, any limitation on the number of shares that may be sold in any one trading day and any minimum price below which sales may not be made. Under the ATM Agreement, Craig-Hallum is required to use commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices to sell shares in accordance with the terms of the ATM Agreement and any applicable sales notice.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the ATM Agreement, Craig-Hallum may sell any shares of common stock only by methods deemed to be an “at the market” offering as defined in Rule 415 under the Securities Act, including sales made directly through the Nasdaq Capital Market, by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions, in negotiated transactions, to or through a market maker other than on an exchange or otherwise, at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, at prices related to such prevailing market prices, or at negotiated prices and/or any other method permitted by law. If any sale of shares pursuant to the ATM Agreement is not made directly on the Nasdaq Capital Market or any other existing trading market for common stock at market prices at the time of sale, including a sale to Craig-Hallum acting as principal or a sale in a privately negotiated transaction, we must file a prospectus supplement describing the terms of such sale, the number of shares sold, the price of the shares, the applicable compensation, and such other information as may be required pursuant to Rules 424 and 430B under the Securities Act, as applicable, within the time required by Rule 424 under the Securities Act.
Under the terms of the ATM Agreement, we are to pay Craig-Hallum a placement fee of 3.5% of the gross sales price of shares of common stock sold, unless Craig-Hallum acts as principal, in which case we may sell the shares to Craig-Hallum as principal at a price we agree upon with Craig-Hallum. We are obligated to reimburse Craig-Hallum for certain expenses incurred in connection with the ATM Agreement, and we have provided Craig-Hallum with customary indemnification and contribution rights with respect to certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
The offering of shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement will terminate upon the earliest of (a) the sale of all of the shares registered for purposes of the offering pursuant to the ATM Agreement, (b) our mutual written agreement with Craig-Hallum, (c) written notice from Craig-Hallum, in its sole discretion, to us, and (d) five business days’ prior written notice from us, in our sole discretion, to Craig-Hallum.
As of the filing date of this report, we have issued and sold pursuant to the ATM Agreement a total of 9,709,328 shares of common stock at a volume-weighted average price of $4.20 per share for gross proceeds of $40.8 million and net proceeds, after giving effect to placement fees and other transaction costs, of $38.8 million. Additional shares of common stock may be issued and sold pursuant to the ATM Agreement for gross proceeds of up to $19.2 million, but we cannot provide any assurance that will be able to issue any additional shares under the ATM Agreement at an acceptable price or at all.
Credit Agreement. The following description summarizes certain key provisions of the Credit Agreement:
•
Principal Amount. The Credit Agreement provides for a $20,000,000 senior secured term loan credit facility, which was drawn in full on September 4, 2019. Under the terms of the Credit Agreement, we may use the proceeds (a) for general working capital purposes and other permitted corporate purposes, (b) to refinance certain of our existing indebtedness and (c) to pay fees, costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Credit Agreement, including the Lender’s closing cost amount of $550,000, which was netted from the proceeds, and a financing fee of $600,000 (3.0% of gross proceeds) payable to Craig-Hallum, our financial advisor for the financing.
•
Interest Rate. Principal outstanding under the Credit Agreement bears interest at a rate per annum equal to the sum of (a) the greater of the one month London Interbank Offered Rate and 2.5% plus (b) 8.75%. At any time at which an event of default (as described under “-Default Provisions” below) has occurred and is continuing, the interest rate will increase by 4.0%. Accrued interest is payable on a monthly basis. On December 31, 2021 the interest rate was 11.25%.
•
Scheduled Repayment. No principal repayments are due prior to September 30, 2022, unless we elect to prepay principal as described under “- Optional Prepayment” below or principal is accelerated pursuant to an event of default as described under “-Default Provisions” below. Principal installments in the amount of $300,000 are payable on the last day of each of the eleven months from September 2022 through July 2023, and all remaining principal is payable at maturity on September 3, 2023.
•
Optional Prepayment. We may prepay outstanding principal from time to time, subject to payment of a premium on the prepaid principal amount equal to 4% through September 3, 2022. No premium will be due with respect to any prepayment made on or after September 4, 2022.
•
Guarantees. Our subsidiaries Chembio Diagnostic Systems Inc. and Chembio Diagnostics Malaysia Sdn Bhd. have guaranteed, and the Lender from time to time may require our other subsidiaries to guarantee, our obligations under the Credit Agreement.
•
Security. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority, perfected lien on substantially all of our property and assets, including our equity interests in our subsidiaries. Our subsidiary Chembio Diagnostic Systems Inc. has secured its guarantee of our Credit Agreement obligations with a lien on substantially all of its assets, and the Lender from time to time may require Chembio Diagnostics Malaysia Sdn Bhd. and any of our other subsidiaries that has guaranteed our Credit Agreement obligations to do the same.
•
Representations and Warranties. Financial and Other Covenants. In the Credit Agreement we made customary representations and warranties as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants limiting additional indebtedness, liens, guarantees, mergers and acquisitions, substantial asset sales, investments and loans, sale and leasebacks, transactions with affiliates, and fundamental changes. The Credit Agreement also contains financial covenants requiring that (a) we maintain aggregate unrestricted cash of not less than $3,000,000 at all times and (b) we achieve specified minimum total revenue requirements for the twelve months preceding each quarter end. The minimum total revenue amounts range from $32.0 million to $50.1 million and, for the next year, range from $42.0 million for the twelve months ending March 31, 2022 to $47.4 million for the twelve months ending December 31, 2022. The minimum total revenue requirements were developed for purposes of the Credit Agreement and do not reflect the internal estimates and plans used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets, and to establish operational goals for managing our business. We therefore do not believe that the covenant requirements provide useful information to investors or others in enhancing an understanding of our future prospects.
•
Default Provisions. The Credit Agreement provides for customary events of default, including events of default based on non-payment of amounts due under the Credit Agreement, defaults on other debt, misrepresentations, covenant breaches, changes of control, insolvency, bankruptcy and the occurrence of a material adverse effect on our company. Upon an event of default resulting from a voluntary or involuntary proceeding for bankruptcy, insolvency or receivership, the amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement will become immediately due and payable and the Lender’s commitments will be automatically terminated. Upon the occurrence and continuation of any other event of default, the Lender may accelerate payment of all obligations and terminate its commitments under the Credit Agreement.
Research and Development Awards. Under a contract we entered into with BARDA on December 2, 2020, a total of up to $12.7 million of awards were available from BARDA to assist us in (a) developing, and pursuing an EUA from the FDA for, the DPP Respiratory Antigen Panel and (b) performing the clinical trials for and submitting the DPP SARS-CoV-2 Antigen test system to the FDA for 510(k) clearance. Of the total awards available under this contract, we recognized government grant income totaling $10.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The completion of milestones to earn the remaining awards are outside our control, and contingent to the EUA approval by the FDA.
Working Capital. The following table sets forth selected working capital information:
Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, were held for working capital purposes. We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future earnings for use in the operation of our business and do not anticipate paying any cash dividends. We have not entered into, and do not expect to enter into, investments for trading or speculative purposes. Our accounts receivable and inventory balances fluctuate from period to period, which affects our cash flow from operating activities. Fluctuations vary depending on cash collections, client mix, raw material lead times, the mix of vendor terms, and the timing of shipment of our products and the invoicing of our research and development activities.
Uses of Funds
Cash Flow Used in Operating Activities. Our operations used $30.9 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the net loss adjusted for non-cash items of $18.8 million. Those uses of cash were the result of $8.0 million increase in accounts receivable, a $4.5 million increase in inventory, $1.6 million decrease in deferred revenue and $0.9 million decrease in Prepaid and other current assets, offset in part by a $3.1 million increase in accounts payable and other accrued liabilities.
Credit Agreement. Principal installments in the amount of $300,000 are payable under the Credit Agreement on the last day of each of the eleven months from September 2022 through July 2023, and all remaining principal is payable at maturity on September 3, 2023. Upon an event of default under the Credit Agreement, the Lender could elect to declare all amounts outstanding thereunder, together with accrued interest, to be immediately due and payable, as further described “-Sources of Funds-Credit Agreement-Default Provisions” above. In addition, we could determine to prepay from time to time outstanding principal under the Credit Agreement (see “-Sources of Funds-Credit Agreement-Optional Prepayment” above) or to make other payments under the Credit Agreement that may not be then due or otherwise required under the Credit Agreement, although, as of the date of the filing of this report, we do not intend to make any such prepayments or other payments.
Capital Expenditures. Our capital expenditures totaled $1.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, all of which related to investments in automated manufacturing equipment, facilities, and other fixed assets. As of December 31, 2021, we had capital purchase obligations of $1.5 million related to additional automated manufacturing equipment, with payments expected to come due during 2022 based on vendor performance milestones.
Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the audited consolidated financial statements included herein. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if (a) it requires us to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time we were making the estimate and (b) changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected would have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
The following listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any viable alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue for product sales in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Revenues from product sales are recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon tendering to the customer. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred because the expected amortization period of the asset that it would have recognized is one year or less or the amount is immaterial. Freight and distribution activities on products are performed after the customer obtains control of the goods. We have made an accounting policy election to account for shipping and handling activities that occur either when or after goods are tendered to the customer as a fulfillment activity, and therefore recognizes freight and distribution expenses in cost of product sales. We exclude certain taxes from the transaction price (e.g., sales, value added and some excise taxes).
Estimates of variable consideration and the determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based on all information (historical, current, and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us, taking into consideration the type of customer, the type of transaction, market events and trends, and the specific facts and circumstances of each arrangement.
For applicable contracts, we recognize revenue from research and development, milestone and grant revenues when earned. Grants are invoiced after expenses are incurred. Revenues from projects or grants funded in advance are deferred until earned. For certain collaborative research projects, we recognize revenue by defining milestones at the inception of the agreement and applying judgment and estimates in recognizing revenue for relevant contracts.
From time to time the Company engages in bill-and-hold arrangements, whereby the Company manufactures and sells its product and at the customer’s request stores the product at the Company’s warehouse. Even though the product remains in the Company’s possession, a sale is recognized at the point in time when the customer obtains control of the product. Control is transferred to the customer in bill and hold transactions when: customer acceptance specifications have been met, legal title has transferred, the customer has a present obligation to pay for the product and the risk and rewards of ownership have transferred to the customer. Additionally, all the following bill and hold criteria would have to be met in order for control to be transferred to the customer:
(a)
The reason for the bill-and-hold arrangement must be substantive (for example, the customer has requested the arrangement).
(b)
The product must be identified separately as belonging to the customer.
(c)
The product currently must be ready for physical transfer to the customer.
(d)
The entity cannot have the ability to use the product or to direct it to another customer.
Goodwill
We periodically review goodwill for impairment indicators. We review goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We perform the goodwill impairment review at the reporting unit level. We perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If not, no further goodwill impairment testing is performed. If so, we perform the step discussed hereafter. Our qualitative assessment involves significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, our financial performance, reporting unit specific events and changes in our share price.
If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, goodwill is not considered to be impaired. We would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, provided the impairment charge does not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The company operates as a single operating segment and has one reporting unit. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company performed a quantitative analysis and determined that the carrying value exceeded its fair value by $2.6 million, on December 31, 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies to the audited consolidated financial statements included herein for a complete description of recent accounting standards that we have not yet been required to implement which may be applicable to our operations. Additionally, the significant accounting standards that have been adopted during the year ended December 31, 2021 are described.