ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on June 24, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
Our sponsor is CENAQ Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the initial public offering was declared effective on August 12, 2021. On August 17, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 15,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. The underwriter was granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the initial public offering to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per unit. On August 19, 2021, the underwriters exercised the overallotment in full, generating additional gross proceeds of $22,500,000. Transaction costs of our initial public offering and the over-allotment amounted to $17,771,253 consisting of $3,450,000 of underwriting discount, $6,037,500 of deferred underwriting discount, an excess of fair value of the founder shares acquired by the Anchor Investors of $6,265,215, fair value of the 189,750 representative shares of $1,442,100 and $576,438 of other cash offering costs were charged to additional paid in capital.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,000,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $6 million. On August 19, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment in full and consummated the private placement of additional 675,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $675,000.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the Private Placement, $174,225,000 ($10.10 per share) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the initial public offering and the Private Placement were placed in the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete an initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its franchise and income taxes as well as expenses relating to the administration of the Trust Account (less up to $100,000 of interest released to us to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in each case, to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we have not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from June 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and initial public offering (“Public Offering” or “IPO”), and, since the completion of the IPO, searching for a target to consummate a Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Public Offering and placed in the Trust Account (defined below).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $474,585. We incurred $456,765 of formation and operating costs (not charged against stockholders’ equity), consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses. We earned interest income of $4,680 and recorded unrealized loss on fair value changes of over-allotment option liability of $22,500.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $505,518 in its operating bank account, and working capital of $487,083.
The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares (see Note 5) and no borrowings under the promissory note. Upon close of the IPO, there was no amount outstanding on the promissory note.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors committed to provide the Company with Working Capital Loans up to $1,500,000, as defined later (see Note 5). This commitment extends through August 17, 2022. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
If the Company’s estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to the Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete its Business Combination or because it becomes obligated to redeem a significant number of its public shares upon consummation of the Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, the Company would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of the Business Combination. If the Company is unable to complete its Business Combination because it does not have sufficient funds available to it, the Company will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following the Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, the Company may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet its obligations.
We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to consummate an initial business combination will be successful. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, which could impact our business plan. The financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report do not include any adjustments that might result from our inability to continue as a going concern.
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the closing of the IPO, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to our Class A common stock). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period, which occurs (i) in the case of the Founder Shares, on the earlier of (A) six months after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last sale price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 75 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property and (ii) in the case of the Private Placement Warrants and the respective Class A common stock underlying such warrants, 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of this initial public offering to purchase up to an additional 2,250,000 units to cover over-allotments, if any. On August 19, 2021, the over-allotments were exercised in full.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering and the over-allotment, the underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of 2% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering and the over-allotment, or $3,450,000. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering and the over-allotment upon the completion of our initial Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is possible that the estimates management considered could possibly change due to one or more future events. The most significant estimates that affected the financial statements as of December 31, 2021 are the calculations of the fair values of the over-allotment option, fair values of the representative shares and the fair values of the anchor shares. These estimates are uncertain due to the assumptions used in the stock valuations. These estimates and assumptions have not changed significantly during the year. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the IPO. We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments, if any, issued in the IPO based on a relative fair value basis compared to total proceeds received.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, we recognized the subsequent re-measurement under ASC 480-10-S99 from initial carrying amount to redemption value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Common stock
We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are allocated on pro rata basis between redeemable and non-redeemable common stock. The 19,612,500 potential common shares for outstanding warrants to purchase our stock were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt -debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging -Contracts in Entity’ Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’ Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We are currently evaluating the impact of the ASU on the financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options (a consensus of the FASB Emerging Issues Task Force). This guidance clarifies certain aspects of the current guidance to promote consistency among reporting of an issuer’s accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options (for example, warrants) that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. The amendments in this update are effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted for all entities, including adoption in an interim period. We are currently evaluating the impact of the ASU on the financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying unaudited condensed financial statement.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We have elected to irrevocably opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we will adopt the new or revised standard at the time public companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another emerging growth company that has not opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accountant standards used.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company”, we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.