Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of Century Aluminum Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, “Century,” the “Company,” “our” and “we”) and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and in Item 1A. Risk Factors. This MD&A contains “forward-looking statements” - See “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Overview
We are a global producer of primary aluminum with aluminum reduction facilities, or "smelters," in the United States and Iceland. The key determinants of our results of operations and cash flow from operations are as follows:
•the price of primary aluminum, which is based on the London Metal Exchange ("LME") and other exchanges, plus any regional premiums and value-added product premiums;
•the cost of goods sold, the principal components of which are electrical power, alumina, carbon products and labor, which in aggregate represent more than 75% of our cost of goods sold; and
•our production volume.
Pricing of aluminum
The overall price of primary aluminum consists of three components: (i) the base commodity price, which is based on quoted prices on the LME and other exchanges; plus (ii) any regional premium (e.g., the Midwest premium for metal sold in the United States ("MWP") and the European Duty Paid premium for metal sold into Europe); plus (iii) any value-added product premium. Each of these price components has its own drivers and variability.
The aluminum price is influenced by a number of factors, including global supply-demand balance, inventory levels, speculative activities by market participants, production activities by competitors and political and economic conditions, as well as production costs in major production regions. These factors can be highly speculative and difficult to predict which can lead to significant volatility in the aluminum price. Increases or decreases in primary aluminum prices result in increases and decreases in our revenues (assuming all other factors are unchanged). From time to time, we may seek to manage our exposure to fluctuations in the LME price of primary aluminum and/or associated regional premiums through financial instruments designed to protect our downside price risk exposure. Information regarding financial contracts is included in Note 18. Derivatives and risks affiliated with such financial contracts are disclosed specifically in Item 1A. Risk Factors.
The historic volatility of the price of aluminum is reflected in the chart below:
We have seen meaningful increases in the pricing of aluminum throughout 2021. The average LME price for primary aluminum was $2,475 per tonne in 2021, compared to $1,702 per tonne in 2020, and $1,792 in 2019. The average MWP price was $581 per tonne in 2021 compared to $267 per tonne in 2020 and $396 per tonne in 2019. The average European Duty Paid premium was $272 per tonne in 2021 compared to $126 per tonne in 2020 and $142 per tonne in 2019.
Energy, Key Supplies and Raw Materials
Our operating costs are significantly impacted by changes in the prices of the materials used in the production of aluminum, including alumina, electrical power and carbon products. These costs may be subject to increasing inflationary pressures, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. Because we sell our products based principally on the LME price for primary aluminum, regional premiums and value-added product premiums, we are unable to pass increased production costs on to our customers. Although we attempt to mitigate the effects of price fluctuations from time to time through the use of various fixed-price commitments, financial instruments and also by negotiating LME-based pricing in some of our raw materials and electrical power contracts, these efforts also limit our ability to take advantage of favorable changes in the market prices for primary aluminum or raw materials and may affect our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Alumina and electrical power represent the two largest components of our cost of goods sold. As a result, the availability of these cost components at competitive prices is critical to the profitability of our operations. The pricing under our alumina supply contracts varies from contract to contract. A major portion of our alumina requirements is indexed to the price of primary aluminum, which provides a natural hedge to one of our largest production costs. We also purchase alumina based on a published alumina index and at fixed prices. The alumina price is influenced by a number of factors, including global supply-demand balance, natural disasters and weather events, and other factors outside of our control. The average market alumina index price as a percentage of market LME price per tonne for 2021 was 13% compared to 16% for 2020 and 19% for 2019.
Electrical power is our other largest operating cost. Currently, our Hawesville and Sebree plants receive all of their electricity requirements under market-based power agreements and Grundartangi receives 30% of its electricity requirements from market-based power agreements. Market-based energy prices are driven in large part by the price of coal, natural gas, and
other fuel sources, weather influenced reservoir or generation levels for wind, solar and hydro production and weather-influenced electric loads. Extreme weather events, such as that experienced in mid-February 2021 throughout the United States or the low rain levels experienced in Nordic regions during winter 2021, can result in low generation, power outages and/or significant increases in demand, which may result in significant increased power costs incurred in our operations.
Prior to April 2021, our Mt. Holly aluminum smelter was a party to both a power agreement with a third party supplier (providing 75% of Mt. Holly's power) and with Santee Cooper (supplying 25% of Mt. Holly's power) to supply the Mt. Holly smelter with all its power needs. Our Mt. Holly plant now has a power supply agreement with Santee Cooper that runs through December 2023. Under this power supply agreement, 100% of Mt. Holly’s electrical power requirements are supplied from Santee Cooper’s generation at cost of service based rates. The contract provides sufficient energy to allow the Mt. Holly smelter to reach 75% of full production capacity upon completion of the restart project.
In Iceland, approximately 70% of the power requirements for our Grundartangi plant are indexed to the price of primary aluminum, which provides a natural hedge of one of our largest production costs. The price of the remaining 30% of Grundartangi’s power requirements is linked to the market price for power in the Nord Pool power market, the trading market for power in the Nordic countries and certain other areas of Europe, through December 2023. In July 2021, the contract was extended for the period January 1, 2024 through December 31, 2026 with pricing at fixed rates.
Production/Shipment Volumes
Shipment volume is another key determinant of our financial results. In normal circumstances, fluctuations in production and shipment volumes, other than through acquisitions or expansions, are generally small period over period. Any adverse changes in the conditions that affect shipment volumes could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and cash flows.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the shipment volumes and revenues for primary aluminum shipments:
(1) Excludes scrap aluminum and alumina sales
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net sales (in millions) 2021 2020
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 2,212.5 $ 1,605.1
Net sales: Net sales (excluding alumina sales) increased by $603.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by favorable LME and regional premium price realizations of $640.9 million, partially offset by unfavorable volume and product mix of $37.4 million.
Gross profit (loss) (in millions) 2021 2020
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 124.2 $ (36.5)
Gross profit (loss): Gross profit increased by $160.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by favorable LME and regional premium price realizations of $640.9 million, partially offset by unfavorable power price realizations of $251.1 million, unfavorable raw material price realizations of $99.1
million, unfavorable volume impacts of $23.7 million and increased operating costs of $108.3 million driven by higher labor and supplies costs, both primarily related to our restart projects at Mt. Holly and Hawesville.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (in millions) 2021 2020
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 57.6 $ 43.5
Selling, general and administrative expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $14.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increases in share-based compensation due to fluctuations of the stock price period over period and other compensation costs.
Net loss on forward and derivative contracts (in millions) 2021 2020
Twelve months ended December 31, $ (212.4) $ (17.3)
Net loss on forward and derivative contracts: In 2021, we recognized losses of $212.4 million primarily related to LME, MWP and Nord Pool fixed forward financial sales contracts. The losses were primarily driven by increases in LME and MWP forward prices. In 2020, we recognized losses of $17.3 million primarily related to LME and MWP fixed forward financial sales contracts. The losses were primarily driven by fluctuations in forward prices. See Note 18. Derivatives to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information.
Income tax benefit (expense) (in millions) 2021 2020
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 30.6 $ 3.1
Income tax expense (benefit): We have a valuation allowance against all of our U.S. and certain foreign deferred tax assets. We recognized a $30.6 million income tax benefit in 2021 as compared to income tax benefit of $3.1 million in 2020. The period-to-period change is primarily related to a discrete tax benefit of $49.8 million related to the recognition of certain foreign deferred tax assets. The deferred tax asset represents the future tax benefit we expect to realize for deductible costs related to our historical investment in Nordural Helguvik ehf (“Helguvik”). During the period, it became apparent this deferred tax asset would be realized in the foreseeable future. As this deferred tax asset is expected to be realized prior to expiration, we have not recorded a valuation allowance. See Note 14. Income Taxes to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net sales (in millions) 2020 2019
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 1,605.1 $ 1,836.6
Net sales: Net sales (excluding alumina sales) decreased by $220.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by unfavorable LME and regional premium price realizations of $188.6 million and unfavorable volume and product mix of $31.6 million.
Gross profit (loss) (in millions) 2020 2019
Twelve months ended December 31, $ (36.5) $ (23.9)
Gross profit (loss): Gross loss increased by $12.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, primarily driven by unfavorable LME and regional premium price realizations of $188.6 million. The increases to gross loss were offset by favorable raw material price realizations of $178.6 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (in millions) 2020 2019
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 43.5 $ 47.4
Selling, general and administrative expenses: Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $3.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in compensation cost in the current year, partially offset by increases in professional fees.
Net (gain) loss on forward and derivative contracts (in millions) 2020 2019
Twelve months ended December 31, $ (17.3) $ 12.0
Net (gain) loss on forward and derivative contracts: In 2020, we recognized losses of $17.3 million primarily related to LME, MWP and Nord Pool fixed forward financial sales contracts. The losses were primarily driven by fluctuations in forward prices. In 2019, we had recognized gains of $12.0 million primarily related to LME and MWP fixed forward financial sales contracts. The gains were primarily driven by decreases in the LME and MWP prices during 2019.
Income tax expense (in millions) 2020 2019
Twelve months ended December 31, $ 3.1 $ 8.4
Income tax expense (benefit): We have a valuation allowance against all of our U.S. and certain foreign deferred tax assets. We recognized an $3.1 million income tax benefit in 2020 as compared to income tax benefit of $8.4 million in 2019. The increase in income tax benefit year over year primarily relates to a decrease in earnings of certain of our foreign entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are available cash and cash flow from operations. We also have access to our existing U.S. and Iceland revolving credit facilities (collectively, the "revolving credit facilities") and have raised capital in the past through public equity and debt markets. We regularly explore various other financing alternatives. Our principal uses of cash include the funding of operating costs (including post-retirement benefits), debt service requirements, capital expenditures, investments in our growth activities and in related businesses, working capital and other general corporate requirements.
We believe that cash provided from operations and financing activities will be adequate to cover our operations and business needs over the next 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $29.0 million and unused availability under our revolving credit facilities of $70.5 million, resulting in a total liquidity position of approximately $99.5 million.
On April 14, 2021, we issued $250.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.5% senior secured notes that will mature in 2028 (the "2028 Notes") and used a portion of the proceeds to purchase $195.9 million of our 12.0% senior secured notes due 2025 (the "2025 Notes") pursuant to a cash tender offer for the 2025 Notes. On April 9, 2021, we issued $86.3 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2028 (the "Convertible Notes"). The remaining proceeds from the issuance of the 2028 Notes and a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes were used to redeem the remaining 2025 Notes on May 14, 2021. The remaining proceeds from the Convertible Notes offering were used to repay borrowings under our revolving credit facilities and to pay for the cost of the capped call transactions in connection with the issuance of the Convertible Notes. With these transactions, we have effectively extended the maturities of our principal debt obligations, reduced the interest rate on these obligations, and raised additional liquidity through the issuance of the Convertible Notes.
Available Cash
Our available cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2021 was $29.0 million compared to $81.6 million at December 31, 2020.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities as reflected in the consolidated statement of cash flows for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are summarized below:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net cash used in operating activities for 2021 was $64.7 million, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $42.9 million in 2020. The change in net cash used in operating activities was driven by increasing raw material prices, increasing power prices, higher labor costs, increases in working capital, and hedge settlements, partially offset by higher realized aluminum prices.
The increase in net cash used in investing activities during 2021 was primarily due to higher spending on capital projects during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, driven by capital investments in the Mt. Holly restart project.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $90.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to increased borrowings on the revolving credit facilities primarily used to fund working capital and the Mt. Holly restart project and issuance of the Convertible Notes.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year December 31, 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 was $42.9 million, compared to $17.7 million for 2019. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by improvements in working capital. The improvements in working capital were primarily attributable to timing of raw material receipts and the timing of trade receivable collections, offset by increasing raw material prices.
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities during 2020 was due to lower capital expenditures related to Hawesville restart activities and deferral of capital projects in response to COVID-19.
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $7.6 million during 2020 primarily due to payments made on our term loan with Glencore Ltd. (the "Hawesville Term Loan"), offset by net borrowings on our U.S. revolving credit facility and Iceland revolving credit facility. Borrowings on our revolving credit facilities are available, if needed, for working capital requirements, general corporate or other purposes.
Availability under Our Credit Facilities
Our U.S. revolving credit facility, dated May 2018 (as amended, the "U.S. revolving credit facility"), originally provided for borrowings of up to $175.0 million in the aggregate. On December 23, 2021, we entered into a Third Amendment to our existing $175.0 million U.S. revolving credit facility and exercised a portion of the uncommitted accordion feature in the amount of $45.0 million, increasing the maximum capacity from $175.0 million to $220.0 million, including up to $110.0 million under a letter of credit sub-facility. The U.S. revolving credit facility matures in May 2023. Any letters of credit issued and outstanding under the U.S. revolving credit facility reduce our borrowing availability on a dollar-for-dollar basis.
We have also entered into, through our wholly-owned subsidiary Nordural Grundartangi ehf ("Grundartangi"), a revolving credit facility, dated November 2013, as amended (the "Iceland revolving credit facility") which originally provided for borrowings of up to $50.0 million in the aggregate. On February 4, 2022, we further amended this Iceland revolving credit facility and increased the facility amount to $80.0 million in the aggregate. The Iceland revolving credit facility matures November 2024.
The availability of funds under our revolving credit facilities is limited by a specified borrowing base consisting of certain accounts receivable, inventory and qualified cash deposits which meet the lenders' eligibility criteria. Increases in the price of aluminum and/or restarts of previously curtailed operations, for example, increase our borrowing base by increasing our accounts receivable and inventory balances; decreases in the price of aluminum and/or curtailments of production capacity would decrease our borrowing base by reducing our accounts receivable and inventory balances. As of December 31, 2021, our U.S. revolving credit facility had a borrowing base of $215.2 million, $63.6 million in outstanding borrowings, and $81.1 million in letters of credit outstanding. Of the outstanding letters of credit, $12.1 million related to our power commitments, $51.0 million are related to hedging collateral, and the remainder are primarily for the purpose of securing certain secured debt and workers’ compensation commitments. As of December 31, 2021, our Iceland revolving credit facility had a borrowing base of $50.0 million and $50.0 million in outstanding borrowings.
As of December 31, 2021, our revolving credit facilities had $70.5 million of net availability after consideration of our outstanding borrowings and letters of credit. We may borrow and make repayments under our revolving credit facilities in the ordinary course based on a number of factors, including the timing of payments from our customers and payments to our suppliers.
Our revolving credit facilities contain customary covenants, including restrictions on mergers and acquisitions, indebtedness, affiliate transactions, liens, dividends and distributions, dispositions of collateral, investments and prepayments of indebtedness, including in the U.S. revolving credit facility, a springing financial covenant that requires us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0 any time availability under the U.S. revolving credit facility is less than or equal to $22.0 million, or 10% of the borrowing base but not less than $12.5 million. We intend to maintain availability to comply with these levels any time we would not meet the ratio, which could limit our ability to access the full amount of our availability under our U.S. revolving credit facility. Our Iceland revolving credit facility contains covenants that require Grundartangi to maintain a minimum equity ratio. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all such covenants or maintained availability above such covenant triggers.
Grundartangi Casthouse Facility
On November 2, 2021, in connection with the casthouse project at Grundartangi, we entered into an eight-year Term Facility Agreement with Arion Bank hf, to provide for borrowings up to $130.0 million (the “Casthouse Facility”). Under the Casthouse Facility, repayments of principal amounts will be made in equal quarterly installments equal to 1.818% of the principal amount, the first payment occurring 30 months after the first drawdown by Grundartangi, with the remaining 60% of the principal amount to be paid no later than the termination date. The Casthouse Facility shall mature 8 years following the first drawdown date. The Casthouse Facility bears interest at a rate equal to USD LIBOR 3 month plus an applicable margin. The Casthouse Facility is secured by a $430.0 million general bond. As of December 31, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding under the Casthouse Facility.
The Casthouse Facility also contains customary covenants, including restrictions on mergers and acquisitions, indebtedness, preservation of assets, and dispositions of assets and contains a covenant that requires Grundartangi to maintain a minimum equity ratio. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all such covenants or maintained availability above such covenant triggers.
Senior Secured Notes and Convertible Senior Notes
We have $250.0 million principal of senior secured notes that mature on April 1, 2028, unless earlier refinanced in accordance with their terms. Interest on the 2028 Notes is payable semi-annually on April 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on October 1, 2021, at a rate of 7.5% per year. The indenture governing the 2028 Notes contains customary covenants which may limit our ability, and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries, to: (i) incur additional debt; (ii) incur additional liens; (iii) pay dividends or make distributions in respect of capital stock; (iv) purchase or redeem capital stock; (v) make investments or certain other restricted payments; (vi) sell assets; (vii) issue or sell stock of certain subsidiaries; (viii) enter into transactions with shareholders or affiliates; and (ix) effect a consolidation or merger.
In April 2021, we issued $86.3 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes, unless earlier converted, repurchased or redeemed. The principal included the full exercise of the option by the initial purchasers of the Convertible Notes to purchase $11.3 million of additional principal amount. The Convertible Notes bear interest semi-annually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on November 1, 2021, at a rate of 2.75% per annum in cash.
We applied the net proceeds from the offering of the 2028 Notes and a portion of the net proceeds from the Convertible Notes described above toward payment of the total consideration amount to holders whose 2025 Notes were accepted and purchased in the tender offer and to fund the redemption of any remaining 2025 Notes.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The Company has filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (the "Universal Shelf Registration Statement") with the SEC pursuant to which the Company may, from time to time, offer an indeterminate amount of securities, which may include securities that are guaranteed by certain of the Company's subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021, we have not issued any debt securities pursuant to the Universal Shelf Registration Statement. However, the securities that we may issue in the future may limit the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to pay dividends or make distributions in respect of capital stock.
"Guarantor Subsidiaries" refers to all of our material domestic subsidiaries except for Nordural US LLC, Century Aluminum Development LLC and Century Aluminum of West Virginia, Inc. The Guarantor Subsidiaries are 100% owned by Century. All guarantees will be full and unconditional; all guarantees will be joint and several. Our foreign subsidiaries, together with Nordural US LLC, Century Aluminum Development LLC and Century Aluminum of West Virginia, Inc., are collectively referred to as the "Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries". We allocate corporate expenses or income to our subsidiaries and charge interest on certain intercompany balances.
The following summarized financial information of both the Company and the Guarantor Subsidiaries ("Guarantors") is presented on a combined basis. Intercompany balances and transactions between the Company and the Guarantors have been eliminated and the summarized financial information does not reflect investments of the Company or the Guarantors in the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. The Company’s or Guarantors’ amounts due from, amounts due to, and transactions with the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries are disclosed below:
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, an intercompany receivable due to the Company and Guarantors from the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries totaled $15.1 million and $14.6 million, respectively, and an intercompany non-current loan due to the Company from the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries totaled $544.2 million and $554.9 million, respectively.
Contingent Commitments
We have a contingent obligation in connection with the “unwind” of a contractual arrangement between Century Aluminum Kentucky ("CAKY"), Big Rivers and a third party and the execution of a long-term cost-based power contract with Kenergy, a member of a cooperative of Big Rivers, in July 2009. This contingent obligation consists of the aggregate payments made to Big Rivers by the third party on CAKY’s behalf in excess of the agreed upon base amount under the long-term cost-based power contract with Kenergy. As of December 31, 2021, the principal and accrued interest for the contingent obligation was $28.1 million, which was fully offset by a derivative asset. We may be required to make installment payments for the contingent obligation in the future. These payments are contingent based on the LME price of primary aluminum and the level of Hawesville’s operations. Based on the LME forward market at December 31, 2021 and current level of Hawesville's operations, we believe that we will not be required to make payments on the contingent obligation during the term of the
agreement, which expires in 2028. There can be no assurance that circumstances will not change thus accelerating the timing of such payments.
Employee Benefit Plan Contributions
In 2013, we entered into a settlement agreement with the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (the "PBGC") regarding an alleged "cessation of operations" at our Ravenswood facility (the "PBGC Settlement Agreement"). Pursuant to the terms of the PBGC Settlement Agreement, we agreed to make additional contributions (above any minimum required contributions) to our defined benefit pension plans totaling approximately $17.4 million. Under certain circumstances, in periods of lower primary aluminum prices relative to our cost of operations, we were able to defer one or more of these payments, provided that we provide the PBGC with acceptable security for such deferred payments. We did not make any contributions during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. We historically elected to defer certain payments under the PBGC Settlement Agreement and provided the PBGC with the appropriate security. On October 1, 2021, we amended the PBGC Settlement Agreement such that we removed the deferral mechanism and agreed to contribute approximately $2.4 million per year to our defined benefit pension plans for a total of approximately $9.6 million, over the next four years beginning on November 30, 2022 and ending on November 30, 2025, subject to acceleration if certain terms and conditions are met in such amendment.
Section 232 Aluminum Tariff
On March 23, 2018, the U.S. implemented a 10% tariff on imported primary aluminum products into the U.S. These tariffs are intended to protect U.S. national security by incentivizing the restart of primary aluminum production in the U.S., reducing reliance on imports and ensuring that domestic producers, like Century, can supply all the aluminum necessary for critical industries and national defense. In addition to primary aluminum products, the tariffs also cover certain other semi-finished products. All imports that directly compete with our products are covered by the tariff, with the exception of imports from Australia, Argentina, Canada and Mexico and imports from the European Union up to a quota limit of 18,000 metric tonnes or imports that receive a product exclusion from the Department of Commerce.
Other Items
We are currently in the process of a multi-year project that began in 2018 to restart Hawesville's previously curtailed capacity and return the plant to a production level of approximately 200,000 MT per annum (80% of capacity). As of December 31, 2021, we are finished with these efforts and are producing at approximately 80% of Hawesville’s capacity. The rebuild of the fifth and final potline is expected to be completed over the next several years subject to market conditions.
During 2021, we initiated efforts to restart the curtailed capacity at our Mt. Holly facility, resulting in total production of 75% of Mt. Holly’s full capacity once the restart project is completed. Restart work at the Mt. Holly smelter is progressing and is expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2022, subject to market conditions.
During 2021, we announced plans for construction of a new billet casthouse at Grundartangi. The Grundartangi casthouse project began in late 2021 and is expected to continue through the first quarter of 2024. The Grundartangi casthouse project will be fully funded through the Casthouse Facility.
In May 2018, we temporarily curtailed one potline at our Sebree aluminum smelter due to an equipment failure. Sebree was returned to full capacity by the end of the third quarter of 2018. As of December 31, 2020, we received $19.9 million of insurance proceeds related to a policy covering the equipment failure. In January 2021, the claims process was concluded and a final payment of $1.4 million of insurance proceeds was received.
In October 2021, Nordural Helguvik ehf ("Helguvik"), a past subsidiary of ours and owner of the former Helguvik project site which has been curtailed since 2008, filed for bankruptcy and on October 28, 2021, a district court in Iceland issued a verdict declaring bankruptcy of Helguvik. We recognized a deferred tax asset and recorded a discrete tax benefit of $49.8 million related to the future tax benefit we expect to realize for deductible costs related to our historical investment in Helguvik. There are no other financial statement impacts as a result of the bankruptcy filing.
In 2011, our Board of Directors approved a $60.0 million common stock repurchase program and subsequently increased this program by $70.0 million in the first quarter of 2015. Under the program, Century is authorized to repurchase up to $130.0 million of our outstanding shares of common stock, from time to time, on the open market at prevailing market prices, in block trades or otherwise. The timing and amount of any shares repurchased will be determined by our management based on its evaluation of market conditions, the trading price of our common stock and other factors. We made no repurchases during the years ended 2021, 2020, and 2019. As of December 31, 2021, we had $43.7 million remaining under the repurchase program
authorization. The repurchase program may be expanded, suspended or discontinued by our Board, in its sole discretion, at any time.
In November 2009, Century Aluminum of West Virginia, Inc. ("CAWV") filed a class action complaint for declaratory judgment against the United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial and Service Workers International Union ("USW"), the USW’s local and certain CAWV retirees, individually and as class representatives ("CAWV Retirees"), seeking a declaration of CAWV’s rights to modify/terminate retiree medical benefits. Later in November 2009, the USW and representatives of a retiree class filed a separate suit against CAWV, Century Aluminum Company, Century Aluminum Master Welfare Benefit Plan, and various John Does with respect to the foregoing. On August 18, 2017, the District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia approved a settlement agreement in respect of these actions, pursuant to which, CAWV agreed to make payments into a trust for the benefit of the CAWV Retirees in the aggregate amount of $23.0 million over the course of ten years. Upon approval of the settlement, we paid $5.0 million to the aforementioned trust in September 2017 and agreed to pay the remaining amounts under the settlement agreement in annual increments of $2.0 million for nine years. At December 31, 2021, we had $2.0 million in other current liabilities and $6.2 million in other liabilities related to this agreement.
We are a defendant in several actions relating to various aspects of our business. While it is impossible to predict the ultimate disposition of any litigation, we do not believe that any of these lawsuits, either individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. See Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements included herein for additional information.
Capital Resources
We intend to finance our future capital expenditures from available cash, cash flow from operations and if necessary, borrowings under our existing revolving credit facilities. For major investment projects, we would likely seek financing from various capital and loan markets and may potentially pursue the formation of strategic alliances. We may be unable, however, to issue additional debt or equity securities, or enter into other financing arrangements on attractive terms, or at all, due to a number of factors including a lack of demand, unfavorable pricing, poor economic conditions, unfavorable interest rates, or our financial condition or credit rating at the time. Future uncertainty in the U.S. and international markets and economies may adversely affect our liquidity, our ability to access the debt or capital markets and our financial condition.
Capital expenditures incurred for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $28.1 million, excluding expenditures of $61.9 million associated with the restart at Mt. Holly. We estimate our total capital spending in 2022, excluding the Mt. Holly restart project and Grundartangi casthouse project, will be approximately $30.0 million, related to our ongoing investment and sustainability projects at our plants.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of the financial statements requires that management make judgments, assumptions and estimates in applying these accounting policies. Those judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience about past and current events and on assumptions about future events. Critical accounting estimates require management to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate and a change in these estimates may have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. Significant judgments and estimates made by our management include expenses and liabilities related to inventories, pensions and other postretirement benefits ("OPEB"), deferred tax assets and property, plant and equipment. Our management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the audit committee of our Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed our disclosure.
Inventories
Our inventories are stated at lower of cost or net realizable value ("NRV").
Our estimate of the market value of our inventories involves establishing a net realizable value for both finished goods and the components of inventory that will be converted to finished goods, raw materials and work in process. This requires management to use its judgment when making assumptions about future selling prices and the costs to complete our inventory during the period in which it will be sold.
Our assumptions are subject to inherent uncertainties given the volatility surrounding the market price for primary aluminum sales and the market price for our major inputs, alumina and electrical power.
Although we believe that the assumptions used to estimate the market value of our inventory are reasonable, actual market conditions at the time our inventory is sold may be more or less favorable than management’s current estimates.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Liabilities
We sponsor several pension and OPEB plans. Our liabilities under these defined benefit plans are determined using methodologies that involve several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, health care cost inflation rate and the long-term rate of return on plan assets. We review our actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions when appropriate.
Discount Rate Selection
We select a discount rate for purposes of measuring obligations under defined benefit plans by matching cash flows separately for each plan to the yields on high-quality zero coupon bonds. We use the Ryan Above Median Yield Curve (the "Ryan Curve"). We believe the projected cash flows used to determine the Ryan Curve rate provide a good approximation of the timing and amounts of our defined benefit payments under our plans and no adjustment to the Ryan Curve rate has been made.
A change of a half percentage point in the discount rate for our defined benefit plans would have the following effects on our obligations under these plans as of December 31, 2021:
Medical Trend Rate
Measurement of our postretirement benefit obligations requires the use of several assumptions about factors that will affect the amount and timing of future benefit payments. The assumed health care cost trend rates are the most critical estimates for measurement of the postretirement benefit obligation. Changes in the health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the health care benefit obligation.
Medical cost inflation is initially estimated to be 6.4% and 7.1% for pre- and post-65 participants, respectively, declining to 4.5% over ten years and thereafter. A one-percentage-point change in the assumed health care cost trend rate would have had the following effects in 2021:
Long-term Rate of Return on Plan Assets Assumption
Our expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is derived from our asset allocation strategies and anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. Our analysis gives consideration to recent plan performance and historical
returns; however, the assumptions are primarily based on long-term, prospective rates of return. The weighted average long-term rate of return on plan assets for our defined benefit pension plans is 7.25% for 2021.
Based on information provided by independent actuaries and other relevant sources, the Company believes that the assumptions used to estimate expenses, assets and liabilities of pensions and other postretirement benefits are reasonable; however, changes in these assumptions could impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Deferred Income Tax Assets
We regularly assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent we believe that it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established. The amount of a valuation allowance is based upon our best estimate of our ability to realize the net deferred tax assets. We have a valuation allowance of $485.8 million recorded for all of our U.S. deferred tax assets and a portion of our Icelandic deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021.
Property, Plant and Equipment Impairment
We review our property, plant and equipment for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets (asset group) may not be recoverable. The carrying amount of the assets (asset group) is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the assets (asset group). In that case, an impairment loss would be recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets (asset group), with the fair value determined using a discounted cash flow calculation. These estimates of future cash flows include management’s assumptions about the expected use of the assets (asset group), the remaining useful life, expenditures to maintain the service potential, market and cost assumptions.
Determination as to whether and how much an asset is impaired involves significant management judgment involving highly uncertain matters, including estimating the future sales volumes, future selling prices and estimated raw material and conversion costs, alternative uses for the asset, and estimated proceeds from the disposal of the asset.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards Updates
Information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we have entered into various contractual obligations that will be settled in cash. These obligations consist primarily of long-term debt obligations and purchase obligations. The expected future cash flows required to meet these obligations through the year 2030 are shown in the table below. More information is available about these contractual obligations in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included herein.
(1)Long-term debt includes principal repayments on our 2028 Notes, Convertible Notes, the Casthouse Facility and the IRB. Payments are based on the assumption that all outstanding debt instruments will remain outstanding until their respective due dates. For our contingent obligation, based on the LME forward market prices for primary aluminum at December 31, 2021 and expected Hawesville operating levels, we believe that we will not have any payment obligations through the term of the agreement, which expires in 2028.
(2)Estimated interest payments on our long-term debt assume that all outstanding debt instruments will remain outstanding until their respective due dates. Our estimated future interest payments for any debt with a variable rate are based on the assumption that the December 31, 2021 rate for that debt continues until the respective due date. We assume that no interest payments on the contingent obligation will be paid through the term of agreement, see above.
(3)Operating leases include long-term leases for land, office space, automobiles, and mobile equipment.
(4)Purchase obligations include long-term alumina and power contracts, excluding market-based power and raw material requirements contracts. Purchase obligations not executed or legally binding as of December 31, 2021 have been excluded from this table. For contracts with LME-based pricing provisions, including our long-term Icelandic power contracts, we assumed an LME price using the LME forward curve as of December 31, 2021.
(5)Other long-term liabilities include asset retirement obligations. Asset retirement obligations are primarily estimated disposal costs for spent potliner used in the reduction cells of our domestic smelters.
Material Commitments
We also have outstanding commitments related to pension, supplemental executive retirement benefit ("SERB") plans, OPEB and workers' compensation obligations. As of December 31, 2021, estimated future payments related to these obligations through the year 2031 amount to approximately $198.9 million, $16.4 million, $60.5 million and $9.9 million, respectively.