Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying footnotes, and Part I, Item 1. Business - Assets.
A comparative discussion of our 2020 operating results to our 2019 operating results can be found in Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Overview
We own and operate crude oil, natural gas and NGL midstream assets and operations. Headquartered in Houston, Texas, we are a fully-integrated midstream solution provider that specializes in connecting shale-based energy supplies to key demand markets. We conduct our operations through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Crestwood Midstream, a limited partnership that owns and operates gathering, processing, storage, disposal and transportation assets in the most prolific shale plays across the United States.
Our Company
We provide broad-ranging services to customers across the crude oil, natural gas and NGL sectors of the energy value chain. Our midstream infrastructure is geographically located in or near significant supply basins, especially developed and emerging liquids-rich and crude oil shale plays, across the United States. We believe that our strategy of focusing on prolific, low-cost shale plays positions us well to generate greater returns in varying commodity price environments and capture greater upside economics when development activity occurs.
In conjunction with the divestiture of our Stagecoach Gas equity method investment described in Outlook and Trends below, and the definitive merger agreement we entered into with Oasis Midstream, also described in Outlook and Trends below, we modified our segments as of December 31, 2021 and, as a result, our financial statements reflect three operating and reporting segments: (i) gathering and processing north (includes our Williston Basin and Powder River Basin operations); (ii) gathering and processing south (includes our operations in the Marcellus and Barnett shales as well as our Crestwood Permian Basin Holdings LLC equity method investment in the Delaware Basin); and (iii) storage and logistics (includes our crude oil, NGL and natural gas storage and logistics operations, the COLT Hub, and our Tres Holdings and PRBIC equity method investments). Our gathering and processing north and gathering and processing south segments were historically combined into one segment, and our storage and logistics segment was historically separated into a storage and transportation segment and a marketing, supply and logistics segment.
Below is a summary of our operating and reporting segments. For a detailed description of the assets included in our operating and reporting segments, see Part I, Item 1. Business.
•Gathering and Processing North. Our gathering and processing north operations provide natural gas, crude oil and produced water gathering, compression, treating, processing and disposal services to producers in the Williston Basin and Powder River Basin.
•Gathering and Processing South. Our gathering and processing south operations provide natural gas gathering, compression, treating and processing and produced water gathering and disposal services to producers in the Marcellus, Barnett and Delaware basins.
•Storage and Logistics. Our storage and logistics operations provide NGL, crude oil and natural gas storage, terminal, marketing and transportation (including rail, truck and pipeline) services to producers, refiners, marketers, utilities and other customers.
Outlook and Trends
Our business objective is to create long-term value for our unitholders. We expect to create value for our investors by generating stable operating margins and improving cash flows from our diversified midstream operations by prudently financing investments in our assets and expansions of our portfolio, maximizing throughput and optimizing services on our assets, and effectively controlling our capital expenditures, operating and administrative costs.
We have taken a number of strategic steps to better position the Company as a stronger, better capitalized company that can accretively grow cash flows and as an industry leader in ESG efforts.
During 2021, CEQP paid Crestwood Holdings approximately $268 million to (i) acquire approximately 11.5 million CEQP common units, 0.4 million subordinated units of CEQP and 100% of the equity interests of Crestwood Marcellus Holdings LLC and Crestwood Gas Services Holdings LLC (whose assets consisted solely of CEQP common and subordinated units and 1% of the limited partner interests in Crestwood Holdings LP); and (ii) acquire the general partner and the remaining 99% limited partner interests of Crestwood Holdings LP (whose assets consist solely of its ownership interest in Crestwood Equity GP LLC, which owns CEQP’s non-economic general partner interest) (collectively the Crestwood Holdings Transactions). The purchase price was funded through borrowings under the Crestwood Midstream credit facility. The Crestwood Holdings Transactions resulted in CEQP retiring the common and subordinated units acquired from Crestwood Holdings.
The Crestwood Holdings Transactions were a significant step in our strategy to drive peer leading governance and set the stage for future growth by simplifying our organizational structure, increasing our public float and liquidity and enhancing our financial flexibility as we strive to generate long-term value for our unitholders. In conjunction with the completion of the Crestwood Holdings Transactions, CEQP transitioned to a traditional public company governance structure which further ensures alignment between management and the Board of Directors with common unitholders and is consistent with our long-term ESG program.
To further enhance our financial flexibility and execute our long-term business strategy, in July 2021 Stagecoach Gas sold certain of its wholly-owned subsidiaries to a subsidiary of Kinder Morgan, Inc. (Kinder Morgan) for approximately $1.195 billion plus certain purchase price adjustments (Initial Closing) pursuant to a purchase and sale agreement dated as of May 31, 2021 between our wholly owned subsidiary, Crestwood Pipeline and Storage Northeast LLC (Crestwood Northeast), Con Edison Gas Pipeline and Storage Northeast, LLC (CEGP), a wholly owned subsidiary of Consolidated Edison, Inc., Stagecoach Gas and Kinder Morgan. Stagecoach Gas distributed to us approximately $614 million as our proportionate share of the gross proceeds received from the sale. Following the Initial Closing, in November 2021 Crestwood Northeast and CEGP sold each of their equity interests in Stagecoach Gas and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Twin Tier Pipeline LLC (Second Closing), to Kinder Morgan. We received cash proceeds of approximately $15 million related to the sale. The Stagecoach Gas divestiture enabled us to repay borrowings under our credit facility and therefore decrease our net debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio below 3.6x at December 31, 2021, which should position us to utilize a greater portion of our cash flow going forward to increase returns to our unitholders through continued distributions, prudent capital investments around our assets, and opportunistic repurchases of our preferred and common units under our approved $175 million unit repurchase program described below in “Liquidity and Sources of Capital”.
We continue to drive our long-term growth strategy through disciplined capital investments utilizing our current financial flexibility, and on February 1, 2022, we completed the Merger with Oasis Midstream Partners LP (Oasis Midstream) through which we acquired Oasis Midstream in an equity and cash transaction. Pursuant to the merger agreement, Oasis Petroleum Inc. (Oasis Petroleum) received $150 million in cash plus 21.0 million newly issued CEQP common units in exchange for its 33.8 million common units held in Oasis Midstream. In addition, Oasis Midstream’s public unitholders received 12.9 million newly issued CEQP common units in exchange for the 14.8 million Oasis Midstream common units held by them. Additionally, under the merger agreement Oasis Petroleum received a $10 million cash payment for its ownership of the general partner of Oasis Midstream. This transaction further solidifies Crestwood’s competitive position in the Williston Basin with exposure to approximately 1,200 drilling locations and 535,000 dedicated acres, expanding the Company’s operational footprint beyond the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation. Additionally, Oasis Midstream’s Wild Basin gathering and processing assets are highly complementary with our Arrow gathering system and Bear Den processing facility which provides for opportunities to drive cost savings, commercial synergies and better utilization of available gas processing capacity.
In addition to the strategic steps discussed above, we have also taken steps to (i) align capital investments with development activity by our gathering and processing customers; (ii) realign our organizational structure to reduce operating and administrative expenses; (iii) engage with our customers to maintain volumes across our asset portfolio; (iv) optimize our storage, transportation and marketing assets to take advantage of regional commodity price volatility; and (v) evaluate our debt and equity structure to preserve liquidity and ensure balance sheet strength. Given our efforts over the past few years to
improve the partnership’s competitive position in the businesses in which we operate, manage costs and improve margins and create a stronger balance sheet, we believe the Company is well positioned to execute its business plan.
Recent Developments
Bakken DAPL Matter. In July 2020, a U.S. District Court (District Court) ordered the Dakota Access Pipeline (DAPL) to cease operation based on an alleged procedural permitting failure. On August 5, 2020, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (D.C. Circuit) stayed the DAPL shutdown, and subsequently issued an opinion upholding the District Court’s decision on the merits, but not prohibiting DAPL’s continued operation. The plaintiffs sought another injunction against DAPL’s operation, which was denied by the District Court in May 2021. As required by the District Court, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is currently conducting an environmental impact statement, which is currently expected to be complete in September 2022. We expect DAPL will remain in operation while the environmental impact statement is being completed.
The Arrow gathering system currently connects to the DAPL, Kinder Morgan Hiland, Tesoro and True Companies’ Bridger Four Bears pipelines, providing significant downstream delivery capacity for our Arrow customers. Additionally, we can transport Arrow crude volumes to our COLT Hub facility by pipeline or truck, which mitigates the impact of any potential pipeline shut-downs to our producers with the ability to access multiple markets out of the basin.
Carbon Management. One of the core initiatives related to our ESG efforts surrounds our focus on managing the intensity of our emissions in order to reduce climate-related risk to our business.
In January 2022, we published our first carbon management plan (CMP), which outlines near-term emissions reduction and management activities that we intend to implement over the next three years. The CMP includes several core objectives, including (i) reducing emissions intensity of our assets; (ii) evaluating opportunities to reduce Scope 2 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while managing our operations’ energy efficiency; (iii) enhancing our process by which we manage GHG emissions; (iv) piloting methane emission monitoring devices at certain of our facilities; (v) participating in the development of responsibly sourced gas standards for the midstream sector; (vi) investing in technology to better inventory and calculate emissions data and integrating the technology into our operations; and (vii) participating in and providing leadership to trade associations focused on climate-related risks.
During 2021, we included our first emissions-related metric in our executives’ and employees’ short-term incentive compensation program, with a methane intensity target of 0.054% (measured as metric tons per Mscf of throughput on our assets), compared to our actual 2020 methane intensity statistic of 0.051%. We have included a methane intensity target of 0.046% in our executives’ and employees’ short-term incentive compensation program for 2022.
We currently believe that our carbon management efforts will help to mitigate the potential impact that emissions may have on our capital expenditures or results of operations in the future, although we currently anticipate that these efforts will not have a material impact on our capital expenditures or results of operations in 2022.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 2.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to select appropriate accounting estimates and to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We consider our critical accounting estimates to be those that require difficult, complex, or subjective judgment necessary in accounting for inherently uncertain matters and those that could significantly influence our financial results based on changes in those judgments. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates and actual results may differ materially from those estimates. We have discussed the development and selection of the following critical accounting estimates and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of the board of directors of our general partner.
Goodwill
Our goodwill represents the excess of the amount we paid for a business over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually on December 31, and whenever events indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit could be less than its carrying amount. This evaluation requires us to compare the fair value of each of our reporting units to its carrying value (including goodwill). If the fair value exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not considered impaired.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units based on a number of factors, including discount rates, projected cash flows and the potential value we would receive if we sold the reporting unit. Estimating projected cash flows requires us to make certain assumptions as it relates to the future operating performance of each of our reporting units (which includes assumptions, among others, about estimating future operating margins and related future growth in those margins, contracting efforts and the cost and timing of facility expansions) and assumptions related to our customers, such as their future capital and operating plans and their financial condition. When considering operating performance, various factors are considered such as current and changing economic conditions and the commodity price environment, among others. Due to the imprecise nature of these projections and assumptions, actual results can and often do, differ from our estimates. If the assumptions embodied in the projections prove inaccurate, we could incur a future impairment charge. In addition, the use of the income approach to determine the fair value of our reporting units (see further discussion of the use of the income approach below) could result in a different fair value if we had utilized a market approach, or a combination thereof.
Upon acquisition, we are required to record the assets, liabilities and goodwill of a reporting unit at its fair value on the date of acquisition. As a result, any level of decrease in the forecasted cash flows of these businesses or increases in the discount rates utilized to value those businesses from their respective acquisition dates would likely result in the fair value of the reporting unit falling below the carrying value of the reporting unit, and could result in an assessment of whether that reporting unit’s goodwill is impaired.
During 2020, current and forward commodity prices significantly declined from their levels at December 31, 2019 due primarily to the decreases in energy demand as a result of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, Russia, the United States and other oil-producing countries relating to the oversupply of oil. We acquired our Powder River Basin reporting unit in April 2019, and during the year ended December 31, 2020, we fully impaired the goodwill associated with this reporting unit based on the impact that the decline in commodity prices has had on our producer customers in the Powder River Basin described above.
At December 31, 2021, our goodwill consisted of approximately $45.9 million associated with our gathering and processing north Arrow reporting unit and $92.7 million associated with our storage and logistics NGL Marketing and Logistics reporting unit. We continue to monitor our remaining goodwill, and we could experience additional impairments of the remaining goodwill in the future if we experience a significant sustained decrease in the market value of our common or preferred units or if we receive additional negative information about market conditions or the intent of our customers on our remaining operations with goodwill, which could negatively impact the forecasted cash flows or discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of those businesses. A 5% decrease in the forecasted cash flows or a 1% increase in the discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of our Arrow and NGL Marketing and Logistics reporting units would not have resulted in a goodwill impairment of either of those reporting units.
Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets that have been obtained through multiple business combinations and property, plant and equipment that has been constructed in recent years. The initial recording of a majority of these long-lived assets was at fair value, which is estimated by management primarily utilizing market-related information, asset specific information and other projections on the performance of the assets acquired (including an analysis of discounted cash flows which can involve assumptions on discount rates and projected cash flows of the assets acquired). Management reviews this information to determine its reasonableness in comparison to the assumptions utilized in determining the purchase price of the assets in addition to other market-based information that was received through the purchase process and other sources. These projections also include projections on potential and contractual obligations assumed in these acquisitions. Due to the imprecise nature of the projections and assumptions utilized in determining fair value, actual results can, and often do, differ from our estimates.
We utilize assumptions related to the useful lives and related salvage value of our property, plant and equipment in order to determine depreciation and amortization expense each period. Due to the imprecise nature of the projections and assumptions utilized in determining useful lives, actual results can, and often do, differ from our estimates.
To estimate the useful life of our finite lived intangible assets we utilize assumptions of the period over which the assets are expected to contribute directly or indirectly to our future cash flows. Generally this requires us to amortize our intangible assets based on the expected future cash flows (to the extent they are readily determinable) or on a straight-line basis (if they are not readily determinable) of the acquired contracts or customer relationships. Due to the imprecise nature of the projections and assumptions utilized in determining future cash flows, actual results can, and often do, differ from our estimates.
We continually monitor our business, the business environment and the performance of our operations to determine if an event has occurred that indicates that a long-lived asset may be impaired. If an event occurs, which is a determination that involves judgment, we may be required to utilize cash flow projections to assess our ability to recover the carrying value of our assets based on our long-lived assets’ ability to generate future cash flows on an undiscounted basis. This differs from our evaluation of goodwill, for which we perform an assessment of the recoverability of goodwill utilizing fair value estimates that primarily utilize discounted cash flows in the estimation process (as described above), and accordingly a reporting unit that has experienced a goodwill impairment may not experience a similar impairment of the underlying long-lived assets included in that reporting unit.
Projected cash flows of our long-lived assets are generally based on current and anticipated future market conditions, which require significant judgment to make projections and assumptions about pricing, demand, competition, operating costs, construction costs, legal and regulatory issues and other factors that may extend many years into the future and are often outside of our control. If those cash flow projections indicate that the long-lived asset’s carrying value is not recoverable, we record an impairment charge for the excess of the carrying value of the asset over its fair value. The estimate of fair value considers a number of factors, including the potential value we would receive if we sold the asset, discount rates and projected cash flows. Due to the imprecise nature of these projections and assumptions, actual results can and often do, differ from our estimates.
During 2021, we recorded $40.1 million of impairments of our property, plant and equipment related to our gathering and processing south segment’s compressor stations in the Marcellus West AOD based on the actual or anticipated dismantlement and redeployment of those assets to other areas. During 2020 and 2019, we recorded $3.1 million and $4.3 million of impairments of our property, plant and equipment primarily related to certain of our water gathering facilities in our Arrow operations. During 2020, we sold our Fayetteville assets and recorded a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $19.9 million. For a further discussion of these matters, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 2 and Note 3.
We continue to monitor our long-lived assets, and we could experience additional impairments of the remaining carrying value of these long-lived assets in the future if we receive negative information about market conditions or the intent of our long-lived assets’ customers, which could negatively impact the forecasted cash flows or discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of those investments.
Equity Method Investments
We evaluate our equity method investments for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the equity method investment may be impaired and that impairment is other than temporary. If an event occurs, we evaluate the recoverability of our carrying value based on the fair value of the investment. If an impairment is indicated, we adjust the carrying values of the investment downward, if necessary, to their estimated fair values.
We estimate the fair value of our equity method investments based on a number of factors, including discount rates, projected cash flows, enterprise value and the potential value we would receive if we sold the equity method investment. Estimating projected cash flows requires us to make certain assumptions as it relates to the future operating performance of each of our equity method investments (which includes assumptions, among others, about estimating future operating margins and related future growth in those margins, contracting efforts and the cost and timing of facility expansions) and assumptions related to our equity method investments’ customers, such as their future capital and operating plans and their financial condition. When considering operating performance, various factors are considered such as current and changing economic conditions and the commodity price environment, among others. Due to the imprecise nature of these projections and assumptions, actual results can and often do, differ from our estimates.
We continue to monitor our equity method investments, and if we receive negative information about market conditions or the intent of our equity method investments’ customers to curtail production in the future that negatively impacts the forecasted cash flows or discount rates utilized to determine the fair value of those investments, we could experience impairments to the carrying value of these investments.
Our equity method investments have long-lived assets, intangible assets and equity method investments in their underlying financial statements, and our equity investees apply similar accounting policies and have similar critical accounting estimates in assessing those assets for impairment as we do. During 2021, we recorded a $158.7 million reduction to the equity earnings from our Stagecoach Gas equity method investment as a result of the sale (through a series of transactions) of Stagecoach Gas to a subsidiary of Kinder Morgan. For a further discussion of the Stagecoach Gas divestiture, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 6. During 2020, we recorded a $4.5 million reduction to the equity earnings from our PRBIC equity method investment as a result of us recording our proportionate share of a long-lived asset impairment recorded by the equity method investee. The carrying value of our PRBIC equity method investment was $3.5 million at December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues for services and products under our revenue contracts as our obligations to perform services or deliver/sell products under the contracts are satisfied. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation in the contract and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. Under certain contracts, we may be entitled to receive payments in advance of satisfying our performance obligations under the contract. We recognize a liability for these payments in excess of revenue recognized and present it as deferred revenue or contract liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had deferred revenues of approximately $197.8 million and $182.5 million. Our deferred revenues primarily relate to:
•Capital Reimbursements. Certain of our contracts require that our customers reimburse us for capital expenditures related to the construction of long-lived assets utilized to provide services to them under the revenue contracts. Because we consider these amounts as consideration from customers associated with ongoing services to be provided to customers, we defer these upfront payments in deferred revenue and recognize the amounts in revenue over the life of the associated revenue contract as the performance obligations are satisfied under the contract.
•Contracts with Increasing (Decreasing) Rates per Unit. Certain of our contracts have fixed rates per volume that increase and/or decrease over the life of the contract once certain time periods or thresholds are met. We record revenues on these contracts ratably per unit over the life of the contract based on the remaining performance obligations to be performed, which can result in the deferral of revenue for the difference between the consideration received and the ratable revenue recognized.
The evaluation of when performance obligations have been satisfied and the transaction price that is allocated to our performance obligations requires significant judgments and assumptions, including our evaluation of the timing of when control of the underlying good or service has transferred to our customers, estimating the revenue to be generated per unit over the life of the contracts, and determining the relative standalone selling price of goods and services provided to customers under contracts with multiple performance obligations. Actual results can significantly vary from those judgments and assumptions.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our overall business performance based primarily on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. We do not utilize depreciation, amortization and accretion expense in our key measures because we focus our performance management on cash flow generation and our assets have long useful lives.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA - We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are widely accepted financial indicators of a company’s operational performance and its ability to incur and service debt, fund capital expenditures and make distributions. We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful to our investors because it allows them to use the same performance measure analyzed internally by our management to evaluate the performance of our businesses and investments without regard to the manner in which they are financed or our capital structure. EBITDA is defined as income before income taxes, plus debt-related costs (interest and debt expense, net, and gain (loss) on modification/extinguishment of debt) and depreciation, amortization and accretion expense. Adjusted EBITDA considers the adjusted earnings impact of our unconsolidated affiliates by adjusting our equity earnings or losses from our unconsolidated affiliates to reflect our proportionate share (based on the distribution percentage) of their EBITDA, excluding gains and losses on long-lived assets and other impairments. Adjusted EBITDA also considers the impact of certain significant items, such as unit-based compensation charges, gains or losses and impairments related to long-lived assets, goodwill and acquisitions, third party costs incurred related to potential and completed acquisitions, certain environmental remediation costs, the change in fair value of commodity inventory-related derivative contracts, costs associated with the realignment and restructuring of our operations and corporate structure, and other transactions identified in a specific reporting period. The change in fair value of commodity inventory-related derivative contracts is considered in determining Adjusted EBITDA given that the timing of recognizing gains and losses on these derivative contracts differs from the recognition of revenue for the related underlying sale of inventory to which these derivatives relate. Changes in the fair value of other derivative contracts is not considered in determining Adjusted EBITDA given the relatively short-term nature of those derivative contracts. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, as they do not include deductions for items such as depreciation, amortization and accretion, interest and income taxes, which are necessary to maintain our business. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income, operating cash flow or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA calculations may vary among entities, so our computation may not be comparable to measures used by other companies. See our reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in “Results of Operations” below.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations (in millions).
Segment Results
The following tables summarize the EBITDA of our segments (in millions):
Below is a discussion of the factors that impacted EBITDA by segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gathering and Processing North
EBITDA for our gathering and processing north segment increased by approximately $160.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Our gathering and processing north segment’s EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by an $80.3 million goodwill impairment related to our Jackalope operations which is further discussed in Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 2.
Our gathering and processing north segment’s revenues increased by approximately $363.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, while our costs of product/services sold increased by approximately $292.2 million during 2021 compared to 2020. The increases were primarily driven by higher natural gas volumes on our Arrow system (described below) and higher average prices (i.e., more than 50% increase in commodity prices during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020) that our gathering and processing north segment realized on its agreements under which it purchases and sells crude oil, natural gas and NGLs. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Arrow’s natural gas gathering and processing volumes both increased by 18% compared to 2020. During the first half of 2020, Arrow experienced lower gathering and processing volumes due to certain of its customers shutting in production in response to low commodity prices during that period.
Our gathering and processing north segment’s operations and maintenance expenses decreased by approximately $4.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to efforts we undertook starting in the second quarter of 2020 to reduce costs in response to lower commodity prices during that period.
Our gathering and processing north segment’s EBITDA during the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a $3.1 million loss on long-lived assets we recorded related to the removal and retirement of certain water gathering lines on our Arrow system.
Gathering and Processing South
EBITDA for our gathering and processing south segment decreased by approximately $18.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Our gathering and processing south segment’s EBITDA was impacted by $40.1 million and $19.9 million of losses on long-lived assets we recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are further described below.
Our gathering and processing south segment’s revenues decreased by approximately $14.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, while our costs of product/services sold were relatively flat during 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in our gathering and processing south segment’s revenues was primarily driven by lower natural gas gathering volumes of approximately 11% on our Marcellus East AOD during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 due to natural declines in our customer’s natural gas production in that area. Also contributing to the decrease in our gathering and processing south segment’s revenues were lower revenues from our Fayetteville operations due to the sale of these assets in October 2020, as further discussed in Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 3.
Our gathering and processing south segment’s operations and maintenance expenses decreased by approximately $6.3
million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the sale of our Fayetteville assets in October 2020 and efforts we undertook starting in the second quarter of 2020 to reduce costs in response to lower commodity prices during that period.
Our gathering and processing south segment’s EBITDA during the year ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by $40.1 million of impairments of our property, plant and equipment related to our compressor stations in the Marcellus western area of operation based on the actual or anticipated dismantlement and redeployment of those assets to other areas. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $19.9 million related to the sale of our Fayetteville assets in October 2020.
Our gathering and processing south segment’s EBITDA was also impacted by an increase in equity earnings of approximately $10.6 million from our Crestwood Permian equity investment during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Crestwood Permian experienced an increase in its natural gas gathering and processing revenues and volumes primarily due to its customers connecting more wells to its system during 2021 as a result of the increases in commodity prices compared to 2020. In addition, Crestwood Permian also experienced an increase in its water gathering revenues and volumes during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to placing in-service its produced water gathering and disposal system in late 2020.
Storage and Logistics
EBITDA for our storage and logistics segment decreased by approximately $145.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, which was primarily driven by a $177.0 million reduction to the equity earnings from our Stagecoach Gas equity investment as further discussed below.
Our storage and logistics segment’s revenues increased by approximately $1,966.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, while our costs of product/services sold increased by approximately $1.950.8 million during 2021 compared to 2020.
Our NGL marketing and logistics operations experienced an increase in revenues of approximately $1,326.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, and an increase in its costs of product/services sold of approximately $1,309.9 million during 2021 compared to 2020. These increases were primarily due to increases in NGL prices during 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of overall increases in commodity prices and the unusually cold weather experienced during early 2021 compared to 2020. Also contributing to the increases in our NGL marketing and logistics operations was the impact of the operating results of the NGL assets acquired from Plains in April 2020, which increased our ability to capture additional
opportunities in the markets in which these assets operate. Included in our costs of product/services sold was a loss of $44.5 million and $20.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 related to our price risk management activities.
Our crude and natural gas marketing operations experienced an increase in its revenues of approximately $644.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, and an increase in its product costs of approximately $641.5 million during 2021 compared to 2020. These increases were driven primarily by higher crude oil purchases and sales as a result of increases in commodity prices during 2021 compared to 2020 as well as an increase in marketing activity surrounding our natural gas-related operations driven by the unusual winter weather conditions experienced during 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our COLT Hub operations experienced a 7% decrease in its rail loading volumes compared to 2020 due to lower demand for its rail loading services as a result of lower basis differentials in the Bakken which resulted in a decrease in revenues of approximately $4.9 million. Our COLT Hub’s costs of services were relatively flat during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Our storage and logistics segment’s EBITDA during the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a loss on long-lived assets of approximately $2.4 million primarily related to the impairment and loss on the sale of our Bakken transportation assets.
Our storage and logistics segment’s EBITDA was also impacted by a net decrease in earnings from unconsolidated affiliates during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. During 2021, we recorded a $158.7 million reduction to the equity earnings from our Stagecoach Gas equity method investment as a result of the sale (through a series of transactions) of Stagecoach Gas to a subsidiary of Kinder Morgan. In addition, our equity earnings from Stagecoach Gas also decreased by approximately $18.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 due to our 2021 results not reflecting a full year of equity earnings from the Stagecoach Gas assets due to the sale. For a further discussion of the Stagecoach Gas divestiture, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 6. During the year ended December 31, 2021, earnings from our Tres Holdings equity investment increased by approximately $9.3 million compared to 2020, primarily due to higher revenues from gas inventory sales and an increase in demand for its storage and transportation services due to the unusually cold weather experienced during early 2021 compared to 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, earnings from our PRBIC equity investment increased by $4.2 million compared to 2020, primarily as a result of recording our proportionate share of a long-lived assets impairment recorded by our PRBIC equity investment during 2020.
Other EBITDA Results
General and Administrative Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Crestwood Midstream’s general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $3.5 million compared to 2020, primarily due to higher unit-based compensation charges driven by higher average awards outstanding under our long-term incentive plans.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Crestwood Equity’s general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $6.1 million compared to 2020 due to higher unit-based compensation charges as discussed above as well as an increase in transaction costs that were expensed related to the Crestwood Holdings Transactions discussed in Part I, Item 1. Business.
Items not affecting EBITDA include the following:
Depreciation, Amortization and Accretion Expense. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our depreciation, amortization and accretion expense increased by approximately $7 million compared to 2020, primarily due to the expansion of our gathering and processing facilities at our Arrow system, placing in-service the expansion of our processing capacity at our Bucking Horse processing facility on our Powder River Basin system in early 2020, and the acquisition of the NGL assets acquired from Plains in April 2020. Partially offsetting these increases was lower depreciation, amortization and accretion expense due to the sale of our Fayetteville assets in late 2020.
Interest and Debt Expense, Net. Interest and debt expense, net decreased by approximately $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to lower average outstanding balances on our Crestwood Midstream credit facility. Partially offsetting the decrease in interest and debt expense, net was the issuance of $700 million unsecured senior notes in January 2021 and lower capitalized interest in 2021 compared to 2020 due to the timing of growth capital projects primarily in the Powder River Basin.
The following table provides a summary of our interest and debt expense, net (in millions):
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $7.5 million primarily due to the redemption of our 2023 Senior Notes and the amendment of our credit facility in December 2021.
Liquidity and Sources of Capital
Crestwood Equity is a holding company that derives all of its operating cash flow from its operating subsidiaries. Our principal sources of liquidity include cash generated by operating activities from our subsidiaries, distributions from our joint ventures, borrowings under the Crestwood Midstream credit facility, and sales of equity and debt securities. Our equity investments use cash from their respective operations and contributions from us to fund their operating activities, maintenance and growth capital expenditures, and service their outstanding indebtedness. We believe our liquidity sources and operating cash flows are sufficient to address our future operating, debt service and capital requirements.
We make quarterly cash distributions to our common unitholders within approximately 45 days after the end of each fiscal quarter in an aggregate amount equal to our available cash for such quarter. We also pay quarterly cash distributions of approximately $15 million to our preferred unitholders and quarterly cash distributions of approximately $10 million to Crestwood Niobrara’s non-controlling partner.
On January 20, 2022, we declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.625 per unit to our common unitholders with respect to the fourth quarter of 2021, which was paid on February 14, 2022 and was consistent with the distribution paid in November 2021. In conjunction with the closing of the Merger, we plan to increase our quarterly cash distribution to $0.655 per unit with respect to the distribution to be paid for the first quarter of 2022. Our Board of Directors evaluates the level of distributions to our common and preferred unitholders every quarter and considers a wide range of strategic, commercial, operational and financial factors, including current and projected operating cash flows and liquidity needs and the potential adverse impact of future distribution reductions on our common unitholders. We believe our operating cash flows will exceed cash distributions to our partners, preferred unitholders and non-controlling partner, and as a result, we will have adequate operating cash flows as a source of liquidity for our growth capital expenditures.
In March 2021, Crestwood Equity’s board of directors authorized a $175 million common unit and preferred unit repurchase program effective through December 31, 2022. Pursuant to the program, we may purchase common and preferred units from time to time in the open market in accordance with applicable securities laws at current market prices. The timing and amount of purchases under the program will be determined based on growth capital opportunities, financial performance and outlook, and other factors, including acquisition opportunities and market conditions. The unit repurchase program does not obligate us to purchase any specific dollar amount or number of units and may be suspended or discontinued at any time.
In December 2021, Crestwood Midstream entered into a Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the CMLP Credit Agreement). The CMLP Credit Agreement provides for a five-year $1.5 billion revolving credit facility (the CMLP Credit Facility) that is available to fund acquisitions, working capital and internal growth projects and for general partnership purposes and allows Crestwood Midstream to increase its available borrowings under the facility by $350 million, subject to lender approval and the satisfaction of certain other conditions, as described in the credit agreement. The CMLP Credit Facility also includes a sub-limit of up to $25 million for same-day swing line advances and a sub-limit up to $350 million for letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had $961.7 million of available capacity under the Crestwood Midstream credit facility considering the most restrictive debt covenants in the credit agreement, which was based on a $1.25 billion facility capacity that was automatically increased to $1.5 billion upon the closing of the merger with Oasis Midstream on February 1, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants applicable to the credit facility and our senior notes.
See Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 9 for a more detailed description of the covenants related to our credit facility and senior notes.
We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we redeemed and cancelled approximately $687.2 million of principal outstanding under our senior notes due 2023, utilizing a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of our senior notes due 2029 and borrowings under our Crestwood Midstream credit facility. During 2021, we sold Stagecoach Gas to a subsidiary of Kinder Morgan and received approximately $629 million as our proportionate share of the gross proceeds received from the sale. We utilized approximately $3 million of these proceeds to pay transaction costs related to the sale described above, $40 million of these proceeds to pay our contingent consideration obligation and related accrued interest, and the remainder of these proceeds to repay a portion of the amounts outstanding under the Crestwood Midstream credit facility.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of Crestwood Equity’s cash flows by category (in millions):
Operating Activities
Our operating cash flows increased by approximately $18.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher operating revenues of approximately $2,314.7 million primarily from our storage and logistics segment and gathering and processing north segment, partially offset by higher costs of product/services sold of approximately $2,243.4 million primarily from these segments as discussed above. Partially offsetting this net increase was a decrease in net cash inflow from working capital of approximately $42.8 million primarily related to our storage and logistics operations as a result of higher average commodity prices during 2021 compared to 2020. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2021, our equity earnings from our Stagecoach Gas equity investment were lower due to the sale of our equity investment as discussed , which resulted in a reduction in our net operating cash flows compared to 2020.
Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures. The energy midstream business is capital intensive, requiring significant investments for the acquisition or development of new facilities. We categorize our capital expenditures as either:
•growth capital expenditures, which are made to construct additional assets, expand and upgrade existing systems, or acquire additional assets; or
•maintenance capital expenditures, which are made to replace partially or fully depreciated assets, to maintain the existing operating capacity of our assets, extend their useful lives or comply with regulatory requirements.
During 2022, we anticipate growth capital expenditures of approximately $160 million to $180 million, which includes contributions to our equity investments related to their capital projects. In addition, we expect to spend between approximately $30 million to $35 million on maintenance capital expenditures and approximately $5 million to $15 million on capital expenditures that are directly reimbursable by our customers. Our anticipated growth capital and maintenance capital expenditures during 2022 include expenditures related to the operations of Oasis Midstream which we acquired on February 1, 2022 (see “Outlook and Trends” above for a further discussion of this acquisition). We anticipate that our growth and reimbursable capital expenditures in 2022 will increase the services we can provide to our customers and the operating efficiencies of our systems. We expect to finance our capital expenditures with a combination of cash generated by our operating subsidiaries, distributions received from our equity investments and borrowings under our credit facility. Additional commitments or expenditures will be made at our discretion, and any discontinuation of the construction of these projects could result in less future operating cash flows and earnings.
The following table summarizes our capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 (in millions):
(1) Represents purchases of property, plant and equipment that are reimbursable by third parties.
Acquisition and Divestiture. Below is a summary of the acquisition and divestiture activities that impacted our investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For a further discussion of these transactions, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 3 and Note 6.
•In November 2021, we sold our remaining Stagecoach Gas equity investment for approximately $15 million;
•In April 2020, we acquired NGL assets from Plains for approximately $162 million; and
•In October 2020, we sold our Fayetteville gathering assets for approximately $23 million.
Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates. Pursuant to our joint venture agreements with our respective equity investments, we periodically make contributions to our equity investments to fund their expansion projects and for other operating purposes. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we contributed approximately $6.9 million and $6.0 million to our Tres Holdings equity investment for its operating purposes and we contributed approximately $10.7 million and $3.4 million to our Crestwood Permian equity investment primarily to fund its expansion projects. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received a distribution from Stagecoach Gas of approximately $614 million, which represented our proportionate share of the gross proceeds received by Stagecoach Gas related to the sale of certain of its assets to Kinder Morgan as discussed in “Outlook and Trends” above. For further discussion of this distribution, see Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 6.
Financing Activities
Below is a summary of the equity and debt transactions that impacted our financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Equity and Debt Transactions
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, CEQP paid approximately $275.6 million in conjunction with the Crestwood Holdings Transactions;
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, distributions to our partners decreased by approximately $18.4 million compared to 2020, primarily due to the decrease in common units outstanding as a result of the Crestwood Holdings Transactions;
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, our taxes paid for unit-based compensation vesting decreased by approximately $7.2 million compared to 2020, primarily due to lower vesting of unit-based compensation awards;
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid $690.5 million to repurchase and cancel approximately $687.2 million of our senior notes due 2023 and during the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid approximately $12.6 million to repurchase and cancel approximately $12.8 million of our senior notes due 2023;
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $691.0 million from the issuance of our senior notes due 2029; and
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, our other debt-related transactions resulted in net repayments of approximately $446.4 million compared to net proceeds of approximately $161.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Guarantor Summarized Financial Information
Crestwood Midstream and Crestwood Midstream Finance Corp. are issuers of our debt securities (the Issuers). Crestwood Midstream is a holding company and owns no operating assets and has no significant operations independent of its subsidiaries. Crestwood Midstream Finance Corp. is Crestwood Midstream’s 100% owned subsidiary and has no material assets or operations other than those related to its service as co-issuer of our senior notes. Obligations under Crestwood Midstream’s senior notes and its credit facility are jointly and severally guaranteed by substantially all of its subsidiaries (collectively, the Guarantor Subsidiaries), except for Crestwood Infrastructure Holdings LLC, Crestwood Niobrara LLC, Crestwood Pipeline and Storage Northeast LLC, Powder River Basin Industrial Complex LLC, and Tres Palacios Holdings LLC and their respective subsidiaries (collectively, Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries). The assets and credit of our Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries are not available to satisfy the debts of the Issuers or Guarantor Subsidiaries, and the liabilities of our Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries do not constitute obligations of the Issuers or Guarantor Subsidiaries. See Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 9 for additional information regarding our credit facility and senior notes and related guarantees.
The following tables provide summarized financial information for the Issuers and Guarantor Subsidiaries (collectively, the Obligor Group) on a combined basis after elimination of significant intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Obligor Group. The investment balances in the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries have been excluded from the supplemental summarized combined financial information. Transactions with other related parties, including the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, represent affiliate transactions and are presented separately in the summarized combined financial information below.
Summarized Combined Balance Sheet Information (in millions)
Summarized Combined Income Statement Information (in millions)
(1) We have operating agreements with certain of our affiliates pursuant to which we charge them operations and maintenance expenses in accordance with their respective agreements, and these charges are reflected as a reduction of operations and maintenance expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we charged $31.8 million to our affiliates under these agreements. See Part IV, Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules, Note 19 for a further description of our related party operating agreements.
(2) Includes $30.9 million of net general and administrative expenses that were charged by our affiliates to us.