Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. Operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods.
Overview
Since our inception in 1991, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and resources to the research, development, clinical testing and commercialization of the INTERCEPT Blood System. Our INTERCEPT Blood System is intended for use with blood components and certain of their derivatives: plasma, platelets, red blood cells and to produce INTERCEPT Fibrinogen Complex, or IFC, and pathogen reduced plasma, cryoprecipitate reduced. The INTERCEPT Blood System for platelets, or platelet system, and the INTERCEPT Blood System for plasma, or plasma system, have received a broad range of regulatory approvals, including but not limited to U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, approval in the U.S., and Class III CE Marks in the European Union and other jurisdictions that recognize CE Mark approval, and are being marketed and sold in a number of countries around the world, including the U.S., certain countries in Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States, or CIS, the Middle East, and Latin America and selected countries in other regions of the world. Additionally, we have received FDA approval for the INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation. The INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation uses our plasma system to produce IFC for the treatment and control of bleeding, including massive hemorrhage, associated with fibrinogen deficiency. In addition, the INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation is used to produce pathogen reduced plasma, cryoprecipitate reduced. We currently sell the platelet and plasma systems and the INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation using our direct sales force and through distributors and sell IFC or disposable kits to manufacture IFC in the U.S. using our direct sales force.
The platelet system is approved in the U.S. for ex vivo preparation of pathogen-reduced apheresis platelet components collected and stored in 100% plasma or InterSol in order to reduce the risk of transfusion-transmitted infection, or TTI, including sepsis, and as an alternative to gamma irradiation for prevention of transfusion-associated graft versus host disease or TA-GVHD. As part of the FDA’s approval of the platelet system, we are required to successfully conduct and complete two post-approval studies - a haemovigilance study to evaluate the incidence of acute lung injury following transfusion of INTERCEPT-treated platelets; and a recovery study of platelets treated with the platelet system that is currently in progress. The haemovigilance study was successfully completed in 2021. The plasma system is approved in the U.S. for ex vivo preparation of pathogen-reduced, whole blood derived or apheresis plasma in order to reduce the risk of TTI when treating patients requiring therapeutic plasma transfusion, and as an alternative to gamma irradiation for prevention of TA-GVHD.
The INTERCEPT Blood System for red blood cells, or the red blood cell system, is currently in development and has not been commercialized anywhere in the world. We filed our application for CE Mark approval of the red blood cell system in December 2018 under the Medical Device Directive, or MDD, and in June 2021, we completed the resubmission of our application under the new European Medical Device Regulation, or MDR. However, we do not expect an approval decision will occur for at least another 12 months, if ever. See also the risk factor entitled “The red blood cell system is currently in development and may never receive any marketing approvals” under “Item 1A - Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information with respect timing of the ultimate approval decision on our CE Mark application. In 2017, we initiated a Phase 3 clinical, double-blind study in the U.S., known as the RedeS study, to assess the safety and efficacy of INTERCEPT-treated red blood cells when compared to conventional, red blood cells. Also in 2017, we received investigational device exemption, or IDE, approval from the FDA to initiate a Phase 3 clinical trial, known as the ReCePI study that is designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of INTERCEPT-treated red blood cells in patients requiring transfusion for acute blood loss during surgery. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, many of the hospital sites conducting our RedeS and ReCePI studies suspended enrollment to focus on their response to the pandemic. Should the COVID-19 pandemic persist or heighten, we could see renewed or further delays to trial enrollment. In addition, we will need to generate acceptable Phase 3 clinical data from chronic anemia patients in the U.S. before the FDA will consider our red blood cell system for approval. We also understand that one or more additional in vitro studies will be required to be successfully completed and submitted to the FDA. There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully complete any such in vitro studies, nor can there be any assurance that we will successfully complete our Phase 3 trial in chronic anemia patients. In part, we will seek to introduce supplemental clinical data we obtained from European clinical trials, though we cannot assure you that we will be able to demonstrate comparability or that the FDA will allow supplemental clinical European data. We must demonstrate to the FDA an ability to define, test and meet acceptable specifications for our current Good Manufacturing Practice and ISO standards for the manufactured compounds used to prepare INTERCEPT-treated red blood cells before we can submit and seek regulatory approval of our red blood cell system from the FDA. In addition, we do not yet know whether the data generated from our European Phase 3 clinical trials will be sufficient to receive CE Mark approval, even if limited to a target patient population having chronic anemia and, we may need to generate additional safety data from commercial use in order to achieve broader market acceptance. In addition, these trials may need to be supplemented by additional, successful Phase 3 clinical trials for approval in certain countries. If such additional Phase 3 clinical trials are required, they would likely need to demonstrate equivalency of INTERCEPT-treated red blood cells compared to conventional red blood cells and the significantly
lower lifespan for INTERCEPT-treated red blood cells compared to conventional red blood cells may limit our ability to obtain any regulatory approvals in certain countries for the red blood cell system. As part of our development activities, we will need to successfully complete a number of in vitro studies prior to receiving any regulatory approvals in Europe and certain additional activities, including successfully completing the RedeS and ReCePI studies and an additional Phase 3 clinical trial for chronic anemia patients, including sickle-cell anemia patients, in the U.S., prior to receiving any regulatory approvals in the U.S. Successful completion of these activities may require capital beyond that which we currently have or that may be available to us under our agreement with BARDA, and we may be required to obtain additional capital in order to complete the development of and obtain any regulatory approvals for the red blood cell system. In addition, if we are unable to obtain from our suppliers sufficient clinical quantities of the active compounds for our red blood cell system meeting defined quality and regulatory specifications, if our suppliers are not able to maintain regulatory compliance or if we experience additional delays in enrollment for the RedeS and ReCePI studies because of the COVID-19 pandemic or any other reason, we may experience delays in testing, conducting trials or obtaining approvals, and our product development costs would likely increase.
In June 2021, we extended our agreement with BARDA, part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, through December 2023. The agreement provides funding from BARDA to support the development of our red blood cell system, including clinical and regulatory development programs in support of potential licensure, and development, manufacturing and scale-up activities, as well as activities related to broader implementation of all three INTERCEPT systems in areas of emerging pathogens. The RedeS and ReCePI and other studies are being funded as part of our agreement with BARDA. Under the contract, BARDA reimburses us for allowable direct contract costs, as such costs are incurred, and for allowable indirect costs. See the discussion under “BARDA” below for more information.
In November 2020, we received FDA approval for the INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation. Beginning in 2021, we began supplying INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation to select blood centers that manufacture IFC for us, and in 2021, we completed our first sale of IFC to a hospital customer. We plan to sell the finished IFC made by our manufacturing blood center partners directly to hospitals. Similar to our platelet and plasma products, any blood center manufacturing IFC will need to complete their process validations and obtain site-specific licenses from CBER before we or they can sell finished IFC to hospital customers outside of the states producing IFC. While one of our manufacturing partners received its BLA from CBER in 2021, we plan to continue working with our other U.S.-based blood centers manufacturing partners to support these activities and any delay in obtaining these licenses would adversely impact the nationwide availability of our finished IFC in the U.S. In addition, we have entered into certain agreements with blood centers and blood center affiliate organizations to sell the INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation kits which will allow those blood centers and blood center affiliate organizations to produce finished IFC for their own sales efforts to hospitals.
We have borrowed and, in the future, may borrow additional capital from institutional and commercial banking sources to fund future growth, including pursuant to the Credit, Security and Guaranty Agreement (Term Loan), or the Term Loan Credit Agreement, and Credit, Security and Guaranty Agreement (Revolving Loan), or the Revolving Loan Credit Agreement, as described below, or potentially pursuant to new arrangements with different lenders. We may borrow funds on terms that may include restrictive covenants, including covenants that restrict the operation of our business, liens on assets, high effective interest rates, financial performance covenants and repayment provisions that reduce cash resources and limit future access to capital markets. In addition, we expect to continue to opportunistically seek access to the equity capital markets to support our development efforts and operations. To the extent that we raise additional capital by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience substantial dilution. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaboration or partnering arrangements, we may be required to relinquish some of our rights to our technologies or rights to market and sell our products in certain geographies, grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us, or issue equity that may be substantially dilutive to our stockholders.
As a result of economic conditions, general global economic uncertainty, political change, and other factors, including uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we do not know whether additional capital will be available when needed, or that, if available, we will be able to obtain additional capital on reasonable terms. Specifically, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted global financial markets, and may limit our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. As a result of stimulus programs put in place over the past two years, the U.S. and many countries are currently experiencing an inflationary environment. This has led to the U.S. Federal Reserve taking action to raise interest rates, which in turn has negatively impacted equity values, including the value of our common stock. Furthermore, we expect that the costs of our business will increase as suppliers raise prices in an inflationary environment, transportation costs increase, and global supply chain constraints impact availability of our products. If we are unable to raise additional capital due to the volatile global financial markets, general economic uncertainty or other factors, we may need to curtail planned development or commercialization activities. In addition, we may need to obtain additional funds to complete development activities for the red blood cell system necessary for potential regulatory approval in Europe, if costs are higher than anticipated or we encounter delays. We may need to obtain additional funding to conduct additional randomized controlled clinical trials for existing or new products, particularly if we are unable to access any additional portions of the funding contemplated by our BARDA agreement, and we may choose to defer such activities until we can obtain sufficient additional funding or, at such time our existing operations provide sufficient cash flow to conduct these trials.
Although we received FDA approval of our platelet and plasma systems in December 2014, our U.S. commercial efforts continue to be largely focused on enabling blood centers that are using INTERCEPT to optimize production and increase the number of platelet and
plasma units produced and made available to patients and continuing to develop awareness of INTERCEPT’s product profile relative to other platelet and plasma products, including conventional, un-treated components. In addition, to address the entire market in the U.S., customers will need to modify their operating practices, or we will need to develop, test and obtain FDA approval of additional configurations of the platelet system. On October 1, 2021, all U.S. blood centers had to be compliant with the FDA guidance document, “Bacterial Risk Control Strategies for Blood Collection Establishments and Transfusion Services to Enhance the Safety and Availability of Platelets for Transfusion,” or the Final Guidance Document. Although the INTERCEPT Blood System is one of the options available to U.S. blood centers for compliance, we cannot predict if U.S. customers will continue to adopt INTERCEPT over other options or at what levels. Should we be unable to manufacture INTERCEPT in sufficient quantities in a timely manner, or have adequate resources to assist customers with implementing the INTERCEPT Blood System, U.S. blood centers may be forced to use alternate options allowed by the guidance document, which could permanently impact our ability to convert those blood centers to INTERCEPT users. Hospitals in regions seeing a surge in COVID-19 cases may disallow access to their sites or personnel which will delay our ability to market and sell our products, including IFC. Should the COVID-19 pandemic persist or heighten, customers may not be able to implement new technologies such as INTERCEPT and may instead choose to utilize other allowable methods with which they may have more familiarity.
Outside of the U.S., we recognize product revenues from the sale of our platelet and plasma systems in a number of countries around the world including those in Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States, or CIS, and the Middle East. We utilize both our direct sales organization and regional distributors to market and sell our platelet and plasma systems in these international markets. Our commercial efforts outside the U.S. are focused on increasing market adoption with our existing customer relationships and building demand in new geographies.
Generally, we enter into customer agreements for a specified term and varying options or extensions beyond the initial term. We cannot assure that all customers will use our products at historical levels or at all since securing long-term purchase volume commitments is not always possible, given the unpredictable nature of blood collection and usage. We also cannot provide any assurance that we will be able to secure any subsequent contracts with our customers or that the terms, including the pricing or committed volumes, if any, of any future contract will be equivalent or superior to the terms under our current contracts.
If we are unable to gain widespread commercial adoption in markets where our blood safety products are approved for commercialization, including the U.S., we will have difficulties achieving profitability. In order to commercialize all of our products and product candidates, we will be required to conduct significant research, development, preclinical and clinical evaluation, commercialization and regulatory compliance activities for our products and product candidates, which, together with anticipated selling, general and administrative expenses, are expected to result in substantial losses. Accordingly, we may never achieve a profitable level of operations in the future.
In addition to the anticipated product revenues from sales of our platelet and plasma systems and sales of IFC, we anticipate that we will continue to recognize revenue from our government contracts. We recognize government contract revenue associated with the government contracts as qualified costs are incurred for reimbursement over the performance period.
Fresenius
Fresenius Kabi AG, or Fresenius, manufactures and supplies the platelet and plasma systems to us under a supply agreement, or the Supply Agreement. Fresenius is obligated to sell, and we are obligated to purchase, finished disposable kits for our platelet, plasma and red blood cell systems. The Supply Agreement permits us to purchase platelet, plasma and red blood cell systems from third parties to the extent necessary to maintain supply qualifications with such third parties or where local or regional manufacturing is needed to obtain product registrations or sales. Pricing terms are defined through 2021. In response to public health directives in France similar to local orders issued in the U.S. to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020 Fresenius reconfigured production workflow to ensure employee safety and to comply with local requirements for social distancing and continues to operate under those local requirements. For a discussion of the risks presented to our supply chain by the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Item 1A - Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
See Note 12, Development and License Agreements, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the Supply Agreement with Fresenius.
Government contracts
In June 2016, we entered into an agreement with BARDA to support our development and implementation of pathogen reduction technology for platelet, plasma, and red blood cells, including access to funding that could potentially support various activities, including funding studies necessary to support a potential premarket approval application submission to the FDA for the red blood cell system, and acceleration of commercial scale up activities to facilitate potential adoption of the red blood cell system by U.S. blood centers.
The agreement with BARDA provides for the reimbursement of certain amounts incurred by us in connection with our satisfaction of certain contractual milestones. Under the agreement, we are reimbursed and recognize revenue as qualified direct contract costs are incurred plus allowable indirect costs, based on approved provisional indirect billing rates, which permit recovery of fringe benefits,
overhead and general and administrative expenses. As of December 31, 2021, BARDA has committed to reimburse certain of our expenses related to the clinical development of the red blood cell system during a base period, or the Base Period, and under exercised option periods, or Option Periods, in an aggregate amount of up to $126.5 million. If we satisfy subsequent milestones and BARDA were to exercise additional Option Periods, the total funding opportunity under the BARDA agreement could reach up to $223.5 million through December 31, 2023. If exercised by BARDA in its sole discretion, each subsequent Option Period would fund activities related to broader implementation of the platelet and plasma system or the red blood cell system in areas of emerging pathogens, clinical and regulatory development programs in support of the potential licensure of the red blood cell system in the U.S., and development, manufacturing and scale-up activities for the red blood cell system. If certain additional Option Periods are exercised by BARDA, we could be responsible for $9.6 million of co-investment. See Note 12, Development and License Agreements, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the agreement with BARDA.
In September 2020, we entered into a five-year agreement with the FDA for the development of next-generation compounds to optimize pathogen reduction treatment of whole blood to reduce the risk of transfusion-transmitted infections. Under the agreement, we are reimbursed and will recognize revenue as qualified direct contract costs are incurred plus allowable indirect costs, based on approved provisional indirect billing rates, which permit recovery of fringe benefits, overhead and general and administrative expenses. The total potential contract value is $11.1 million. See Note 12, Development and License Agreements, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the agreement with FDA.
Equity Agreements
See Note 9, Stockholders’ Equity, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, or the Sales Agreement, for the issuance and sale of our common stock.
Debt Agreement
See Note 7, Debt, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the debt under our Term Loan Credit Agreement and the Revolving Loan Credit Agreement.
COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has affected and will continue to affect economies and business around the world. To date, various governmental authorities and private enterprises have implemented numerous measures to contain the pandemic, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and non-essential business shutdowns, which have led to severe disruptions to the global and U.S. economies that may continue for a prolonged duration and has triggered a recession or a period of economic slowdown. We do not yet know the full extent of potential impacts on our product revenues, business operations, clinical trials, or overall financial projections. Should our employees, notably laboratory-based personnel, see a surge in infections, our ability to complete research and development activities may be impaired. As such, certain studies and trials may be delayed for an extended period of time. Furthermore, key deployment and technical service personnel, if infected, will not be able to support customers timely or effectively which could negatively impact our ability to support customers looking to begin INTERCEPT use or those experiencing any operational difficulties. The extent and duration of the pandemic is highly uncertain and difficult to predict. We are actively monitoring and managing our response and assessing actual and potential impacts to our operating results and financial condition, which could also impact trends and expectations as described in more detail below.
Comparability
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations generally discusses December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Management Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to product revenue recognition and government contract revenue. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements:
• Revenue-Revenue is recognized in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”, by applying the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
The main source of our revenue is product revenue from sales of the INTERCEPT Blood System for platelets and plasma, or the platelet and plasma systems or disposable kits, UVA illumination devices, or illuminators, spare parts, storage solutions, maintenance services of illuminators, and IFC. We sell the platelet and plasma systems directly to blood banks, hospitals, universities, government agencies, as well as to distributors in certain regions. We sell IFC directly to hospital customers in the U.S. using a direct sales force, though we may in the future sell INTERCEPT Blood System for Cryoprecipitation disposable kits to strategic blood centers that are not manufacturing partners for our distribution and sale of IFC. For all sales of our INTERCEPT Blood System products, we use a binding purchase order or signed sales contract as evidence of a contract and satisfaction of our policy. For all sales of IFC, our customers place orders in Bloodhub, and our manufacturing partners fulfill orders and ship orders to our customers. Generally, our contracts with customers do not provide for open return rights, except within a reasonable time after receipt of goods in the case of defective or non-conforming product. The contracts with customers can include various combinations of products, and to a lesser extent, services. We must determine whether products or services are capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations, or are accounted for as a combined performance obligation. We must allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price, or SSP basis, and recognize the revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied. We determine the SSP by using the historical selling price of the products and services. If the amount of consideration in a contract is variable, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price. Product revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Product revenue from the sale of illuminators, disposable kits, spare parts, storage solutions and IFC are recognized upon the transfer of control of the products to the customer. Product revenue from maintenance services is recognized ratably on a straight-line basis over the term of maintenance as customers simultaneously consume and receive benefits. Freight costs charged to customers are recorded as a component of product revenue. Taxes invoiced to our customers and remitted to governments are recorded on a net basis, which excludes such tax from product revenue.
• Government contract revenue-Revenue related to the cost reimbursement provisions under our government contract agreements is recognized as the allowable direct contract costs plus allowable indirect costs are incurred based on approved provisional indirect billing rates, which permit recovery of fringe benefits, overhead and general and administrative expenses. Direct costs incurred under cost reimbursable contracts are recorded as research and development expenses or general and administrative expenses. Payments to us pursuant to our government contract agreements are provisional payments subject to adjustment upon audit by the government. These audits could result in an adjustment to revenue previously reported, which adjustments potentially could be significant. We believe that revenue for periods not yet audited has been recorded in amounts that are expected to be realized upon final audit and settlement. When the final determination of the allowable costs for any year has been made, revenue and billings may be adjusted accordingly in the period that the adjustment is known.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Product revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to year-over-year sales volume growth in disposable platelet system kit sales in the U.S. Also contributing to the increase was a strengthened Euro compared to the U.S. dollar during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We anticipate product revenue for INTERCEPT disposable kits will increase in future periods driven by the expected continued expansion of U.S. sales, increased market acceptance of the INTERCEPT Blood System and adoption of the INTERCEPT Blood System in geographies where commercialization efforts are underway. In addition, we expect to see IFC product revenue increase in future periods, in part due to the impact of our sales efforts to U.S. hospital customers. However, a deterioration of the Euro relative to the U.S. dollar has in the past, and could in the future, have a material impact on our product revenues, as a significant portion of our product revenue is still expected to come from Euro denominated markets over the near term. As a result of these and other factors, the historical results may not be indicative of INTERCEPT Blood System product revenue in the future.
Government contract revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased activities under our government contracts, resulting from the reimbursement of the direct and indirect contract costs incurred under our government contracts. Given the ongoing effects that the COVID-19 pandemic has on our BARDA funded activities, we do not anticipate that government contracts revenue will materially change from historical trends.
Cost of Product Revenue
Our cost of product revenue consists of the cost of the INTERCEPT Blood System sold, provisions for obsolete, slow-moving and unsaleable product, certain order fulfillment costs, to the extent applicable and costs for idle facilities. Inventory is accounted for on a first-in, first-out basis.
Cost of product revenue increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased sales, and, to a lesser extent, the impact of foreign exchange rates.
Our gross margin on product sales was 51% during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 55% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross margin on product sales was primarily due to unfavorable product mix with U.S. customers primarily from platelet kits used to produce a single therapeutic dose which contribute to a lower gross margin percentage relative to platelet kits used to produce more than one therapeutic dose. Changes in our gross margin on product sales are affected by various factors, including the volume of product manufactured and the relative per unit pricing in our Supply Agreement with Fresenius, the timing of inventory purchases related to the underlying exchange rate of the Euro relative to the U.S. dollar, manufacturing and supply chain costs, the mix of product sold, and the mix of customers to which products are sold. Furthermore, we expect that our suppliers will raise prices in an inflationary environment, resulting in increased costs to produce our product, increased transportation costs and an adverse impact on the efficiency of our supply chain. Additionally, we may encounter unforeseen manufacturing difficulties, including those related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which, at a minimum, may lead to higher than anticipated costs, scrap rates, delays in manufacturing products, or lower production levels of manufacturing than would be needed to meet demand. We may also decide to make investments with our manufacturing partners to identify longer-term efficiencies, but result in near-term increased costs. In addition, we may face competition which may limit our ability to maintain existing selling prices for our products which in turn would negatively affect our reported gross margins on product sales. Our gross margins on product sales may be impacted in the future based on all of these and other criteria.
We expect to build inventory levels that will be sufficient to meet forecasted demand. While our suppliers have initiated business continuity plans with minimal disruption to our supply to date, we cannot be certain that any prolonged, intensified or worsened effect from the COVID-19 pandemic would not significantly impact our supply chain. At times, we may purchase quantities of materials, components or finished products that are expected to be on-hand for longer than one year. We may procure and carry this inventory to mitigate obsolescence, supply chain disruption and for business continuity reasons.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses include salaries and related expenses for our scientific personnel, non-cash stock-based compensation, payments to consultants, costs to prepare and conduct preclinical and clinical trials, third-party costs for development activities, certain regulatory costs, costs associated with our facility related infrastructure, and laboratory chemicals and supplies.
Research and development expenses slightly decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to completion of work for certain post-market platelet and IFC studies, largely offset by increased costs associated with work associated with new product development.
We expect to incur additional research and development costs associated with inflationary pressures on labor and study costs, pursuing potential regulatory approvals in other geographies where we do not currently sell our platelet and plasma systems, planning and conducting in vitro studies and clinical development of our red blood cell system in Europe and the U.S., completing activities to support our CE Mark submission for our red blood cell system in Europe, new product development and product enhancements, including potential new label claims, design efforts on our illuminator, and costs associated with performing the activities under our government contracts. Due to the inherent uncertainties and risks associated with developing biomedical products, including, but not limited to,
intense and changing government regulation, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, uncertainty of future preclinical studies and clinical trial results and uncertainty associated with manufacturing, it is not possible to reasonably estimate the costs to complete these research and development projects. We face numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the successful completion of our research and development projects, which risks and uncertainties are discussed in further detail under “Item 1A - Risk Factors” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses include salaries and related expenses for administrative personnel, non-cash stock-based compensation, expenses for our commercialization efforts in a number of countries around the world including those in U.S., Europe, the CIS and the Middle East, Asia, Latin America, and expenses for accounting, tax, internal control, legal, and facility and infrastructure related expenses, and insurance premiums. We expect to incur additional Selling, general and administrative costs associated with inflationary pressures on labor and vendor costs.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by stock-based and incentive compensation as well as investments associated with the commercial launch of IFC.
Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net
Non-operating expense, net consists of foreign exchange gains and losses, interest charges incurred on our debt, and other non-operating gains and losses, including interest earned from our short-term investment portfolio, and gains and losses due to changes in fair value of certain investments.
Foreign Exchange Gain (Loss)
We had foreign exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to foreign exchange gains during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to less favorable foreign exchange variations between the Euro and the U.S. dollar.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the higher underlying balance per our Term Loan Credit Agreement driven by our borrowing of Tranche 2, of $15.0 million on March 29, 2021.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the decrease of interest income from our investments in marketable securities.
Provision for Income Taxes
The tax expenses were primarily a result of our Cerus Europe B.V. subsidiary’s operating profit.
Due to our history of cumulative operating losses, management has concluded that, after considering all of the available objective evidence, it is not likely that all our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021, will be realized. Accordingly, substantially all of our U.S. deferred tax assets continue to be subject to a valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In recent years, our sources of capital have primarily consisted of public issuance of common stock, debt instruments, and to a lesser extent, cash from product sales and reimbursements under our government agreements.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had the following cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and restricted cash (in thousands):
Excess cash is typically invested in highly liquid instruments of short-term investments with high-quality credit rated corporate and government agency fixed-income securities in accordance with our investment policy.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had the following indebtedness (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily related to increased product sales and underlying gross profit, revenue from our BARDA agreement and the timing of payments, partially offset by increased inventory build during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020.
Investing Activities
The change period over period was primarily the result of higher purchases of investments from the proceeds associated with our January 2020 public offering of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to higher proceeds from the maturity and sale of our investments to support operations, during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to the net proceeds of approximately $62.7 million received from our January 2020 public offering of our common stock, and net proceeds of approximately $13.9 million received from the shares sold under the agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. during the year ended December 31, 2020. This was partially offset by borrowings under our Term Loan Credit Agreement of $15.0 million and net increased borrowings under our Revolving Loan Credit Agreement of $2.7 million, and net proceeds of approximately $3.1 million received from the shares sold under the Sales Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 7, Debt, in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Working Capital
Working capital decreased as of December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to continued overall use of cash from operations to support the increased costs associated with product enhancements, initiatives for expanded platelet label claims,
preliminary design efforts on our next generation illuminator, and investments associated with the commercial launch of IFC, offset by proceeds from increased product sales and collections, proceeds from the borrowings under our Term Loan Credit Agreement and Revolving Loan Credit Agreement, and proceeds from the shares sold under the Sales Agreement the during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Capital Requirements
Our near-term capital requirements are dependent on various factors, including operating costs and working capital investments associated with developing and commercializing the INTERCEPT Blood System, including in connection with the continuing U.S. commercialization of our platelet, plasma systems and IFC, costs to develop different configurations of existing products and new products, including our illuminator, costs associated with planning, enrolling and completing ongoing studies, and the post-approval studies we are required to conduct in connection with the FDA approval of the platelet system, costs associated with pursuing potential regulatory approvals in other geographies where we do not currently sell our platelet and plasma systems, costs associated with conducting in vitro studies and clinical development of our red blood cell system in Europe and the U.S., costs associated with performing the agreed-upon activities under our government agreements, and costs related to creating, maintaining and defending our intellectual property. Our long-term capital requirements will also be dependent on the success of our sales efforts, competitive developments, the timing, costs and magnitude of our longer-term clinical trials and other development activities, required post-approval studies, market preparedness and product launch activities for any of our product candidates and products in geographies where we do not currently sell our products, and regulatory factors. Until we are able to generate a sufficient amount of product revenue and generate positive net cash flows from operations, which we may never do, meeting our long-term capital requirements is in large part reliant on access to funds under our government contracts and the public and private equity and debt capital markets, as well as on collaborative arrangements with partners, augmented by cash generated from operations, if at all, and interest income earned on the investment of our cash balances. While we believe that our available cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, as well as cash received from product sales and under our agreement with government contracts, will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements for at least the next 12 months, if we are unable to generate sufficient product revenue, or access sufficient funds under our government contracts or the public and private equity and debt capital markets, we may be unable to execute successfully on our operating plan. We have based our cash sufficiency estimate on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect. If our assumptions prove to be incorrect, we could consume our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect or in excess of amounts than we currently expect, which could adversely affect our commercialization and clinical development activities.
We have borrowed and in the future may borrow additional capital from institutional and commercial banking sources to fund future growth, including pursuant to the Term Loan Credit Agreement and Revolving Loan Credit Agreement, or potentially pursuant to new arrangements with different lenders. We may borrow funds on terms that may include restrictive covenants, including covenants that restrict the operation of our business, liens on assets, high effective interest rates, financial performance covenants and repayment provisions that reduce cash resources and limit future access to capital markets. In addition, we expect to continue to opportunistically seek access to the equity capital markets to support our development efforts and operations. To the extent that we raise additional capital by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience substantial dilution. To the extent that we raise additional funds through collaboration or partnering arrangements, we may be required to relinquish some of our rights to our technologies or rights to market and sell our products in certain geographies, grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us, or issue equity that may be substantially dilutive to our stockholders.
In December 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement under which we may issue and sell up to $100.0 million of our common stock through or to Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. or Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, as sales agent or principal. To date, we have sold 0.4 million shares of our common stock under the Sales Agreement for net proceeds of $3.1 million.
While we expect to receive significant funding under our agreement with BARDA, our ability to obtain the funding we expect to receive under this agreement is subject to various risks and uncertainties, with respect to BARDA’s ability to terminate the agreement for convenience at any time and our ability to achieve the required milestones under this agreement, including with respect to the conduct of the RedeS and ReCePI studies, enrollment for which has been suspended or slowed at many of the hospital sites due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, access to federal contracts is subject to the authorization of funds and approval of our research plans by various organizations within the federal government, including the U.S. Congress. The general economic environment and uncertainty associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with tight federal budgets, has led to a general decline in the amount available for government funding. If BARDA were to eliminate, reduce or delay funding under our agreement, this would have a significant negative impact on the programs associated with such funding and could have a significant negative impact on our revenues and cash flows. Furthermore, should we be unable to deploy personnel or derive a benefit from fixed study costs or generate data from clinical sites and studies reimbursed by BARDA, our cash flows would be negatively impacted or we may have to initiate furloughs and layoffs which would likely prove disruptive to our management and operations. In addition, if we are unable to generate sufficient prerequisite Phase 3 clinical data, our agreement with BARDA will be severely limited in scope or could be terminated altogether, and our ability to complete the development activities required for licensure in the U.S. may require additional capital beyond which we currently have.
Furthermore, while BARDA has provided funding for and has indicated a potential for future funding for many activities associated with combating COVID-19, the availability and focus for any BARDA funding will likely be finite and may require us to compete with other technologies, both similar and disparate. If alternative sources of funding are not available, or if we determine that the cost of alternative available capital is too high, we may be forced to suspend or terminate development activities related to the red blood cell system in the U.S.
We do not currently enter into any hedging contracts to normalize the impact of foreign exchange fluctuations. As a result, our future results could be materially affected by changes in these or other factors.
As a result of economic conditions, general global economic uncertainty, political change, global pandemics, natural disasters, and other factors, we do not know whether additional capital will be available when needed, or that, if available, we will be able to obtain additional capital on reasonable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital due to the volatile global financial markets, general economic uncertainty or other factors, we may need to curtail planned development or commercialization activities. Specifically, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted global financial markets, and may limit our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. A recession or market correction resulting from the spread of COVID-19 could materially affect our business and the value of our common stock.
In addition, we may need to obtain additional funds to complete development activities for the red blood cell system necessary for potential regulatory approval in Europe, if costs are higher than anticipated or we encounter delays. We may need to obtain additional funding to conduct additional randomized controlled clinical trials for existing or new products, particularly if we are unable to access any additional portions of the funding contemplated by our government agreements, and we may choose to defer such activities until we can obtain sufficient additional funding or, at such time, our existing operations provide sufficient cash flow to conduct these trials.
Other Information
See Note 9, Stockholders’ Equity, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding the public offering of our common stock.
Commitments
See Note 7, Debt, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the debt under our Term Loan Credit Agreement and the Revolving Loan Credit Agreement.
See Note 8, Commitments and Contingencies, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on our operating leases.
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Financial Instruments
Our investment policy is to manage our marketable securities portfolio to preserve principal and liquidity while maximizing the return on the investment portfolio to assist us in funding our operations. We currently invest our cash and cash equivalents in money market funds and interest-bearing accounts with financial institutions. Our money market funds are classified as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy, in which quoted prices are available in active markets, as the maturity of money market funds are relatively short and the carrying amount is a reasonable estimate of fair value. Our available-for-sale securities related to corporate debt and U.S. government agency securities are classified as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy, which uses observable inputs to quoted market prices, benchmark yields, reported trades, broker/dealer quotes or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. We maintain portfolio liquidity by ensuring that the securities have active secondary or resale markets. We did not record any credit losses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Adverse global economic conditions have had, and may continue to have, a negative impact on the market values of potential investments.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part IV, Item 15, "Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on new accounting pronouncements.