Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to assist in understanding the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and capital resources of the Company. The Bank comprises almost all of the consolidated assets and liabilities of the Company and the Company is dependent primarily upon the performance of the Bank for the results of its operations. Because of this relationship, references to management actions, strategies and results of actions apply to both the Bank and the Company except where the context indicates otherwise.
Executive Summary
The following summary should be read in conjunction with the Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section in its entirety.
The Company recognized net income of $84.5 million, or $0.62 per share, for fiscal year 2022 compared to net income of $76.1 million, or $0.56 per share, for the prior fiscal year. The $8.4 million, or 11.0%, increase in net income was due to an increase in net interest income, partially offset by higher income tax expense and a lower negative provision for credit losses. The net interest margin was 1.79% for the current year compared to 1.90% for the prior year. When the leverage strategy discussed below is in place, it reduces the net interest margin due to the amount of earnings from the transaction in comparison to the size of the transaction. Excluding the effects of the leverage strategy, the net interest margin would have been 2.04% in the current year, a 14 basis point increase from the prior year. The increase in net interest margin excluding the effects of the leverage strategy was due mainly to a reduction in the weighted average cost of retail certificates of deposit. During the latter portion of the current year, as market interest rates increased, the Bank's cost of borrowings and deposits began increasing at a faster pace than the yield on assets. Management anticipates this may continue in the near term.
At times, the Bank has utilized a leverage strategy to increase earnings. The leverage strategy during the current year involved borrowing up to $2.60 billion by entering into short-term FHLB advances. The borrowings were repaid prior to each quarter end. The proceeds from the borrowings, net of the required FHLB stock holdings which yielded 6.75% during the current year, were deposited at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City ("FRB of Kansas City"). Net income attributable to the leverage strategy is largely derived from the dividends received on FHLB stock holdings, plus the net interest rate spread between the yield on the cash deposited at the FRB of Kansas City and the rate paid on the related FHLB borrowings, less applicable federal insurance premiums and estimated taxes. Net income attributable to the leverage strategy was $3.1 million during the current year. Management continuously monitors the net interest rate spread and overall profitability of the strategy. It is expected that the strategy will be utilized as long as it remains profitable and/or the borrowing capacity and available capital does not need to be used for other operational purposes.
Total assets were $9.62 billion at September 30, 2022, a decrease of $6.3 million from September 30, 2021. Loans receivable increased $383.1 million, or 5.4%, during the current year to $7.46 billion at September 30, 2022. The loan growth was primarily in the one-to four-family correspondent and commercial loan portfolios. This growth was funded by cash flows from the securities portfolio and FHLB borrowings. The deposit portfolio decreased $402.5 million during the current year, to $6.19 billion at September 30, 2022. The decrease was primarily in the certificate of deposit portfolio, partially offset by increases in the retail checking, savings and money market accounts. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2022, management began increasing offered rates on certificates of deposit, which slowed the runoff in this portfolio. Due to deposit outflows and loan growth, the Bank entered into additional FHLB borrowings during the second half of the current fiscal year. FHLB borrowings increased $549.3 million during the year, to $2.13 billion at September 30, 2022. If deposit outflows continue, the Bank will likely increase FHLB borrowings. If that occurs, the leverage strategy transaction amount may decrease due to borrowing, collateral capacity and capital levels. Stockholder's equity was $1.10 billion at September 30, 2022, a decrease of $145.8 million from September 30, 2021. The decrease was due almost entirely to a reduction in AOCI as a result of changes in the fair value of AFS securities due to an increase in market interest rates during the year. The unrealized losses on AFS securities increased $211.3 million, resulting in a $159.8 million reduction in AOCI, net of tax.
The Bank's asset quality continued to remain strong during the current fiscal year, reflected in low delinquency and charge-off ratios. At September 30, 2022, loans 30 to 89 days delinquent were 0.09% of total loans receivable, net, and loans 90 or more days delinquent or in foreclosure were 0.12% of total loans receivable, net. The ratio of net charge-offs (recoveries) ("NCOs") during the current year to average loans outstanding during the current year was 0.00%.
At September 30, 2022, the Bank had a one-year gap position of $(1.14) billion, or (11.9)% of total assets, meaning the amount of interest-bearing liabilities exceeds the amount of interest-earning assets maturing or repricing during the same period. See additional discussion in "Part II,