Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans, and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Special Note About Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “we,” “us,” “our,” “our company,” and “Confluent” refer to Confluent, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. Unless otherwise indicated, references to our “common stock” include our Class A common stock and Class B common stock.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the final prospectus for our initial public offering (“IPO”) dated as of June 23, 2021 and filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on June 25, 2021.
Overview
Confluent is on a mission to set data in motion. We were founded in 2014 to pioneer this fundamentally new category of data infrastructure designed to connect all the applications, systems, and data layers of a company around a real-time central nervous system. This new data infrastructure software has emerged as one of the most strategic parts of the next-generation technology stack, and using this stack to harness data in motion is critical to the success of every modern company as they strive to compete and win in the digital-first world. Prior to Confluent, our founders created the open source software project Apache Kafka, a technology that has been central to enabling data in motion. Since our founding, we have heavily invested in product development to build a complete, cloud-native platform for data in motion.
Confluent is designed to act as the nexus of real-time data, from every source, allowing it to stream across the organization and enabling applications to harness it to power real-time customer experiences and data-driven business operations. Our offering enables organizations to deploy production-ready applications that span across cloud environments and data centers, while scaling elastically with enhanced features for security, compliance, and governance. Our platform provides the capabilities to fill the structural, operational, and engineering gaps required for businesses to fully realize the power of data in motion. We enable software developers to easily build their initial applications to harness data in motion, and enable large, complex enterprises to make data in motion core to everything they do. As organizations mature in their adoption cycle, we enable them to quickly, securely, and reliably build more and more applications that take advantage of data in motion. The results have a dual effect: businesses continuously improve their ability to provide better customer experiences and concurrently drive data-driven business operations. We believe that Confluent, over time, will become the central nervous system for modern digital enterprises, providing ubiquitous real-time connectivity and powering real-time applications across the enterprise.
We generate our revenue primarily from the sale of subscriptions to our offering that can be deployed in two different ways. Confluent Platform is an enterprise-ready, self-managed software offering that can be deployed in our customers’ on-premise, private cloud, and public cloud environments. Confluent Cloud is a fully-managed, cloud-native software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) offering available on all of the leading cloud providers. These two core offerings can be leveraged independently or together, spanning the various public cloud, private cloud, and on-premise environments in which our customers operate.
Confluent Platform customers receive access to our proprietary features and various tiers of customer support. Our Confluent Platform subscriptions primarily have one-year terms and are generally billed annually in advance. Confluent Cloud customers may purchase subscriptions either without a minimum commitment contract on a month-to-month basis, which we refer to as pay-as-you-go, or under a usage-based minimum commitment contract of at least one year in duration, in which customers commit to a fixed minimum monetary amount at specified per-usage rates. Pay-as you-go customers are billed, and revenue from them is recognized, based on usage. Customers with usage-based minimum commitments are billed annually in advance or monthly in arrears, and we recognize revenue from such subscriptions based on usage by the customer. As a result, our revenue may fluctuate from period to period due to varying patterns of customer consumption.
We are focused on the acquisition of new customers and expanding within our current customers. Our go-to-market model benefits from our self-service motions driven by our cloud-native platform offerings, our widespread mindshare among developers through Apache Kafka, community downloads, and our enterprise sales force. We are able to acquire new customers through seamless and frictionless self-service cloud adoption and free cloud trials, as well as community downloads. For example, after users get started with our free cloud trial, they can easily convert online to become paying customers either on a pay-as-you-go model or with a minimum commitment contract. Once customers see the benefits of our platform for their initial use cases, they often expand into other use cases and lines of business, divisions, and geographies. Our deep technical expertise, coupled with our product capabilities and laser focus on customer outcomes, enable us to form strategic partnerships with our customers to guide and accelerate this journey. This expansion often generates a natural network effect in which the value of our platform to a customer increases as more use cases are adopted, more users and teams are onboarded, more applications and systems are connected, and more data is added. We had approximately 3,470, 2,100, and 820 customers as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We have experienced significant growth, with revenue increasing from $236.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $387.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing year-over-year growth of 64%, and from $149.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $236.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing year-over-year growth of 58%.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic, including any new variants, will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, related public health measures, how national, state, and local governments continue to respond, rate of COVID-19 vaccinations, emergence of new variant strains of the virus and their resistance to vaccines, and the pandemic’s impact on the global economy generally and our customers specifically, all of which remain highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted.
Since the pandemic began, we have experienced, and may continue to experience in future periods, an adverse impact on certain parts of our business as a result of governmental restrictions and other measures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including delays in delivery of professional services and education services to customers and a lengthening in the sales cycle for some prospective customers. If our customers or partners experience new or continued downturns or uncertainty in their own business operations or revenue resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, they may decrease or delay their spending, request pricing discounts, or seek renegotiations of their contracts, any of which may result in decreased revenue, dollar-based net retention rate (“NRR”), and cash receipts for us.
Despite the adverse impacts described above, the pandemic has caused more of our existing and potential customers to accelerate their digital transformation efforts. As a result, we believe the value of our offering is becoming even more evident, which may result in a positive impact on our business over the long term. In addition, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we saw slower growth in certain operating expenses due to reduced business travel and the virtualization or cancellation of customer, partner, and employee events. While slower growth in operating expenses had a short-term benefit to our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we expect expenses related to travel, in-person events, real estate and facilities to increase in 2022.
We adopted several measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to focus on maintaining business continuity and preparing for the long-term success of our business, including temporarily requiring employees to work remotely, suspending non-essential travel by our employees, requiring events to be held virtually, and temporarily reducing the pace of our employee hiring across all functions in the second and third quarters of 2020. In particular, the reduction in employee hiring for our sales and marketing organization has negatively impacted our near- to medium-term growth rate and revenue. Furthermore, as a government contractor, we are subject to the federal government vaccination mandate, which requires federal contractor employees, except in certain limited circumstances, to be vaccinated against COVID-19 by January 4, 2022. While the vaccination mandate remains subject to the interpretation of various government agencies and other entities, and questions remain regarding the specific application of the vaccination mandate, we have developed and implemented certain protocols to voluntarily comply with the vaccination mandate. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, the vaccination mandate has not had a material impact on our employees or operations. We may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our business, employees, customers, and business partners. The global impact of COVID-19 continues to rapidly evolve, and while the broader implications of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain, we will continue to monitor the situation and the effects on our business and operations.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Developing Innovative, Market-Leading Offerings and Expanding Developer Mindshare
We are focused on delivering market-leading offerings. We believe it is critical for us to maintain our product leadership position and further increase the strength of our brand and reputation to drive revenue growth. We developed Confluent Cloud, our cloud-native SaaS offering, in 2017 to capitalize on the existing demand for a fully-managed cloud service for Apache Kafka. Confluent Cloud has grown rapidly since launch, as organizations have been making significant investments in digital infrastructure with the goal of both driving efficiencies across their businesses, and better leveraging the data that powers their processes and customer experiences. In addition, we continue to release new product enhancements and features to simplify application development and real-time analytics and enhance security and data governance. We intend to continue investing in our engineering capabilities and marketing activities to maintain our strong position within the developer community. Our results of operations may fluctuate as we make these investments to drive increased customer adoption and usage.
Increasing Adoption of Confluent Cloud
We believe our cloud-native Confluent Cloud offering represents an important growth opportunity for our business. Organizations are increasingly looking for a fully-managed offering to seamlessly leverage data in motion across a variety of environments. In some cases, customers that have been self-managing deployments through Confluent Platform subsequently have become Confluent Cloud customers. We offer customers a free cloud trial and a pay-as-you-go arrangement to encourage adoption and usage over time. We will continue to leverage our cloud-native differentiation to drive our growth. We expect Confluent Cloud’s contribution to our subscription revenue to increase over time. Our Confluent Cloud revenue increased from $31.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $94.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing year-over-year growth of 200%, and from $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $31.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing year-over-year growth of 117%.
Growing Our Customer Base and Extending Our Global Reach
We are intensely focused on continuing to grow our customer base. We have invested and will continue to invest in our sales and marketing efforts and developer community outreach, which are critical to driving customer acquisition. We historically focused on large enterprise customers with significant expansion opportunities and built a go-to-market motion around this approach. As we grew our cloud offering and created more self-serve opportunities, we have significantly broadened our reach of customers and are able to attract a greater array of customers. This is evidenced by our significant increase in customer count in recent years, driven by Confluent Cloud customers. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including our success in recruiting and scaling our sales and marketing organization, our ability to accelerate ramp time of our sales force, the impact of marketing efforts to enhance our brand, and competitive dynamics in our target markets. We had approximately 3,470, 2,100, and 820 customers as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, spanning organizations of all sizes and industries. Our customer count treats affiliated entities with the same parent organization as a single customer and includes pay-as-you-go customers. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, 36%, 34%, and 32% of our total revenue came from outside of the United States, respectively.
Retaining and Expanding Revenue from Existing Customers
Our business model is driven by customer renewals and increasing existing customer subscriptions over time, referred to as land-and-expand. We believe we have significant opportunities to increase our revenue as customers expand their use of our offering in connection with migrating more data to the public cloud, identifying new use cases, and realizing the benefits of data in motion. Our ability to retain and expand revenue from existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including the impact of existing customers becoming a larger portion of our overall customer base, large initial deal sizes that incorporate potential growth, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the initial impact of existing customers transitioning to our usage-based Confluent Cloud offering, customer satisfaction with our subscriptions and services, loss of large customers including the timing of any such loss, and the mix of commercial and enterprise customers, among other things.
Investing in Growth and Scaling our Business
We believe our market opportunity is significant, and we are focused on continuing to make substantial investments in our long-term revenue and profitability potential. We believe it is critical to scale across all organizational functions, including our sales and marketing organization, in order to capture this opportunity. Any investments we make in our sales and marketing organization will occur in advance of experiencing the benefits from such investments, and it may be difficult for us to determine if we are efficiently allocating resources within the organization. We intend to continue to invest to grow our business to take advantage of our expansive market opportunity rather than optimize for profitability, margins, or cash flow in the near future.
Key Business Metrics
We monitor the key business metrics set forth below to help us evaluate our business and growth trends, establish budgets, measure our performance, and make strategic decisions. The calculation of the key metrics discussed below may differ from other similarly titled metrics used by other companies, securities analysts, or investors.
Remaining Performance Obligations (“RPO”)
RPO represents the amount of contracted future revenue that has not yet been recognized as of the end of each period, including both deferred revenue that has been invoiced and non-cancelable committed amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. RPO excludes pay-as-you-go arrangements.
RPO as a metric is not necessarily indicative of future revenue growth because it does not account for the timing of customers’ consumption or future expansion. RPO may also fluctuate due to a number of factors, including the timing of renewals, average contract terms, seasonality, and dollar amount of customer contracts. Due to these factors, it is important to review RPO in conjunction with revenue and other financial measures disclosed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our RPO was $500.6 million, $261.7 million, and $159.6 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Customers with $100,000 or Greater in Annual Recurring Revenue (“ARR”)
We define ARR as the revenue customers contractually committed to over the following 12 months assuming no increases or reductions in their subscriptions. ARR excludes services and pay-as-you-go arrangements. Similar to RPO, ARR as a metric is not necessarily indicative of future revenue growth because it does not account for the timing of customers’ consumption or future expansion. Large customer relationships lead to scale and operating leverage in our business model. Compared with smaller customers, large customers present a greater opportunity for us because they have larger budgets, greater potential for migrating more applications over time, and a wider range of potential use cases for data in motion. As a measure of our ability to scale with our customers and attract large enterprises to our offering, we count the number of customers that contributed $100,000 or greater in ARR as of period end. Our customer count may also fluctuate due to acquisitions, consolidations, spin-offs, and other market activity. We had 734, 513, and 337 customers with $100,000 or greater in ARR as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
From time to time, we may refine our methodology of calculating ARR. We have included, and continue to include, annualized overages in our calculation of ARR. Customers are contractually committed to pay overages plus the minimum contractually committed amount. Beginning in the third quarter of 2021, we refined our methodology of calculating ARR to only include overages above the contractually committed ARR, to align with how our management assesses ARR internally. This change in methodology had an immaterial impact to historical amounts presented, which have not been retroactively adjusted.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate (“NRR”)
We calculate our dollar-based NRR as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period end, or Prior Period Value. We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period end, or Current Period Value, which includes any growth in the value of subscriptions and is net of contraction or attrition over the prior 12 months. Services and pay-as-you-go arrangements are excluded from the calculation of ARR. We then divide the Current Period Value by the Prior Period Value to arrive at our dollar-based NRR. The dollar-based NRR includes the effect, on a dollar-weighted value basis, of our subscriptions that expand, renew, contract, or attrit, but excludes ARR from new customers in the current period. Our dollar-based NRR is subject to adjustments for acquisitions, consolidations, spin-offs, and other market activity. We believe that our dollar-based NRR provides useful information about the evolution of our existing customers and our future growth prospects. Our dollar-based NRR was over 130% as of December 31, 2021, demonstrating our ability to expand within existing customers.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from subscriptions and, to a lesser extent, services.
Subscription Revenue. Our subscription revenue consists of revenue from term-based licenses and post-contract customer support, maintenance, and upgrades, referred to together as PCS, which we refer to as Confluent Platform, and our SaaS offering, which we refer to as Confluent Cloud. We recognize a portion of the revenue from our term-based license subscriptions at a point in time, upon delivery and transfer of control of the underlying license to the customer, which is typically the effective start date. Revenue from PCS, which represents a substantial majority of the revenue from our term-based license subscriptions, is recognized ratably over the contract term. The majority of our revenue from Confluent Cloud for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was based on usage-based minimum commitments and is recognized on a usage basis, as usage represents a direct measurement of the value to the customer of the subscription transferred as of a particular date relative to the total value to be delivered over the term of the contract. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the majority of our revenue from Confluent Cloud was derived from contracts that are not usage-based, with revenue from these contracts recognized ratably over the non-cancelable term of the subscription for such contracts, as our usage-based offering for Confluent Cloud became available in late 2019. Our subscriptions primarily have one-year terms, and are generally non-cancelable and non-refundable. We also provide pay-as-you-go arrangements, which consist of month-to-month SaaS contracts. These arrangements have historically represented an immaterial portion of our subscription revenue.
Services Revenue. Services revenue consists of revenue from professional services and education services, which are generally sold on a time-and-materials basis. Revenue for professional services and education services is recognized as these services are delivered.
We expect our total revenue may vary from period to period based on, among other things, the timing and size of new subscriptions, the rate of customer renewals and expansions, fluctuations in customer consumption of our usage-based offering, delivery of professional services, ramp time and productivity of our salesforce, the impact of significant transactions, and seasonality.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Subscription Revenue. Cost of subscription revenue primarily includes personnel-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for employees associated with customer support and maintenance, third-party cloud infrastructure costs, amortization of internal-use software, and allocated overhead costs for information technology, facilities, and recruiting. We expect our cost of subscription revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our subscription revenue increases.
Cost of Services Revenue. Cost of services revenue primarily includes personnel-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for employees associated with our professional services and education services, costs of third-party contractors, and allocated overhead. We expect our cost of services revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our services revenue increases.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross Profit. Gross profit represents revenue less cost of revenue.
Gross Margin. Gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including the average sales price of our subscriptions and services, changes in our revenue mix, including the mix of revenue between our Confluent Platform, Confluent Cloud, and service offerings, timing and amount of usage of third-party cloud infrastructure resources, and infrastructure optimization. We expect our gross margin to fluctuate over time depending on the factors described above.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related costs are the most significant component of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, net of capitalized amounts, third-party cloud infrastructure expenses incurred in developing our platform, software and subscription services dedicated for use by our research and development organization, contractor and professional services fees, and allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows and we continue to invest in our offering.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, sales commissions, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, costs related to marketing programs, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, which consist of sales commissions and the associated payroll taxes, travel-related costs, and allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, corporate communications, and brand-building and developer-community activities. We expect our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars over time and continue to be our largest operating expense for the foreseeable future as we expand our sales force, increase our marketing resources, and expand into new markets.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for administrative functions including finance, human resources, and legal, professional fees, software and subscription services dedicated for use by our general and administrative functions, and allocated overhead.
As a result of our IPO, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional expenses to operate as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations, and increased expenses for investor relations and professional services. As discussed in Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements, we also recognized non-cash expense of $13.3 million related to the charitable donation of our Class A common stock to Confluent.org in June 2021. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts on marketable securities, interest expense from amortization of debt issuance costs, gains and losses from foreign currency transactions, and realized gains and losses on marketable securities.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign and U.S. state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance against our U.S. and U.K. deferred tax assets because we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods presented:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
*In connection with a tender offer and secondary sales of our common stock and convertible founder stock, stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $111.9 million of expense related to the amount paid in excess of the estimated fair value of common stock as of the date of the transactions. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
(2) Includes employer taxes on employee stock transactions as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Subscription revenue increased by $138.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily from sales to existing customers and the remaining increase was attributable to sales to new customers. Sales to new customers represent the revenue recognized from customers acquired in the 12 months prior to each quarter end within the year ended December 31, 2021. A further indication of our ability to expand from existing customers is through our dollar-based net retention rate of over 130% as of December 31, 2021. Confluent Platform and Confluent Cloud contributed 73% and 27% of our subscription revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, respectively, compared to 85% and 15% during the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
Services revenue increased by $12.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase in delivery of professional services as we expanded our professional services organization to help our customers further realize the benefits of our offering.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Cost of subscription revenue increased by $45.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $15.7 million in personnel-related costs (excluding stock-based compensation expense) and allocated overhead costs driven by increased headcount, an increase of $14.1 million in third-party cloud infrastructure costs, and an increase of $10.0 million in stock-based compensation expense. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily due to increased headcount, equity awards granted to existing employees, and to a lesser extent, the 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “2021 ESPP”), which became effective in connection with our IPO.
Cost of services revenue increased by $16.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $8.1 million in personnel-related costs (excluding stock-based compensation expense) and allocated overhead costs driven by increased headcount, and an increase of $3.7 million in stock-based compensation expense. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily due to increased headcount, equity awards granted to existing employees, and to a lesser extent, the 2021 ESPP. The increase in cost of services revenue was also due to an increase of $3.5 million in third-party contractors who supplemented our services delivery team.
Our subscription gross margin decreased primarily due to higher stock-based compensation expense, higher personnel-related costs, and the change in our revenue mix, partially offset by economies of scale resulting from increased efficiency and optimization of our infrastructure. Our services gross margin decreased primarily due to higher stock-based compensation expense and higher third-party contractor expense.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $56.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $32.4 million in personnel-related costs (excluding stock-based compensation expense) and allocated overhead costs driven by increased headcount, and an increase of $15.3 million in stock-based compensation expense, net of amounts capitalized. The increase in stock-based compensation expense, net of amounts capitalized, was due to increased headcount, equity awards granted to existing employees, and to a lesser extent, the 2021 ESPP, partially offset by $23.9 million of stock-based compensation expense related to a tender offer and a secondary sale of our common and convertible founder stock that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. In the tender offer and secondary sales transactions, we facilitated sales by directors, employees, and non-employees to existing and new investors at a per share purchase price in excess of estimated fair value. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details. The increase in research and development expenses was also due to an increase of $3.6 million of third-party cloud infrastructure expenses incurred in developing our platform, and an increase of $2.2 million of employer taxes on employee stock transactions.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $153.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $71.9 million in personnel-related costs (excluding stock-based compensation expense) and allocated overhead costs driven by increased headcount, and an increase of $40.8 million in stock-based compensation expense. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily due to increased headcount, equity awards granted to existing employees, and to a lesser extent, the 2021 ESPP, partially offset by $3.5 million of stock-based compensation expense related to the tender offer that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 described under “-Research and Development.” The increase in sales and marketing expenses was also due to an increase of $16.3 million in advertising costs and marketing programs, an increase of $10.7 million of amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, and an increase of $4.0 million of employer taxes on employee stock transactions.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $13.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to an overall decrease of $57.5 million of stock-based compensation expense as a result of $83.9 million of stock-based compensation expense related to the tender offer and secondary sales that occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 described under “-Research and Development,” partially offset by increases in stock-based compensation expense due to increased headcount, equity awards granted to existing employees, and to a lesser extent, the 2021 ESPP, as well as $3.8 million of stock-based compensation expense related to performance-based options, for which the performance-based vesting condition was satisfied upon the effectiveness of the IPO. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was partially offset by an increase of $19.1 million in personnel-related costs (excluding stock-based compensation expense) and allocated overhead costs driven by increased headcount, an increase of $13.3 million associated with the charitable donation of our Class A common stock upon the consummation of the IPO, an increase of $5.9 million in professional services fees and other expenses to operate as a public company, and an increase of $2.4 million of employer taxes on employee stock transactions.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $2.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower returns on marketable securities.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net increased by $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to losses from foreign currency transactions and interest expense from amortization of debt issuance costs.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in foreign taxes as we continued our global expansion and the establishment of the U.K. valuation allowance. During the year ended December 31, 2021, based on the weight of positive and negative evidence, we established a valuation allowance on its U.K. net deferred tax assets resulting in a tax expense of $1.1 million.
We maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. and U.K. deferred tax assets. The most significant component of our recorded tax expense is current cash taxes in various foreign jurisdictions. The cash tax expenses are impacted by each jurisdiction’s individual tax rates, laws on the timing of recognition of income and deductions, and availability of net operating losses and tax credits. Our effective tax rate might fluctuate to the extent earnings are lower in countries that have lower statutory rates or higher in countries that have higher statutory rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed operations primarily through proceeds received from issuances of equity and debt securities and payments received from our customers. In June 2021, we completed our IPO, which resulted in proceeds of $786.6 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions.
In December 2021, we issued $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of 0% convertible senior notes due 2027 (the “2027 Notes”), including the exercise in full of the initial purchasers’ option to purchase up to an additional $100.0 million principal amount of the 2027 Notes, in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act. The net proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and debt issuance costs, were $1,080.5 million. See Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaling $2,016.0 million. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of bank deposits, U.S. treasury securities, money market funds, and commercial paper. Our marketable securities consist of corporate notes and bonds, commercial paper, U.S. agency obligations, U.S. treasury securities, and municipal bonds. We believe that existing cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to fund our short-term and long-term operating and capital needs, including our purchase obligations primarily related to our non-cancelable agreements for third-party cloud infrastructure, and operating lease commitments, net of sublease receipts, primarily related to our office space.
We have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $748.9 million. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows from operations in the future and may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operations, and the continuing market acceptance of our subscriptions and services. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We generally invoice our customers annually in advance for our term-based licenses and either annually in advance or monthly in arrears for our SaaS offering. Our largest source of operating cash is payments received from our customers. We have in the past and expect in the future to experience seasonality, with the fourth quarter historically being our strongest quarter for new customer sales, renewals, and expansion as a result of large enterprise buying patterns. Accordingly, the operating cash flow benefit from increased collections from our customers generally occurs in the subsequent one to two quarters after billing. We expect seasonality, timing of billings, and collections from our customers to have a material impact on our cash flow from operating activities from period to period. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, third-party cloud infrastructure costs, sales and marketing expenses, and overhead expenses.
Cash used in operating activities of $105.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of our net loss of $342.8 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $215.9 million, and net cash inflows of $21.9 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Our non-cash charges included $155.6 million of stock-based compensation expense, net of amounts capitalized, $26.7 million of amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, $13.3 million of Class A common stock charitable donation expense, and $11.0 million of non-cash operating lease costs. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities were an $87.3 million increase in deferred revenue corresponding with our increased sales and a $61.1 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to timing of payments, increased headcount, growth in our business, and employee contributions under the 2021 ESPP, partially offset by a $57.9 million increase in deferred contract acquisition costs due to our increased sales, a $32.5 million increase in accounts receivable due to overall growth of our sales and our expanding customer base, and a $31.4 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets primarily driven by prepaid third-party cloud infrastructure costs and prepaid insurance as a result of becoming a public company.
Cash used in operating activities of $82.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of our net loss of $229.8 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $173.5 million, and net cash outflows of $25.7 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Our non-cash charges included $143.3 million of stock-based compensation expense ($111.9 million of which related to a tender offer and secondary sales transactions involving purchase prices in excess of estimated fair value of the shares sold), net of amounts capitalized, $16.0 million of amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, and $11.9 million of non-cash operating lease costs. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities were a $41.6 million increase in accounts receivable due to our increased sales and expanding customer base, and a $38.1 million increase in deferred contract acquisition costs due to our increased sales. These amounts were partially offset by a $64.1 million increase in deferred revenue corresponding with our increased sales.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $400.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to purchases of marketable securities of $663.6 million, capitalized internal-use software development costs of $5.3 million, and purchases of property and equipment of $3.6 million, partially offset by maturities of marketable securities of $271.9 million.
Cash used in investing activities of $176.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to purchases of marketable securities of $329.6 million, capitalized internal-use software development costs of $3.6 million, and purchases of property and equipment of $1.0 million, partially offset by sales and maturities of marketable securities totaling $157.4 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $1,844.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to $1,081.3 million in proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes, net of issuance costs, $786.6 million in proceeds from our IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, and $70.7 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon exercises of stock options, net of repurchases, partially offset by $91.0 million used to purchase capped calls and $3.1 million of payments of deferred offering costs.
Cash provided by financing activities of $276.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $259.8 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock and $17.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon exercises of stock options, net of repurchases.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Convertible Senior Notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.1 billion outstanding principal associated with our 2027 Notes. See Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Operating Leases. Our operating lease commitments, net of sublease receipts, relate primarily to our office space. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $44.9 million, with $10.5 million expected to be paid within 12 months and the remainder thereafter. See Note 7, Commitments and Contingencies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Purchase Obligations. As of December 31, 2021, our purchase obligations were $471.3 million, with $71.0 million expected to be paid within 12 months and the remainder thereafter. Our purchase obligations primarily relate to non-cancelable agreements for third-party cloud infrastructure agreements, under which we are granted access to use certain cloud services. See Note 7, Commitments and Contingencies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
In January 2022, we entered into an amended third-party cloud infrastructure agreement that includes a non-cancelable commitment of $150.0 million over the next five years through January 2027.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from the sale of subscriptions and services. Subscription revenue consists of revenue from term-based licenses that include post-contract customer support, maintenance, and upgrades, referred to together as PCS, which we refer to as Confluent Platform, and our SaaS offering, which we refer to as Confluent Cloud. Confluent Cloud customers may purchase subscriptions either without a minimum commitment contract on a month-to-month basis, which we refer to as pay-as-you-go, or under a usage-based minimum commitment contract of at least one year in duration, in which customers commit to a fixed minimum monetary amount at specified per-usage rates. Our pay-as-you-go arrangements have historically represented an immaterial portion of revenue. We primarily enter into subscription contracts with one-year terms, and subscription contracts are generally non-cancelable and non-refundable, although customers can terminate for breach if we materially fail to perform. Services revenue consists of revenue from professional services and education services. We generate sales of our subscriptions and services through our sales teams, self-service channel, and partner ecosystem, including the major cloud provider marketplaces.
The consolidated financial statements reflect our accounting for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when customers obtain control of promised subscriptions or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those subscriptions or services. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, the following steps are performed:
(i)identification of the contract with a customer
We generally contract with customers through order forms, which are governed by master sales agreements, and through cloud provider marketplaces. We determine that we have a contract with a customer when the contract is approved, each party’s rights regarding the subscriptions or services to be transferred and the payment terms for the services can be identified, we have determined the customer has the ability and intent to pay, and the contract has commercial substance. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience or, in the case of a new customer, credit, reputation, and financial or other information pertaining to the customer.
When a contract is entered into, we evaluate whether the contract is part of a larger arrangement and should be accounted for with other contracts, and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation.
(ii)identification of the performance obligations in the contract
Performance obligations are identified based on the subscriptions and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both (1) capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the subscriptions or services either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and (2) are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the subscriptions and services is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised subscriptions or services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised subscriptions or services are capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, or if performance obligations follow the same pattern of recognition, the promised subscriptions or services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation. We have concluded that our contracts with customers do not contain warranties that give rise to a separate performance obligation.
(iii)measurement of the transaction price
The transaction price is the total amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the subscriptions and services in a contract. The transaction price in a usage-based SaaS contract is typically equal to the minimum commitment in the contract, less any discounts provided. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Our contracts do not contain a significant financing component.
(iv)allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations
If a contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price using a relative standalone selling price, or SSP, allocation based on the SSPs of each performance obligation. Determining the relative SSP for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations is a critical accounting estimate. We establish SSP based on multiple factors, including prices at which we separately sell standalone subscriptions and services. In cases where directly observable standalone sales are not available, such as when license and PCS are not sold on a standalone basis, we establish the SSP by using information such as the historical selling price of performance obligations in similar transactions, market conditions, and our pricing practices, which can require significant judgment and are subject to change based on continuous reevaluation. There is typically more than one SSP for individual subscriptions and services due to the stratification of subscription support tiers and services. We also consider if there are any additional material rights inherent in a contract, and if so, we allocate revenue to the material right as a performance obligation.
(v)recognition of revenue when we satisfy each performance obligation
We recognize revenue at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those subscriptions or services. We record revenue net of any withholding, value added, or sales tax, as well as any discounts or marketing development funds.
Subscription Revenue
Our subscription revenue includes revenue from Confluent Platform for licenses sold in conjunction with PCS. The license provides the right to use licensed proprietary software features, which represents significant standalone functionality and is therefore deemed a distinct performance obligation. License revenue is recognized at a point in time, upon delivery and transfer of control of the underlying license to the customer, which is typically the effective start date. Revenue from PCS is based on its continuous pattern of transfer to the customer and therefore is recognized ratably over the contract term.
Our subscription revenue also includes revenue from Confluent Cloud for our usage-based minimum commitment and pay-as-you-go offering, which is recognized on a usage basis, as usage represents a direct measurement of the value to the customer of the subscription transferred as of a particular date relative to the total value to be delivered over the term of the contract. For contracts that are not usage-based, revenue from Confluent Cloud is recognized ratably over the non-cancelable contractual term of the arrangement, generally beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer.
Services Revenue
Our services revenue includes revenue from professional services and education services, which are generally sold on a time-and-materials basis. We recognize the associated revenue as services are delivered.
Deferred Contract Acquisition Costs
Sales commissions earned by our sales force and the associated payroll taxes are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions for new revenue contracts, including incremental sales to existing customers, are deferred and then amortized over an estimated period of benefit, which we have determined to be five years. To determine the period of benefit, we consider our technology development cycle, the cadence of software releases, the nature of our customer contracts, the duration of customer relationships, and the expected renewal period. Sales commissions for renewal contracts (which are not considered commensurate with sales commissions for new revenue contracts and incremental sales to existing customers) are deferred and then amortized over the renewal contract term. Amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs are included in sales and marketing expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. We periodically review the carrying amount of deferred contract acquisition costs to determine whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that could impact the period of benefit of these deferred costs.
Stock-Based Compensation
We record stock-based compensation expense in connection with all stock-based awards, including stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) granted to employees and non-employees and stock purchase rights granted under the ESPP to employees, based on the fair value of the awards granted. The fair value of each stock option and ESPP right is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For awards that vest based only on continuous service, stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Prior to our IPO, we also granted certain awards that had both a service-based and a performance-based vesting condition. Stock-based compensation expense for such awards is recognized using the accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period when it is probable the performance-based vesting condition will be achieved. The performance-based vesting condition was satisfied upon the sale of our common stock in a firm commitment underwritten public offering. If an award contains a provision whereby vesting is accelerated upon a change in control, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis, as a change in control is considered to be outside of our control and is not considered probable until it occurs. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•Fair value of the underlying common stock. Prior to our IPO, our board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock at each meeting in which awards were approved. After our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined by the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant, which is traded on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
•Expected term. We determine the expected term for stock options that have only service-based vesting conditions based on the period the stock options are expected to be outstanding using the simplified method, calculated as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For other option grants, we estimate the expected term using historical data on employee exercises and post-vesting employment termination behavior, considering the contractual life of the award.
•Expected volatility. We derive the expected volatility at the grant date from the average historical volatilities of public companies within our industry over a period equal to the expected term of the options.
•Risk-free interest rate. We use the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon notes with maturities equivalent to the option’s expected term.
•Expected dividend yield. We utilize a dividend yield of zero, as we do not currently issue dividends, nor do we expect to do so in the future.
The following table summarizes the weighted-average assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options granted during the periods presented:
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to the IPO, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and contemporaneous independent third-party valuations. We believe that our board of directors had the relevant experience and expertise to determine the fair value of our common stock. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors include:
•the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the prices paid for common or redeemable convertible preferred stock sold to third-party investors by us and prices paid in tender offers or secondary transactions;
•lack of marketability of our common stock;
•our operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions and projections;
•hiring of key personnel and the experience of our management;
•the history of the company and the introduction of new products;
•our stage of development;
•likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, a merger, or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global capital market conditions.
The fair value of our common stock was determined using various valuation methods, including a combination of the income and market approach. The income approach estimated value based on the expectation of future cash flows that we would generate. These future cash flows were discounted to their present values using a discount rate that was derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly traded companies in our industry or those with similar business operations and was adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. The market approach estimated value based on a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple was determined and then applied to our financial forecasts to estimate the value of our company.
For each valuation, the fair value, or equity value, of our business determined by the income and market approaches was then allocated to the common stock using either the option-pricing method, or OPM, or a hybrid of the probability-weighted expected return method, or PWERM, and OPM methods. Our valuations prior to December 31, 2020 were allocated based on the OPM. Beginning December 31, 2020, our valuations were allocated based on a hybrid method of the PWERM and the OPM.
Application of these approaches and methodologies involves the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies, and the probability of and timing associated with possible future events.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recently adopted accounting pronouncements and accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups (“JOBS”) Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act for the adoption of certain accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.