Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a late clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the discovery and development of direct lytic agents (“DLAs”), including lysins and amurin peptides, as new medical modalities for the treatment of life-threatening, antibiotic-resistant infections. We believe DLAs are fundamentally different than antibiotics and offer a potential paradigm shift in the treatment of antibiotic-resistant infections. According to one of the most recent and comprehensive reports on the global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance (“AMR”), there were an estimated 4.95 million deaths associated with bacterial AMR in 2019, including 1.27 million deaths directly attributable to bacterial AMR. The six leading pathogens for deaths associated with resistance (Escherichia coli (“E. coli”)
, Staphylococcus aureus (“S. aureus”)
, Klebsiella pneumoniae (“K. pneumoniae”)
, Streptococcus
pneumoniae
, Acinetobacter baumannii (“A. baumannii”)
, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(“P. aeruginosa
”)) were responsible for 929,000 deaths. Only one pathogen-drug combination, methicillin-resistant S. aureus
(“MRSA”), caused more than 100,000 deaths in 2019.
Lysins are recombinantly-produced enzymes, that when applied to bacteria cleave a key component of the target bacteria’s peptidoglycan cell wall, resulting in rapid bacterial cell death. In addition to the speed of action and potent cidality, we believe lysins are differentiated by their other hallmark features, which include the demonstrated ability to eradicate biofilms and synergistically boost the efficacy of conventional antibiotics in animal models. Amurin peptides are a new class of DLAs, discovered in our laboratories, which disrupt the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, resulting in rapid bacterial cell death, offering a distinct mechanism of action from lysins. Amurins have a potent, broad spectrum of in vitro
activity against a wide range of gram-negative pathogens, including deadly, drug-resistant P. aeruginosa
, K. pneumoniae, E. coli, A. baumannii
and Enterobacter cloacae
bacteria species as well as difficult to treat pathogens such as Stenotrophomonas,
Achromobacter
and some Burkholderia
species. The highly differentiated properties of DLAs underscore their potential use in addition to antibiotics with the goal of improving clinical outcomes compared to antibiotics alone. The development of DLAs involves a novel clinical and regulatory strategy, using superiority design clinical trials with the goal of delivering significantly improved clinical outcomes for patients with serious, antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections, including biofilm-associated infections. We believe this approach affords potential clinical benefits to patients as well as the potential ability to mitigate against further development of antibiotic resistance.
We have not generated any revenues and, to date, have funded our operations primarily through our initial public offering (“IPO”), our follow-on
public offerings, private placements of securities, and grant funding received. On March 22, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 11,500,000 shares of our common stock, including shares sold pursuant to the fully exercised overallotment option granted to the underwriters in connection with the offering, at a public offering price of $5.00 per share of common stock, resulting in estimated net proceeds of approximately $53.8 million after underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
On May 27, 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 11,797,752 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an additional 8,848,314 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $4.90 per share. The public offering price was $4.45 for one share of common stock and an accompanying warrant to purchase 0.75 shares of common stock, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $48.9 million after underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. We also completed a concurrent private placement to Pfizer Inc. (“Pfizer”) of 674,156 shares of common stock and an accompanying warrant to purchase an additional 505,617 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $4.90 per share. The offering price for the warrant was $4.45 for one share of common stock and an accompanying warrant to purchase 0.75 shares of common stock, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $3.0 million. This was the second investment by Pfizer, for a total of $6.0 million invested into the Company.
On March 10, 2021, we executed a cost-share contract (the “BARDA Contract”) with the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (“BARDA”) and any exercise of BARDA’s options to extend such contract, part of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Under the terms of the BARDA Contract, the Company will receive $9.8 million in initial funding and up to an additional $77.0 million. The initial funding will be used to support our ongoing pivotal Phase 3 DISRUPT superiority trial of exebacase. Under the terms of the agreement, and if supported by Phase 3 DISRUPT study data, BARDA may provide the Company with additional funding upon achievement of key milestones to continue the advancement of exebacase through FDA product approval and completion of post-approval commitments. The BARDA Contract contains terms and conditions that are customary for contracts with BARDA of this nature, including provisions giving the government the right to terminate the contract at any time for its convenience. As a government contractor, we are subject to complex and wide-ranging federal and
agency-specific regulations and contractual requirements. The costs of compliance with these requirements may be significant. Failure to comply with government contracting requirements could result in termination of our contract or the imposition of penalties.
We have never been profitable and our net operating losses were $47.3 million, $34.2 million, and $27.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $260.7 million and we had approximately $54.3 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. We expect to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance our product candidates through preclinical activities and clinical trials to seek regulatory approval and, if approved, commercialize such product candidates. Accordingly, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations and to continue as a going concern. We expect to seek to fund our operations through public or private equity, debt financings, equity-linked financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements, research grants or other sources. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. Without additional funding, the Company believes it will not have sufficient funds to meet its obligations within the next twelve months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern may materially and adversely affect the price per share of our common stock, and it may be more difficult for us to obtain financing. If potential collaborators decline to do business with us or potential investors decline to participate in any future financings due to such concerns, our ability to increase our cash position may be limited. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenues to date. In the future, we may generate revenues from product sales. In addition, to the extent we enter into licensing or collaboration arrangements, we may have additional sources of revenue. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the amount and timing of payments that we may recognize upon the sale of our products, to the extent that any products are successfully commercialized, and the amount and timing of fees, reimbursements, milestone and other payments received under any future licensing or collaboration arrangements. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, performance bonuses, benefits, travel and non-cash
stock-based compensation expense;
•
external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties such as contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturers, consultants and academic institutions; and
•
facilities and laboratory and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. We account for non-refundable
advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when the payment is made.
The following summarizes our most advanced current research and development programs.
Exebacase
Our lead DLA product candidate, exebacase, was granted Breakthrough Therapy designation for the treatment of MRSA bloodstream infections (bacteremia), including right-sided endocarditis, when used in addition to standard-of-care
(“SOC”) anti-staphylococcal antibiotics in adult patients, by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in February 2020 and is currently being studied in an ongoing Phase 3 superiority design study. In addition to bacteremia, S. aureus
is also a common cause of pneumonia and osteomyelitis as well as biofilm-associated infections of heart valves (endocarditis), prosthetic joints, indwelling devices and catheters. These infections result in significant morbidity and mortality despite currently available antibiotic therapies.
In December 2019, we initiated the Phase 3 DISRUPT (Direct Lysis of S. aureus
Resistant Pathogen Trial) superiority design study of exebacase. The DISRUPT study is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 clinical trial conducted in the U.S. alone to assess the efficacy and safety of exebacase in approximately 350 adult and adolescent patients with complicated S. aureus
bacteremia, including right-sided endocarditis. Patients entering the study will be randomized 2:1 to either exebacase or placebo, with all patients receiving SOC antistaphylococcal antibiotics. The primary efficacy endpoint of the study is clinical response at Day 14 in patients with MRSA bacteremia, including right-sided endocarditis. Secondary endpoints include clinical response at Day 14 in the All S. aureus
patient group (MRSA and methicillin-sensitive S. aureus
(“MSSA”)), 30-day
all-cause
mortality in MRSA patients, and clinical response at later timepoints. We will also evaluate the impact of treatment with exebacase on health resource utilization, including hospital length of stay, ICU length of stay and 30-day
readmission rates. We plan to conduct an interim futility analysis after approximately 60% of the MRSA population (the primary endpoint study population) completes the Day 14 primary endpoint study visit. We obtained concurrence with the FDA on the Phase 3 study protocol at an End-of-Phase
2 meeting with the FDA in September 2019, including the key design features of the study population, the endpoints and the size of the safety database that would be needed to support a Biologics License Application (“BLA”) for approval of exebacase, under the FDA’s “streamlined development” paradigm for agents to treat bacterial infections associated with high unmet medical need.
We completed a Phase 2 superiority design study of exebacase that evaluated its safety, tolerability, efficacy and pharmacokinetics (“PK”) when used in addition to SOC antibiotics compared to SOC antibiotics alone for the treatment of S. aureus
bacteremia, including endocarditis in adult patients. The results from this study showed clinically meaningful improvement in clinical responder rates among patients treated with exebacase in addition to SOC antibiotics compared to SOC antibiotics alone. In the primary efficacy analysis population of 116 patients with documented S. aureus
bacteremia, including endocarditis, who received a single intravenous (“IV”) infusion of blinded study drug, the clinical responder rate at Day 14 was 70.4% for patients treated with exebacase and 60.0% for patients dosed with SOC antibiotics alone (p=0.314).
In a pre-specified
analysis of MRSA-infected patients, the clinical responder rate at Day 14 in patients treated with exebacase was nearly 43-percentage
points higher than in patients treated with SOC antibiotics alone (74.1% for patients treated with exebacase compared to 31.3% for patients treated with SOC antibiotics alone (p=0.010)). In addition to the higher rate of clinical response, MRSA-infected patients treated with exebacase showed a 21-percentage
point reduction in 30-day
all-cause
mortality (p=0.056), a four day lower mean length of hospital stay and meaningful reductions in hospital readmission rates. Additional pre-specified
analyses showed a clinical responder rate at Day 14 in the subset of patients with bacteremia including right-sided endocarditis of 80.0% for patients treated with exebacase compared to 59.5% for patients treated with SOC antibiotics alone, an increase of 20.5% (p=0.028). In the subset of patients with bacteremia alone, the clinical responder rate at Day 14 was 81.8% for patients treated with exebacase compared to 61.5% for patients treated with SOC antibiotics alone, an increase of 20.3% (p=0.035).
Exebacase was well-tolerated and treatment emergent adverse events, including serious treatment-emergent serious adverse events (“SAEs”) were balanced between the treatment groups. There were no SAEs that we
determined to be related to exebacase, there were no reports of hypersensitivity related to exebacase and no patients discontinued treatment with study drug in either treatment group.
We also performed a post-hoc
Phase 3 simulation analysis using the Phase 2 data to evaluate the clinical outcomes for the Phase 2 patient population that would meet the Phase 3 inclusion criteria. In this simulated Phase 3 analysis population of 84 U.S. patients with documented S. aureus
bacteremia, including right-sided endocarditis, who received a single IV infusion of blinded study drug, the clinical responder rate at Day 14 was 83.7% for patients treated with exebacase and 54.3% for patients dosed with SOC antibiotics alone, an improvement in the responder rate of over 29-percentage
points. The clinical responder rate at Day 14 in the subset of patients with MRSA bacteremia including right-sided endocarditis was 82.6% for patients treated with exebacase compared to 33.3% for patients treated with SOC antibiotics alone, an improvement in the responder rate of over 49-percentage
points. In the subset of patients with MSSA bacteremia including right-sided endocarditis, the clinical responder rate at Day 14 was 84.6% for patients treated with exebacase compared to 66.7% for patients treated with SOC antibiotics alone, an increase of nearly 18-percentage
points.
We believe these data established proof of concept for exebacase and for DLAs as therapeutic agents. In particular, the data for MRSA-infected patients treated with exebacase, which, in the Phase 2 superiority study, demonstrated superior outcomes in clinical response at Day 14 and in 30-day
all-cause
mortality as well as health economics benefits, provided the basis for the FDA to grant Breakthrough Therapy designation to exebacase for the treatment of MRSA bloodstream infections (bacteremia), including right-sided endocarditis, when used in addition to SOC anti-staphylococcal antibiotics in adult patients. Breakthrough Therapy designation is a program designed by the FDA to expedite the development and review of medicines for serious or life-threatening diseases where preliminary clinical evidence suggests that the investigational therapy may demonstrate substantial improvement on at least one clinically significant endpoint over available therapies. The Breakthrough Therapy designation provides additional benefits, such as expedited interactions with the FDA and the potential for priority review, in addition to the Fast Track designation granted to exebacase in August 2015.
On March 10, 2021, we entered into a cost-share contract (the “BARDA Contract”) with BARDA, a division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response. Under the BARDA Contract, we will receive funding of up to an estimated $86.8 million to advance the development of exebacase. The base period for the BARDA Contract includes government funding of up to $9.8 million to reimburse expenses for approximately one year to support the conduct of the ongoing Phase 3 clinical trial and futility analysis. Following successful completion of the base period, the BARDA Contract provides for approximately $77.0 million of additional BARDA funding for five option stages in support of the completion of the Phase 3 clinical trial of exebacase, further clinical and non-clinical
studies, manufacturing, supply chain, clinical, regulatory and administrative activities. The contract period-of-performance
(base period plus option exercises) is up to approximately six years. The BARDA Contract contains terms and conditions that are customary for contracts with BARDA of this nature, including provisions giving the government the right to terminate the contract at any time for its convenience.
Other programs
Our next product candidate, CF-370,
is designed to target a range of gram-negative bacteria including P. aeruginosa
and has demonstrated potent in vivo
activity against extensively drug-resistant (“XDR”) strains. P. aeruginosa
is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with hospital-acquired or ventilator-associated pneumonia and a major medical challenge for cystic fibrosis patients with chronic lung infections. CF-370
has also shown promising activity against E. coli
, K. pneumoniae
and A. baumannii
in in vitro
studies.
In July 2020, we were granted an award of up to $18.9 million in funding from CARB-X,
including initial funding of $4.9 million, in support of the advancement of CF-370
through IND-enabling
activities. Any additional funding beyond the $4.9 million is at the discretion of CARB-X
and based on factors such as available funding, achievement of project milestones and mutual agreement on future milestones. We expect CF-370
to be our next DLA to enter clinical studies.
In addition, we have entered into two funding agreements with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation to investigate the potential utility of DLAs against resistant gram-negative pathogens which afflict Cystic Fibrosis (“CF”) patients. The first agreement provided funding for the assessment of the in vitro
activity of CF-370
and amurin peptides against bacterial specimens obtained from CF patients at different stages of disease. The second agreement will provide funding for assessing the in vitro
and in vivo
activity of exebacase against S. aureus
isolates obtained from CF patients. If we obtain supportive data, we plan to evaluate potential future clinical development of DLA product candidates for the treatment of exacerbations in CF lung disease.
We have developed a novel, engineered variant of exebacase, known as CF-296,
which we believe provides an additional opportunity to advance a potential targeted therapy for deep-seated, invasive biofilm-associated S. aureus
infections. We are conducting further in vitro
and in vivo
characterization of CF-296
to evaluate the full profile of this compound. We have been awarded up to $7.2 million of funding from the Military Infectious Diseases Research Program, United States Army Medical Research and Development Command (“USAMRDC”) over the course of three years to advance CF-296
through Investigational New Drug application (“IND”)-enabling studies.
Beyond our lysin programs, we continue our research to advance potential product candidates from our amurin peptide platform. We are evaluating our most promising amurins in preclinical animal studies with the goals of determining our next product candidate and moving this program towards clinical studies as soon as possible.
To date, a large portion of our research and development work has related to the establishment of our platform technologies, the advancement of our research projects to discovery of clinical candidates, manufacturing and preclinical testing of our clinical candidates and clinical testing of exebacase. We currently expect to focus the majority of our resources on the exebacase program. As our pipeline progresses, we are able to further leverage our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple development programs well as research projects. We recorded approximately $35.5 million, $22.6 million, and $18.1 million of research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. A breakdown of our research and development expenses by category is shown below. We do not currently utilize a formal time or laboratory project expense allocation system to allocate employee-related expenses, laboratory costs or depreciation to any particular project. Accordingly, we do not allocate these expenses to individual projects or product candidates. However, we do allocate some portions of our research and development expenses in the product development, external research and licensing and professional fees categories to exebacase as shown below.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by category for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with the commencement of additional clinical trials for our product candidates. However, the successful development of
future product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•
the scope, rate of progress and expense of our research and development activities;
•
clinical trial results;
•
the terms and timing of regulatory approvals;
•
our ability to market, commercialize and achieve market acceptance for our product candidates in the future; and
•
the expense, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing of patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of exebacase or any other product candidate that we may develop could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of exebacase or any such product candidate. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those which we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of exebacase or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any clinical trials of exebacase, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of the clinical development of exebacase.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including non-cash
stock-based compensation expense, in our executive, finance, legal, human resource and business development functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility costs, insurance expenses and professional fees for legal, consulting and accounting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods to support increases in our research and development activities and as a result of increased headcount, expanded infrastructure, increased legal, compliance, accounting and investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company and increased insurance premiums, among other factors.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale
securities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on our historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Fair Value of Warrant Liability
In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures
(“ASC 820”), we classify and account for our warrant liability as a level 3 financial instrument. The valuation of a level 3 financial instrument requires inputs that reflect our own assumptions that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable. We calculate the fair value estimate of our warrant liability on a recurring basis at each measurement date, based on relevant market information.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of our warrant liability using various assumptions that require management to apply judgment and make estimates, including:
•
the expected term of the warrant, which we estimate to be the remaining contractual life;
•
the expected volatility of the underlying common stock, which we estimate based on the historical volatility of our own common shares;
•
the risk-free interest rate, which we based on the yield curve of U.S. Treasury securities with periods commensurate with the expected term; and
•
the expected dividend yield, which we estimate to be zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends.
These estimates may be subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters of judgment and therefore cannot be determined with precision. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our warrant liability could be materially different in the future.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses are related to fees paid to CMOs and CROs in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to CMOs and CROs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts for the conduct of manufacturing or research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepayment expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Differences between our estimates and amounts actually incurred to date, and any resulting adjustments, have not been material.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation
, which we refer to as ASC 718. ASC 718 requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards made to employees, directors, and non-employees,
including employee stock options. Compensation expense based on the grant date fair value is generally amortized over the requisite service period of the award on a straight-line basis.
The fair value of options is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model uses various assumptions that require management to apply judgment and make estimates, including:
•
the expected term of the stock option award, which for non-employees
we use the remaining contractual term, but for employees we calculate using the simplified method, as prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment,
as we have insufficient historical information regarding our stock options to provide a basis for an estimate;
•
the expected volatility of the underlying common stock, which we estimate based on the historical volatility of our own common shares;
•
the risk-free interest rate, which we based on the yield curve of U.S. Treasury securities with periods commensurate with the expected term of the options being valued;
•
the expected dividend yield, which we estimate to be zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends; and
•
the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Financial Statements, for a discussion of the impact of new accounting standards on our Financial Statements.
Results of Operations
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, including a year-to-year
comparison between 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense was $35.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $12.9 million. This increase was primarily attributable to a $5.6 million increase in expenditures for the Phase 3 DISRUPT study of exebacase as we increased patient enrollment and expanded the number of clinical sites. We also increased expenditures by $4.9 million on non-clinical
studies of exebacase that will support a potential BLA submission and CF-370
that will support a potential IND submission and by $4.5 million on manufacturing costs related to the process transfer, validation and manufacturing of exebacase that will also support a potential BLA submission, in addition to process development and manufacturing for CF-370.
Finally, we increased expenditures to expand our internal research and development team and our external consultants by $4.0 million. These increases were partially offset by a $6.3 million increase in our expenses that are reimbursable under our grants compared to the prior year period.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense was $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $11.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.1 million. This increase was primarily attributable to increases in internal compensation costs and external professional fees of $0.6 million and insurance costs of $0.4 million. These increases were partially offset by a $0.9 million reduction in our external legal costs.
Other income
Other income was $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $20.9 million. This increase was primarily attributable to the increase in the non-cash
gain related to the change in fair value of our warrant liability of $18.8 million. In addition, the prior year period has a charge to other expense of $2.2 million for issuance expenses allocated to warrants, for which there was no such expense in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have financed our operations to date primarily through proceeds from sales of common stock, common stock and warrants, convertible preferred stock and convertible debt and, to a lesser extent, funding received from government contracts and granting organizations. To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of products. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception.
Since the date of our IPO, we have funded our operations through the sale of registered securities for gross proceeds of $257.8 million, $9.6 million from the exercise of the Class B Warrants issued in our IPO, $26.0 million from the sale of securities in private placements and the receipt of $16.7 million of funding from grant agreements and government contracts.
On August 14, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3
(the “Form S-3”)
with the SEC. The Form S-3
was declared effective by the SEC on August 31, 2020. The Form S-3
allows us to offer and sell from time-to-time
up to $150.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants or units comprised of any combination of these securities. On March 22, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 11,500,000 shares of our common stock, including shares sold pursuant to the fully exercised overallotment option granted to the underwriters in connection with the offering, at a public offering price of $5.00 per share of common stock, resulting in estimated net proceeds of approximately $53.8 million after underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. The terms of any future offerings under the shelf registration statement will be established at the time of such offering and will be described in a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC prior to the completion of any such offering.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $54.3 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities which we do not believe will be sufficient to meet our obligations within the next twelve months from the date of issuance of our audited consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Combined with our accumulated deficit and our forecasted cash expenditures, these factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
As such, under the requirements of Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) 205-40,
we may not consider the potential for future capital raises in our assessment of our ability to meet our obligations for the next twelve months. We plan to continue to fund our operations through public or private debt and equity financings, but there can be no assurances that such financing will continue to be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all, and the terms of any public or private offerings of stock could be significantly dilutive to existing stockholders. If we are unable to obtain funding, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs, which could adversely affect our business prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations. In accordance with the requirements of ASC 205-40,
we have concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the date of issuance of our audited consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In the past, we have obtained grants to supplement our financings with non-dilutive
funding, including grants from CARB-X,
USAMRDC and our cost-sharing contract with BARDA. We may continue to pursue further non-dilutive
funding opportunities. In addition, there can be no assurances that either BARDA, CARB-X
or USAMRDC will provide the maximum potential funding to the Company.
Cash flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash
charges and changes in the components of working capital. Net cash used in operating activities increased $7.9 million
for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the comparable period in 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to increased expenditures for the Phase 3 DISRUPT trial of exebacase in order to enroll more patients and expand the number of active investigator sites, process transfer, validation and manufacturing of exebacase, process development and manufacturing of CF-370,
and an increased number of personnel and related compensation costs.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributable to the proceeds received from the maturities of marketable securities less the purchases of marketable securities subsequent to the equity offering completed on March 22, 2021. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to the proceeds received from the maturities of marketable securities less the purchases of marketable securities subsequent to the equity offerings completed on May 27, 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted primarily from the completion of our equity offering on March 22, 2021, resulting in proceeds of $53.8 million, net of offering costs. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from the completion of our equity offerings on May 27, 2020, resulting in proceeds of $51.9 million, net of offering costs.
Funding requirements
All of our product candidates are in clinical or preclinical development. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•
continue our ongoing clinical trials, and initiate the planned clinical trials of our product candidates;
•
continue our ongoing preclinical studies, and initiate additional preclinical studies, of our product candidates;
•
continue the research and development of our other product candidates and our platform technology;
•
add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and future commercialization efforts;
•
seek marketing approvals for our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•
establish, either on our own or with strategic partners, a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•
seek to identify additional product candidates;
•
acquire or in-license
other products and technologies;
•
maintain, leverage and expand our intellectual property portfolio; and
For a description of our contractual obligations, see Note 8, “Commitments and Contingencies” to the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Without additional funding, we believe we will not have sufficient funds to meet our obligations within the next twelve months from the date of issuance of our audited consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
If we are unable to obtain funding, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs, which could adversely affect our business
prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations. In accordance with the requirements of ASC 205-40,
we have concluded that substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, and the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the development of our current product candidates. We plan to continue to fund our operations through public or private debt and equity financings, but there can be no assurances that such financing will be available to us on satisfactory terms, or at all. We plan to continue to supplement our financings with non-dilutive
funding, including grants from CARB-X
and USAMRDC and our cost-sharing contract with BARDA, but there can be no assurances that either BARDA, CARB-X
or USAMRDC will provide the maximum potential funding to the Company.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the progress and results of the clinical trials of our lead product candidates;
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of compound discovery, preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our other product candidates;
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license
other products and technologies;
•
the timing and amount of actual reimbursements under the BARDA Contract;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the costs of future commercialization activities, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•
revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•
our ability to establish any future collaboration arrangements on favorable terms, if at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity and debt offerings, collaborations, grants, government contracts, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or other securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
We incur significant costs as a public company, including, but not limited to, increased personnel costs, increased directors fees, increased directors and officers insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations and external communications fees, expenses for compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and rules implemented by the SEC and Nasdaq and various other costs and expenses.
Effects of Inflation
We do not believe that inflation or changing prices had a significant impact on our results of operations for any periods presented herein. We continue to monitor the impact of inflationary pressures on purchases and new contractual commitments.