Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed under “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A (Risk Factors) in this Form 10-K. The following section is qualified in its entirety by the more detailed information, including our financial statements and the notes thereto, which appears elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are the market leader in microturbines based on the number of microturbines sold. Generally, power purchased from the electric utility grid is less costly than power produced by distributed generation technologies. Utilities may also charge fees to interconnect to their power grids. However, we can provide economic benefits to end users in instances where the waste heat from our microturbine has value (CHP and CCHP), where fuel costs are low (renewable energy/renewable fuels), where the costs of connecting to the grid may be high or impractical (such as remote power applications), where reliability and power quality are of critical importance, or in situations where peak shaving could be economically advantageous because of highly variable electricity prices. Our microturbines can be interconnected to other distributed energy resources to form “microgrids” (also called “distribution networks”) located within a specific geographic area and provide power to a group of buildings. Because our microturbines can provide a reliable source of power and can operate on multiple fuel sources, management believes they offer a level of flexibility not currently offered by other technologies such as reciprocating engines. In addition to our existing microturbine products, since September 2020, we have offered additional energy conversion products in the form of Baker Hughes 5 MW, 12 MW, and 16 MW industrial gas turbines, where we will purchase and resell their product (although there was no revenue from sales of additional energy conversion products in the form of Baker Hughes industrial gas turbines for the year ended March 31, 2022 or 2021). We are currently exploring energy conversion options for the smaller end of the power spectrum. We intend to begin to manufacture modular hybrid energy stations and lithium-ion battery energy storage systems (“BESS”) to be sold either individually or combined as part of a custom microturbine-battery storage solution. We consider our microturbines, Baker Hughes turbines, and hybrid energy stations to be a part of our Energy conversion products business line. We also added a new Energy Storage Products business line in Fiscal 2022, and there has not yet been any revenue from this business line.
Our goals for Fiscal 2022 were to broaden our diverse energy products and service offerings; focus on growing top line revenue through our new Direct Solutions Sales (DSS) team, growing the DSS subscription program, and expanding the rental fleet to 21.1 MW (a key component of growing our EaaS business); increase aftermarket margins and escalate parts availability; and focus on managing working capital and inventory turns. During Fiscal 2022 our net loss was $20.2 million and our basic and diluted net loss per share was $1.37, compared to $18.4 million and $1.63, respectively, in the same period of the previous fiscal year. The $1.8 million increase in the net loss during Fiscal 2022 was primarily attributable to increases in selling, general and administrative expense primarily driven by lower expense in Fiscal 2021 from the enactment of our Business Continuity Plan in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, as well as additional expense related to the growth of the DSS team during Fiscal 2022. This increase was partially offset by the loss on extinguishment of debt accounting resulting from entering into the A&R Note Purchase Agreement with Goldman Sachs during the third quarter of Fiscal 2021 and the gain on extinguishment of debt resulting from the forgiveness of the PPP Loan during the first quarter of Fiscal 2022. On October 1, 2020, the Company entered into an Amended & Restated Note Purchase Agreement (the “A&R Note Purchase Agreement”), and issued $20.0 million in additional Notes. See Note 11-Term Note Payable, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion with respect to this A&R Note Purchase Agreement.
We continue to focus on developing all our major vertical markets (energy efficiency, renewable energy, natural resources, critical power supply, and microgrids). In the energy efficiency market, we continue to expand our market presence in hotels, office buildings, hospitals, retail, and industrial applications globally. The renewable energy market is fueled by landfill gas, biodiesel, and biogas from sources such as food processing, agricultural waste and livestock manure. Our product sales in the oil and gas and other natural resources market are driven by our microturbines’ reliability,
emissions profile and ease of installation. Given the volatility of the oil and gas market, our business strategy is to ensure diversification by also targeting projects within the energy efficiency and renewable energy markets.
We continue to focus on improving our products based on customer input, building brand awareness and new channels to market by developing a diversified network of strategic distribution partners. Our focus is on products and solutions that provide near term opportunities to drive repeatable business rather than discrete projects for niche markets. In addition, management closely monitors operating expenses and strives to improve manufacturing efficiencies while simultaneously lowering direct material costs and increasing average selling prices. The key drivers to our success are revenue growth, higher average selling prices, lower direct material costs, positive new order flow and reduced cash usage.
An overview of our direction, targets and key initiatives are as follows:
1) Our Energy Conversion Products business line is driven by our industry-leading, highly efficient, low-emission, resilient microturbine energy systems offering scalable solutions in addition to a broad range of customer-tailored solutions. We target specific market verticals for these products.
Focus on Vertical Markets Within the distributed generation markets that we serve, we focus on vertical markets that we identify as having the greatest near-term potential. In our primary products and applications (energy efficiency, renewable energy, natural resources, critical power supply, microgrid and transportation products), we identify specific targeted vertical market segments. Within each of these segments, we identify what we believe to be the critical factors to success and base our plans on those factors. Given the volatility of the oil and gas market, we have refocused our business strategy to target projects within the energy efficiency and renewable energy markets.
The following table summarizes our percentage of product revenues by vertical markets for which we had product revenues for the periods presented:
Energy Efficiency-CHP/CCHP
Energy efficiency refers to the proper utilization of both electrical and thermal energies in the power production process. In such applications, our microturbines are able to maximize the availability of usable energy to provide a significant economic advantage to customers while reducing their onsite emissions. CHP and CCHP can improve site economics by capturing the waste heat created from a single combustion process to increase the efficiency of the total system, from approximately 30 percent to 80 percent or more. Compared with more traditional, independent generation sources, the increase in operational efficiency also reduces greenhouse gas emissions through the displacement of other separate systems, which can also reduce operating costs.
Natural Resources-Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Shale Gas & Mining
Our microturbines are installed in the natural resource market for use in both onshore and offshore applications, including oil and gas exploration, production, and at compression and transmission sites as a highly efficient and reliable source of power. In some cases, these oil and gas or mining operations have no electric utility grid and rely solely on power generated onsite. There are numerous locations, on a global scale, where the drilling, production, compression and transportation of natural resources and other extraction and production processes create fuel byproducts, which are traditionally burned or
released into the atmosphere. Our microturbines can turn these fuel byproducts - flare gas, or associated gas, into a useable fuel to provide prime power to these sites.
Renewable Energy
There is a growing transition to renewable energy sources and technologies on a global scale. Our microturbines run efficiently on renewable fuels such as methane and other biogases from landfills, wastewater treatment facilities and renewable natural gas. They also run efficiently on other small biogas applications like food processing plants, livestock farms and agricultural green waste operations. Microturbines can burn these renewable fuels with minimal emissions, thereby, in some cases, avoiding the imposition of penalties incurred for pollution while simultaneously producing electricity from this “free” renewable fuel source for use at the site or in the surrounding areas. Our microturbines have demonstrated effectiveness in these smaller applications and may outperform conventional combustion engines in some situations, including when the gas contains a high amount of sulfur, as the sulfur can contaminate combustion engines lube oil leading to equipment breakdowns and higher lifecycle costs.
Critical Power Supply
Because of the potentially catastrophic consequences of system failure, momentary or otherwise, certain high demand power users, including high technology, health care and information systems facilities require higher levels of reliability in their power generation service. To meet these customer requirements, traditional solutions utilize Uninterruptible Power Supplies (“UPS”) to protect critical loads from power disturbances along with back-up diesel generators for extended outages. We offer an alternative solution that can both meet customer reliability requirements and reduce operating costs. We have seen continued development in the critical market segment as it relates to heath care facilities.
Microgrid
Microgrid is a group of interconnected loads and distributed energy resources that acts as a single controllable energy entity with respect to the grid. Distributed energy resources typically include other dual-mode microturbines, reciprocating engines, solar photovoltaic (PV), wind turbine, fuel cells and battery storage. Microgrids can be connected to larger electricity grids; however, in the event of a widespread outage, the microgrid will disconnect from the main grid and continue to operate independently to maintain the electricity supply to the homes and businesses that are connected to the microgrid’s electricity network. Our microturbines have the ability to meet the needs of microgrid end-users by lowering their overall cost to operate and by providing a versatile dispatchable technology that is fuel flexible and scalable enough to fit a wide variety of applications. We have seen continued development in the microgrid market segment.
Backlog
Net product orders were approximately $31.8 million and $25.9 million for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively. Ending backlog was approximately $25.3 million at March 31, 2022 compared to $29.4 million at March 31, 2021. Book-to-bill ratio was 1.1:1 for both Fiscal 2022 and 2021. Book-to-bill ratio is the ratio of new orders we received to units shipped and billed during a period.
A portion of our backlog is concentrated in the oil and gas market which may impact the overall timing of shipments or the conversion of backlog to revenue. The timing of the backlog is based on the requirement date indicated by our customers. However, based on historical experience, management expects that a significant portion of our backlog may not be shipped within the next 18 months. Additionally, the timing of shipments is subject to change based on several variables (including customer deposits, payments, availability of credit and customer delivery schedule changes), most of which are not in our control and can affect the timing of our revenue. As a result, management believes the book-to-bill ratio demonstrates the current demand for our products in the given period.
2) Sales and Distribution Channels We seek out distributors that have business experience and capabilities to support our growth plans in our targeted markets. A significant portion of our revenue is derived from sales to distributors that resell our products to end users. We have a total of 66 distributors, OEMs and national accounts. In the United States and Canada, we currently have 10 distributors, OEMs and national accounts. Outside of the United States and Canada, we currently have 56 distributors, OEMs and national accounts. We continue to refine our distribution channels to address our specific targeted markets.
Our DSS program provides additional support for distributor business development activities, customer lead generation, brand awareness and tailored marketing services for each of our major geography and market verticals. This program is funded by our distributors and was developed to provide improved worldwide distributor training, sales efficiency, website development, company branding and provide funding for increased strategic marketing activities. See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of revenue recognition for this program.
3) Service As part of our Energy as a Service business line, we provide service primarily through our global distribution network. Together with our global distribution network we offer a comprehensive factory protection plan for a fixed fee to perform regularly scheduled and unscheduled maintenance as needed. We provide factory and on-site training to certify all personnel that are allowed to perform service on our microturbines. Factory protection plans are generally paid quarterly in advance.
Our FPP backlog at the end of Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021 was approximately $79.1 million and $75.1 million, respectively, which represents the value of the contractual agreement for FPP services that has not been earned and extends through Fiscal 2042. Additionally, we offer new and remanufactured parts through our global distribution network. Service revenue in Fiscal 2022 was approximately 33% of total revenue.
4) Product Robustness and Life Cycle Maintenance Costs We continue to invest in enhancements that relate to high performance and high reliability. An important element of our continued innovation and product strategy is to focus on the engineering of our product hardware and electronics to make them work together more effectively and deliver improved microturbine performance, reliability and low maintenance cost to our customers.
5) New Product Development Our new product development is targeted specifically to meet the needs of our selected vertical markets. We expect that our existing product platforms, the C65, C200 and C1000 Series microturbines, will be our foundational product lines for the foreseeable future. Our research and development project portfolio is centered on enhancing the features of these base products.
During Fiscal 2022, we continued to expand and develop our new hydrogen products. In March 2022, we released a commercially available hydrogen-based combined heat and power (CHP) product, which can safely run on a 30% hydrogen-70% natural gas mix. In continuing these efforts, we are testing a 100% hydrogen gas combustion system through our research and development partnership with Argonne National Laboratory.
6) Cost and Core Competencies We believe that the core competencies of our products are air-bearing technology, advanced combustion technology and sophisticated power electronics to form efficient and ultra-low emission electricity and cooling and heat production systems. Our core intellectual property is contained within our air-bearing technology. We continue to review avenues for cost reduction by sourcing to the best value supply chain option. In order to utilize manufacturing facilities and technology more effectively, we are focused on continuous improvements in manufacturing processes. Additionally, considerable effort is being directed to manufacturing cost reduction through process improvement, product design, advanced manufacturing technology, supply management and logistics. Management expects to be able to leverage our costs as product volumes increase.
Our manufacturing designs include the use of conventional technology, which has been proven in high- volume automotive and turbocharger production for many years. Many components used in the manufacture of our products are readily fabricated from commonly available raw materials or off the shelf items available from multiple supply sources; however, certain items are custom made to meet our specifications that require longer lead time. We believe that in most cases, adequate capacity exists at our suppliers and that alternative sources of supply are available or could be developed within a reasonable period of time; however, single source suppliers with long lead times may be more challenging to transition to another supplier. We regularly reassess the adequacy and abilities of our suppliers to meet our future needs.
We believe that effective execution in each of these key areas will be necessary to leverage our promising technology and early market leadership into achieving positive cash flow with growing market presence and improving financial performance.
We currently occupy warehouse and office space in Van Nuys, California with a production capacity of approximately 2,000 units per year, depending on product mix.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including but not limited to those related to bad debts, inventories, warranty obligations, and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
● Our revenue consists of sales of products, parts, accessories and service, which includes FPPs, net of discounts. Our distributors purchase products, parts and FPPs for sale to end users and are also required to provide a variety of additional services, including application engineering, installation, commissioning and post-commissioning service. Our standard terms of sales to distributors and direct end users include transfer of title, care, custody and control at the point of shipment, payment terms ranging from full payment in advance of shipment to payment in 90 days, no right of return or exchange, and no post-shipment performance obligations by us except for warranties provided on the products and parts sold. We recognize revenue when all of the following criteria are met: persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or service has been rendered, selling price is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured. Service revenue derived from time and materials contracts is recognized as the service is performed. FPP contracts are agreements to perform certain agreed-upon service to maintain a product for a specified period of time. Service revenue derived from FPP contracts is recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract period. We occasionally enter into agreements that contain multiple elements, such as equipment, installation, engineering and/or service. Effective January 1, 2018, we launched our DSS program to fund additional support for distributor business development activities, customer lead generation, brand awareness and tailored marketing services for each of our major geography and market vertical. Service revenue derived from our DSS program is recognized on a pro rata basis as the distributors purchase our products.
● Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost (determined on a first in first out (“FIFO”) basis) or net realizable value. We routinely evaluate the composition of our inventories and identify slow-moving, excess, obsolete or otherwise impaired inventories. Inventories identified as impaired are evaluated to determine if write-downs are required. Included in this assessment is a review for obsolescence as a result of engineering
changes in our product. Future product enhancement and development may render certain inventories obsolete, resulting in additional write-downs of inventories. In addition, inventories are classified as current or long-term based on our sales forecast and also, in part, based on our projected usage for warranty claims and service. A change in forecast could impact the classification of inventories.
● We provide for the estimated cost of warranties at the time revenue from sales is recognized. We also accrue the estimated costs to address reliability repairs on products no longer under warranty when, in our judgment, and in accordance with a specific plan developed by us, it is prudent to provide such repairs. We estimate warranty expenses based upon historical and projected product failure rates, estimated costs of parts, labor and shipping to repair or replace a unit and the number of units covered under the warranty period. While we engage in extensive quality programs and processes, our warranty obligation is affected by failure rates and service costs in correcting failures. As we have more units commissioned and longer periods of actual performance, additional data becomes available to assess future warranty costs. When we have sufficient evidence that product changes are altering the historical failure occurrence rates, the impact of such changes is then taken into account in estimating future warranty liabilities. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period that new information, such as design changes, cost of repair and product enhancements, becomes available. Should actual failure rates or service costs differ from our estimates, revisions to the warranty liability would be required and could be material to our financial condition, results of operations and cash flow. During Fiscal 2021, we recorded a specific $4.9 million warranty reserve related to reliability programs to account for the replacement of remaining high risk failure parts in some of our fielded units due to a supplier defect.
● Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amount and typically non-interest bearing. We maintain allowances for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments and other accounts receivable allowances. We evaluate all accounts aged over 60 days past payment terms. If the financial condition of our customers deteriorates or if other conditions arise that result in an impairment of their ability or intention to make payments, additional allowances may be required.
● We recognize stock-based compensation expense associated with stock options in the statement of operations. Determining the amount of stock-based compensation to be recorded requires us to develop estimates to be used in calculating the grant-date fair value of stock options. We calculate the grant-date fair values using the Black-Scholes valuation model.
The use of Black-Scholes model requires us to make estimates of the following assumptions:
● Expected volatility-The estimated stock price volatility was derived based upon our actual historic stock prices over the expected option life, which represents our best estimate of expected volatility.
● Expected option life-The expected life, or term, of options granted was derived from historical exercise behavior and represents the period of time that stock option awards are expected to be outstanding.
● Risk-free interest rate-We used the yield on zero-coupon U.S. Treasury securities for a period that is commensurate with the expected life assumption as the risk-free interest rate.
The amount of stock-based compensation cost is recorded on a straight-line basis over the vesting period.
Results of Operations
Year Ended March 31, 2022 Compared to Year Ended March 31, 2021
The following table summarizes our revenue by geographic markets (amounts in millions):
Revenue for Fiscal 2022 increased $2.0 million, or 3%, to $69.6 million from $67.6 million for Fiscal 2021. The change in revenue for Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 included increases in revenue of $2.0 million from the Latin American markets, $1.9 million from the United States and Canadian markets, and $1.8 million from the Middle East and African markets. These overall increases in revenue were offset by decreases in revenue of $2.4 million from the European and Russian markets and $1.3 million from the Asian and Australian markets. The decrease in the Europe and Russia markets was primarily due to business impacts from the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine, which has not only impacted Russia but also the European economy. The slight increase in revenue in the Latin American, United States and Canadian and Middle East and African geographic markets was primarily due to increases in product shipments into the energy efficiency and renewable energy vertical markets, as well as an increase in parts shipments.
The following table summarizes our revenue (revenue amounts in millions):
For Fiscal 2022, revenue from microturbine products and accessories increased $0.7 million, or 2%, to $37.2 million from $36.5 million for Fiscal 2021. The increase in revenue was primarily due to the mix of products sold during Fiscal 2022 compared to the same period last year. Megawatts shipped during Fiscal 2022 decreased 0.9 megawatts, or 3%, to 32.6 megawatts from 33.5 megawatts during Fiscal 2021. Average revenue per megawatt shipped was approximately $1.1 million and $1.0 million in Fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The timing of shipments is subject to change based on several variables (including customer deposits, payments, availability of credit and delivery schedule changes), most of which are not within our control and can affect the timing of our revenue. Accessories revenue decreased $1.1 million, or 46%, to $1.3 million from $2.4 million for Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the types of projects that required accessories in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021.
Parts and service revenue for Fiscal 2022 increased $1.3 million, or 4%, to $32.4 million from $31.1 million for Fiscal 2021. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by an increase in rentals, FPP revenue, and spare parts, partially offset by lower engineering service revenue.
Sales to E-Finity accounted for 18% of our revenue for the year ended March 31, 2022. Sales to CAL and E-Finity accounted for 15% and 12%, respectively, of our revenue for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. Sales to CAL were below 10% of our revenues for the year ended March 31, 2022.
Gross Margin Cost of goods sold includes direct material costs, production and service center labor and overhead, inventory charges and provision for estimated product warranty expenses. Gross margin was approximately $8.5 million, or 12% of revenue, for Fiscal 2022, compared to gross margin of $6.9 million, or 10% of revenue, for Fiscal 2021. The increase in gross margin of $1.6 million during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 was primarily because of an incremental decrease of $5.3 million in warranty expense, partially offset by an increase in production and service center labor and overhead expense of $2.9 million and higher inventory charges of $0.8 million.
The decrease in warranty expense of $5.3 million during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 was primarily due to the establishment of a reserve in Fiscal 2021 related to reliability programs to account for the replacement of remaining high risk failure parts in some of our fielded units due to a supplier defect, with no such reserve in Fiscal 2022.
Production and service center labor and overhead expense increased $2.9 million during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily because of increases of approximately $1.6 million in facilities costs, $0.8 million in supplies expense, $0.6 million in consulting expense and $0.6 million in labor costs, partially offset by $0.7 million in overhead allocated to finished goods inventory.
Inventory charges increased $0.8 million during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily as the result of an increase in the provision for excess and obsolete inventory.
The following table summarizes our gross margin (in millions except percentages):
Product and accessories gross margin improved by $2.2 million during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to the establishment of a warranty reserve to replace high-risk parts in fielded units affected by sub-optimal parts initially provided by a former strategic parts supplier in Fiscal 2021, a decrease in volume of product shipments from weakness in the oil and gas market due to a decline in oil price in Fiscal 2021, partially offset by higher overhead costs in Fiscal 2022, primarily due to the cost savings from the COVID-19 Business Continuity Plan in Fiscal 2021. Parts and service gross margin decreased $0.6 million during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher FPP costs in Fiscal 2022 driven by higher scheduled and unscheduled maintenance.
Product and accessories gross margin as a percentage of product and accessories revenue improved to (9)% during Fiscal 2022 from (15)% during Fiscal 2021, primarily driven by the warranty reserve for high-risk parts, partially offset by lower overhead costs in Fiscal 2021 due to the enactment of the Business Continuity Plan. Parts and service gross margin as a percentage of parts and service revenue decreased to 36% for Fiscal 2022 compared to 40% for Fiscal 2021 primarily driven by lower overhead costs in Fiscal 2021 due to the enactment of the Business Continuity Plan, as well as lower FPP costs in Fiscal 2021.
Research and Development Expenses (“R&D”) R&D expenses for Fiscal 2022 increased $1.0 million, or 42%, to $3.4 million from $2.4 million for Fiscal 2021, as a result of lower costs from our COVID-19 Business Continuity Plan during Fiscal 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses SG&A expenses for Fiscal 2022 increased $4.6 million, or 25%, to $23.0 million from $18.4 million for Fiscal 2021. The net increase in SG&A expenses was primarily as a result of increases of approximately $1.3 million of net bad debt expense, $1.2 million in labor costs, $0.6 million in marketing related costs, $0.6 million in consulting expense, $0.5 million in business travel expense, $0.2 million in
facilities costs, and $0.2 million in shareholder costs. These increases in Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021, except for the higher net bad debt expense of $1.3 million, were primarily a result of the actions taken in our Business Continuity Plan in Fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense Interest expense for Fiscal 2022 and 2021 were $5.0 million and $5.2 million, respectively. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional discussion on our interest expense.
Gain and Loss on Extinguishment of Debt We recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.9 million during Fiscal 2022, as the result of the forgiveness of the PPP Loan. See Note 11 - Term Note Payable. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $4.3 million during Fiscal 2021. The loss on extinguishment of debt comprised of the write-off of approximately $1.5 million of unamortized debt issuance costs, a facility fee in the amount of $1.0 million paid to the lender, an accrual of $1.0 million for anticipated exit fees due upon repayment of the principal balance to the lender, and the fair value of common stock warrants issued to the warrant holder in connection with Amendment No. 3 to the Purchase Warrant of $0.8 million.
Other Income for Fiscal 2022 includes the payment to the Company of $0.6 million of PPP Loan proceeds previously repaid in accordance with the Fourth Amendment to the Note Purchase Agreement between the Company and Goldman Sachs Specialty Lending Group, L.P. See Note 11 - Term Note Payable.
Income Tax Provision Income tax expense was $19,000 for Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021. Income tax expense incurred was related to state and foreign taxes. The effective income tax rate of -0.1% differs from the federal and state blended statutory rate of approximately 23.59% primarily as a result of maintaining a full valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets. At March 31, 2022, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $566.5 million and $177.1 million, respectively, which may be utilized to reduce future taxable income, subject to any limitations under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. We provided a valuation allowance for 100% of our net deferred tax asset of $153.4 million at March 31, 2022 because the realization of the benefits of these favorable tax attributes in future income tax returns is not deemed more likely than not. Similarly, at March 31, 2021, the net deferred tax asset was fully reserved.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash requirements depend on many factors, including the execution of our business strategy and plan. Our cash and cash equivalents balances decreased $27.0 million during Fiscal 2022, compared to an increase of $34.4 million during Fiscal 2021. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents during Fiscal 2022 compared to the increase in cash and cash equivalents during Fiscal 2021 was due to an increase in cash used in operating activities, as well as an increase in inventory to continue to produce product despite supply chain challenges and the intentional slowdown of incoming material in Fiscal 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and delays in accounts receivable collections primarily related to the COVID-19 pandemic in the current period. Cash used in investing activities was primarily to continue the expansion of the rental fleet, which was partially offset by cash provided by financing activities from the issuance of Common Stock through our June 2021 Common Stock offering and our at-the-market offering program.
Operating Activities During Fiscal 2022, net cash used by operating activities was $27.5 million, consisting of a net loss for the period of $20.2 million, offset by cash used for working capital of $11.8 million and non-cash adjustments (primarily warranty provision, accounts receivable allowances, depreciation and amortization, stock based compensation and inventory provision) of $4.5 million. During Fiscal 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $1.7 million, consisting of a net loss for the period of $18.4 million, offset by cash provided from working capital of $6.4 million and non-cash adjustments (primarily warranty provision, accounts receivable allowances, depreciation and amortization, stock based compensation and inventory provision) of $13.7 million.
The following is a summary of the significant sources (uses) of cash from operating activities (amounts in thousands):
(1) Represents warranty provision, change in fair value of warrant liability, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, inventory provision and accounts receivable allowances.
The change in non-cash operating activities during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by the loss on extinguishment of debt accounting resulting from entering into the A&R Note Purchase Agreement with Goldman Sachs during Fiscal 2021 and the gain on extinguishment of debt resulting from the forgiveness of the PPP Loan during the first quarter of Fiscal 2022. Also contributing to the change was warranty expense during Fiscal 2021 as a result of the warranty reserve established related to reliability programs to account for the replacement of remaining high risk failure parts in some of our fielded units due to a supplier defect. The change in accounts receivable was primarily the result of slower collections in Fiscal 2022 due to continued delays from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as from impacts from the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine, compared to Fiscal 2021. The change in inventory was primarily to continue to produce product despite supply chain challenges and the intentional slowdown of incoming material in Fiscal 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The change in accounts payable and accrued expenses was primarily the result of the level of inventory receipts and timing of payments made by us during Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021. The change in other operating assets and liabilities during the Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021, was primarily the result of additional expenditures for the reliability repair program.
Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities of $9.9 million and $3.2 million during Fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively, related primarily to the additions to our rental fleet of approximately $8.7 million and $2.4 million, respectively. The remaining amounts were primarily for sustaining our production and facilities.
Financing Activities During Fiscal 2022, we generated approximately $10.4 million in cash from financing activities compared to cash generated during Fiscal 2021 of approximately $36.0 million. The funds generated from financing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 were primarily the result of net proceeds from our June 2021 Common Stock offering and proceeds from the at-the-market offering program described below. The funds generated from financing activities during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 were primarily the result of $19.0 million in net proceeds from our A&R Note Purchase Agreement with Goldman Sachs, as amended, net borrowings under the PPP Loan, as well as $15.9 million in proceeds from the at-the-market offering program described below.
At-the-market offerings
On June 7, 2018, we entered into a Sales Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (the “Sales Agreement”) with respect to an at-the-market offering program (the “ATM Program”) pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our Common Stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million. We will set the parameters for sales of the shares, including the number to be sold, the time period during which sales are requested to be made, any limitation on the number that may be sold in one trading day and any minimum price below which sales may not be made. On July 15, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Sales Agreement, which modified the Sales Agreement to, among other things, amend the termination provisions of the Agreement and amend the maximum amount of shares of our Common Stock that we may offer and sell through or to H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC from time to time under the ATM Program. On March 19, 2021, we entered into a second amendment to the Sales Agreement, which
modified the Sales Agreement to, among other things, reflect our filing of a new Registration Statement on Form S-3 with the SEC on March 22, 2021 and set the maximum amount of shares of our Common Stock that we may offer and sell through or to H.C. Wainwright at $50 million from the date of the amendment to the Sales Agreement, subject to certain limitations set forth in the amendment. During Fiscal 2022, we issued approximately 0.1 million shares of our Common Stock under the ATM program and the net proceeds to us from the sale of our Common Stock were approximately $0.7 million after deducting commissions paid of approximately $26,000. As of March 31, 2022, approximately $49.3 million remained available for issuance under this ATM Program.
Common Stock Offering
On June 17, 2021, we entered into an amended and restated underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (the “Underwriter”) whereby we agreed to sell to the Underwriter, and the Underwriter agreed to purchase, in a firm commitment underwritten public offering 1,904,763 shares (the “Shares”) of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share (the “Offering”). The offering price to the public in the Offering was $5.25 per share of Common Stock, and the Underwriter agreed to purchase the Shares from the Company pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement at a price of $4.91 per share, representing an underwriting discount of 6.5%. Pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we also granted the Underwriter an option to purchase, for a period of 30 days from the date of the Underwriting Agreement, up to an additional 285,714 shares of Common Stock (the “Option Shares”). On June 21, 2021, the Underwriter exercised the option in full. The Offering closed on June 22, 2021, and we received net proceeds of $10.5 million after deducting $1.0 million underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses paid by the Company.
Warrants
Goldman Warrant
On February 4, 2019, we sold to Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC (the “Holder”), a Purchase Warrant for shares of our Common Stock (the “Warrant”) pursuant to which the Holder may purchase shares of our Common Stock in an aggregate amount of up to 404,634 shares (the “Warrant Shares”). Our Common Stock and warrant transactions during Fiscal 2021 triggered certain anti-dilution provisions in the warrants outstanding. As of March 31, 2022, the Holder may purchase shares of our Common Stock in an aggregate amount of up to 463,067 shares at an exercise price of $2.61 per share.
Goldman “2020 Warrant”
On October 1, 2020, we entered into an Amendment No. 3 to the Purchase Warrant for shares of our Common Stock (the “Amendment No. 3”) with Special Situations Investing Group II, LLC (as successor in interest to Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC) (the “Warrant Holder”) that amended that certain Purchase Warrant for shares of our Common Stock originally issued by the Company to Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, dated February 4, 2019, as amended (the “Original Warrant”). As of March 31, 2022, the holder may purchase shares of our Common Stock in an aggregate amount of up to 291,295 shares at an exercise price of $4.76 per share.
September 2019 Pre-Funded and Series D Warrants
On September 4, 2019, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell in a registered direct offering (the “Registered Direct Offering”) an aggregate of 580,000 shares of our Common Stock at a negotiated purchase price of $5.00 per share, and pre-funded warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 440,000 shares of our Common Stock at a negotiated purchase price of $5.00 per Pre-Funded Warrant, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $5.1 million (580,000 shares of common stock plus 440,000 pre-funded warrants at a $5.00 per share purchase price), before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses.
In a concurrent private placement, we agreed to issue to the purchasers warrants to purchase 765,000 shares of Common Stock, which represent 75% of the number of shares of Common Stock and shares underlying the Pre-Funded Warrants purchased in the Registered Direct Offering, pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement. The Common
Warrants are exercisable for shares of Common Stock at an initial exercise price of $6.12 per share for a period of five years, starting on April 2, 2020 and expiring on April 2, 2025. In January 2021, three warrant holders exercised their rights to the warrant agreement to exercise on a cashless basis 690,000 Series D warrants at an exercise price of $6.12 per share under the warrant agreement. In accordance with terms of the warrant agreement, after taking into account the shares withheld to satisfy the cashless exercise option, we issued 352,279 shares of Common Stock. As of March 31, 2022, there were 75,000 Series D warrants outstanding at an exercise price of $6.12 per share.
There were no stock options exercised during Fiscal 2022 and 2021. Repurchases of shares of our common stock for employee taxes due upon vesting of restricted stock units, net of employee stock purchases, resulted in approximately $0.1 million of net cash used during Fiscal 2022 and 2021.
Three-year Term Note On February 4, 2019, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, by and among us, certain subsidiaries of us as guarantors, Goldman Sachs Specialty Lending Holdings, Inc., as collateral agent and any other Purchasers party thereto from time to time, in connection with the sale of senior secured notes of us in a private placement exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Under the Note Purchase Agreement, we sold to the Purchaser $30.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes (the “Notes”). The first interest payment on the Notes was on March 31, 2019. On October 1, 2020, pursuant to A&R Note Purchase Agreement, we increased the amount of borrowing under the Notes by $20.0 million to $50.0 million, and all outstanding Notes bear interest at the Adjusted (London Interbank Offer) LIBO Rate (as defined in the A&R Note Purchase Agreement) plus 8.75% per annum. The Notes do not amortize and the entire principal balance is due in a single payment on the maturity date. As of March 31, 2022, $51.0 million in borrowings were outstanding under the Notes, which includes the accrual for an exit fee to be paid at maturity or upon pre-payment. Pursuant to the First Amendment to the A&R Note Purchase dated as of May 13, 2021, the minimum consolidated liquidity requirement increased from $9.0 million to $12.0 million for the period from the Amendment Date to March 31, 2022, and $9.0 million thereafter. The financial covenants of the A&R Note Purchase Agreement require the Company not to exceed specified levels of Adjusted EBITDA losses relative to its financial model, beginning with the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2021. As of March 31, 2022, we were not in compliance with the Adjusted EBITDA covenant contained in the A&R Note Purchase Agreement and did not cure such non-compliance by prepaying the Notes. As a result, we were in breach of the Adjusted EBITDA covenant as of May 27, 2022. On July 13, 2022 we entered into the A&R NPA Second Amendment with the Purchaser and the Collateral Agent, pursuant to which (i) the Purchaser and the Collateral Agent waived our breach of the Adjusted EBITDA covenant and (ii) the A&R Note Purchase Agreement has been amended to, among other things, add certain new covenants, including requirements that we use our commercially reasonable best efforts to raise at least $10 million through a sale of our common stock by September 14, 2022 and refinance the Notes by October 1, 2022. See Item 9B “Other Information” for a summary of the A&R NPA Second Amendment. As of March 31, 2022, we are in compliance with the other covenants contained in the A&R Note Purchase Agreement.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan On April 15, 2020, we applied for an unsecured PPP Loan in the principal amount of $2,610,200 under the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program enabled by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020. On April 24, 2020, we entered into a promissory note with Western Alliance Bank. The Company received the full amount of the PPP Loan on April 24, 2020. In accordance with the requirements of the CARES Act, we used the proceeds from the PPP Loan to support fixed costs such as payroll costs, rent and utilities. On May 13, 2020, we repaid $660,200 of the PPP Loan in accordance with the Fourth Amendment to the Note Purchase Agreement between the Company and Goldman Sachs Specialty Lending Group, L.P.
The advance under the PPP Loan bore interest at a rate per annum of 1%.
In February 2021, the Company applied for forgiveness in full of the original balance of the PPP loan and the loan was forgiven in full on June 30, 2021. The Company received a refund of $660,200 and recorded these amounts within other income on the Company’s Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations. Management will accounted for forgiveness on the PPP Loan in accordance with ASC 470 and recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt on its condensed consolidated financial statements and related footnote disclosures, provided forgiveness be approved by the SBA.
Working Capital Cash used for working capital was $11.8 million during Fiscal 2022, an increase of $18.2 million from the cash provided from working capital of $6.4 million during Fiscal 2021. These increases in cash used for
working capital and other operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to increases in inventory and accounts receivable, partially offset by decreases in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Evaluation of Ability to Maintain Current Level of Operations In connection with preparing the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, management evaluated whether there were conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raised substantial doubt about our ability to meet our obligations as they became due for the next twelve months from the date of issuance of our Fiscal 2022 consolidated financial statements. Management assessed that there were such conditions and events, including a history of recurring operating losses, negative cash flows from operating activities, the continued negative impact by the volatility of the global oil and gas markets, a strong U.S. dollar in certain markets making our products more expensive in such markets, the COVID-19 pandemic, the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and ongoing global geopolitical tensions. We incurred a net loss of $20.2 million and used cash from operating activities of $27.5 million during the Fiscal 2022. Our working capital requirements during Fiscal 2022 were primarily for increases in inventory to continue to produce product despite supply chain challenges, as well as the delayed timing of accounts receivable collections due to the COVID-19 pandemic and impacts from the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine. Our net loss increased during Fiscal 2022 primarily due to lower overhead and operating expenses in Fiscal 2021 from our COVID-19 Business Continuity Plan. As of March 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $22.6 million, and outstanding debt of $51.0 million at fair value (see Note 11-Term Note Payable in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the outstanding debt).
Management evaluated these conditions in relation to our ability to meet our obligations as they become due. Our ability to continue current operations and to execute on management’s plan is dependent on our ability to generate cash flows from operations. Management believes that we will continue to make progress on our path to profitability through a cost reduction plan implemented in March 2022, expanding the Energy as a Service (“EaaS”) revenue streams, as well as price increases on our Factory Protection Plan and certain product offerings. In March 2022, we implemented an expense reduction plan and announced our efforts to reduce operating costs and modify our operating model to better match our expanding EaaS business. In order to implement the expense reduction plan, we undertook a holistic review of our operations, taking the growing EaaS business into account. Beginning on February 28, 2022, we furloughed 17 employees for a period of 120 days, eliminated the position of Chief Revenue Officer, held by Jim Crouse, effective April 15, 2022, instituted 15% temporary pay cuts for approximately 36 employees and 25% temporary pay cuts for members of our senior leadership team, among other actions.
We believe that the implementation of the expense reduction plan will help better align our current cost structure to support our higher margin EaaS revenues.
In February 2022, we announced that we reached our goal of having 21.1 MW of rental units in our fleet and under contract. The EaaS rental unit timeline includes a delay between the time of manufacture and the time revenue from that unit is realized. The microturbine rental unit is built, allocated by a signed rental contract, and then commissioned at the customer site, at which point it begins to generate revenue. We expect to have all rental units contracted, commissioned, and generating revenue by our second quarter of Fiscal 2023. We expect rental revenue to more than double in Fiscal 2023 from the $2.8 million of rental revenue in Fiscal 2022. Additionally in March 2022, we announced that we increased the Distributor Support System, or DSS, program fee to 5% of prior calendar year revenue, from 3%, to support the expanding EaaS business.
To help offset inflation and the rising cost of components, as well as improve our profitability, we implemented price increases on our Factory Protection Plan contracts effective April 1, 2022, and implemented price increases on certain of our product offerings including the C65 and C1000 products, effective May 1, 2022.
We may seek to raise funds by selling additional securities (through the at-the-market offering or otherwise) to the public or to selected investors or by obtaining additional debt financing. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional funds on commercially favorable terms or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing additional equity or convertible debt securities, the fully diluted ownership percentages of existing stockholders will be reduced. In addition, any equity or debt securities that we would issue may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of the holders of our common stock.
Based on our current operating plan, management anticipates that, given current working capital levels and current financial projections, including the cost reduction plan, expanding EaaS business, and price increases, we will be able to meet our financial obligations as they become due over the next twelve months from the date of issuance of our Fiscal 2022 financial statements.
Depending on the timing of our future sales and collection of related receivables, managing inventory costs and the timing of inventory purchases and deliveries required to fulfill the backlog, our future capital requirements may vary materially from those now planned. The amount of capital that we will need in the future will require us to achieve significantly increased sales volume, which is dependent on many factors, including:
● the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy;
● the continuing impact from the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine;
● the market acceptance of our products and services;
● our business, product and capital expenditure plans;
● capital improvements to new and existing facilities;
● our competitors’ response to our products and services;
● our relationships with customers, distributors, dealers and project resellers; and
● our customers’ ability to afford and/or finance our products.
Our accounts receivable balance, net of allowances, was $24.7 million and $20.6 million as of March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Days sales outstanding in accounts receivable, (“DSO”), increased to 150 days as of March 31, 2022, compared to 111 days as of March 31, 2021 due to continued delayed collections in all markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic and impacts from the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine. In the Energy Efficiency market vertical we sell to end users that have been significantly, economically impacted by the pandemic, such as in the Hospitality and Health Care industries. Additionally, the COVID-19 Pandemic heavily impacted our natural resources market vertical, where we primarily sell to Oil & Gas end users. While oil prices have rebounded above $100 per barrel, we have not seen a corresponding rebound in capital expenditures or spending activity. Additionally, the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine has caused a widespread economic slowdown in the region, which has also impacts our collections. We recorded net bad debt expense of approximately $1.1 million for Fiscal 2022 and a net bad debt recovery of approximately $0.2 million for Fiscal 2021. Our allowance for doubtful accounts, was $0.8 million as of March 31, 2022 and $0.3 million as of March 31, 2021.
No assurances can be given that future bad debt expense will not increase above current operating levels. Increased bad debt expense or delays in collecting accounts receivable could have a material adverse effect on cash flows and results of operations. In addition, our ability to access the capital markets may be severely restricted or made very expensive at a time when we need, or would like, to do so, which could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity and financial resources. Certain industries in which our customers do business and certain geographic areas have been and could continue to be adversely affected by the previously referenced economic and geopolitical considerations.
In March 2022, we implemented an expense reduction plan, which included furloughs, employment terminations and pay cuts. See “-Initiative to Shift Towards Energy as a Service and Reduce Operating Costs” “Risk Factors--Our recently implemented expenses reduction plan and organizational changes undertaken to align to our focus on our EaaS business and achieving profitability may not be successful.”
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding new accounting standards.