ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All references to “2021” and “2020” are referring to the twelve-month period ended December 31 for each of those respective fiscal years. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements that reflect our plans and expectations. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements due to the factors discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We do not undertake, and specifically disclaim, any obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect the occurrence of events or circumstances after the date of such statements except as required by law.
Overview
We are a leading developer and manager of mixed-use and transit-oriented properties in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area. As a vertically integrated and multi-faceted asset management and real estate services company, we have designed, developed, constructed, acquired, and managed thousands of residential units and millions of square feet of commercial and mixed-use properties in since 1985. We provide a broad range of asset management and real estate services to our customers and partners, composed primarily of private and institutional owners, investors in commercial, residential, and mixed-use real estate, and various governmental bodies seeking to leverage the potential of public-private partnerships.
We have broad real estate development and management capabilities that enable us to generate fees for services provided in connection with the real estate assets we manage. Our experienced team provides a full range of services related to acquisition, development, and operations of real estate assets. Our revenue includes fees generated from asset management and real estate services that we provide to properties in our managed portfolio. In addition, we invest capital both on our own account and on behalf of clients and institutional investors seeking above average risk-adjusted returns. These strategic real estate investments tend to focus on office, retail, residential and mixed-use properties in which we generally retain an economic interest while also providing property management and other real estate services.
The services we provide pursuant to the asset management agreements covering our managed portfolio vary by property and client. Substantially all the properties included in our managed portfolio are covered by long-term, full-service asset management agreements encompassing all aspects of design, development, construction, and operations management relating to the subject properties.
Anchoring our asset management services platform is a long-term full service asset management agreement with an affiliated company owned by the Comstock’s Chief Executive Officer, Christopher Clemente (the “2019 AMA”). The 2019 AMA encompasses the majority of the properties we currently manage, including two of the largest transit-oriented, mixed-use developments in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area: Reston Station and Loudoun Station, which along with other development properties under the 2019 AMA constitute our “Anchor Portfolio”.
As of December 31, 2021, our managed portfolio comprised 34 operating assets, including 14 commercial assets totaling approximately 2.2 million square feet, 6 multifamily assets totaling 1,636 units, and 14 commercial garages with over 11,000 parking spaces. Additionally, we have: (i) one commercial asset currently under-construction and scheduled for delivery in 2022 totaling approximately 250,000 square feet that is 100.0% pre-leased; and (ii) 18 development pipeline assets consisting of approximately 2.0 million square feet of additional planned commercial development, approximately 1,900 multifamily units and 2 hotel assets that will include 460 keys.
CES Divestiture
On June 16, 2021, we made the strategic decision to pursue the sale of the operations of Comstock Environmental Services, LLC ("CES"), a subsidiary of Comstock, based on the continued growth and future prospects of the asset management business. Accordingly, we have reflected CES as a discontinued operation in our consolidated statements of operations for all periods presented, and have also designated CES assets and liabilities as held for sale in our consolidated balance sheets. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts and disclosures relate to our continuing operations. For additional information, see Note 3 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
On March 31, 2022, we completed the sale of CES to August Mack Environmental, Inc. ("August Mack") for approximately $1.4 million of total consideration, composed of $1.0 million in cash and $0.4 million held in escrow that is subject to net working capital and other adjustments, as set forth in the executed Asset Purchase Agreement with August Mack.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has also caused significant volatility in U.S. and international debt and equity markets, which can negatively impact consumer confidence. There is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the U.S. economy. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our financial results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. While we have not experienced a significant impact on our business resulting from COVID-19 to date, future developments may have a negative impact on our results of operations and financial condition. We continue to monitor the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the effects of recent notable variants of the virus. The health and safety of our employees, customers, and the communities in which we operate remains our top priority. Although the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the commercial real estate market in the greater Washington, D.C. area remains uncertain, we believe that our Anchor Portfolio is well positioned to withstand any future potential negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Outlook
Our management team is committed to executing on the Company's goal to provide exceptional experiences to those we do business with while maximizing shareholder value. We believe that we are properly staffed for current market conditions and the foreseeable future and that our Company has the ability to manage risk and pursue opportunities for additional growth as market conditions warrant. Our real estate development and management operations are primarily focused on the greater Washington, D.C. area, where we believe our 30-plus years of experience provides us the best opportunity to continue leveraging our significant experience acquiring, developing, and managing high quality real estate assets and capitalizing on positive growth trends.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth consolidated statement of operations data for the periods presented (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Revenue
The following table summarizes revenue by line of business (in thousands):
Revenue increased 38.3% in 2021. The $8.6 million comparative increase was primarily due to a $3.0 million increase in base asset management fees, driven partially by the $1.4 million impact of the PPP Loan we received in 2020 that reduced the prior year reimbursable cost base. In addition, in 2021 there was a $2.6 million increase in loan origination fees earned and a $1.4 million increase in revenue stemming from reimbursed payroll costs. The increases in property management and parking revenue stem from seven additional managed commercial and residential properties and parking facilities in 2021.
Operating costs and expenses
The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses (in thousands):
Operating costs and expenses increased 31.2% in 2021. The $6.2 million comparative increase was primarily due a $3.9 million increase in payroll costs, driven partially by the $1.5 million impact of the PPP Loan received in 2020 that reduced the prior year balance. Also contributing to the increase was a $0.9 million increase in co-broker fees incurred in 2021 due to increased capital markets activity, as well as a $0.5 million increase in rent expense due to a rate increase at our corporate headquarters location.
Other income (expense)
The following table summarizes other income (expense) (in thousands):
Other income (expense) decreased 50.2% in 2021. The $0.2 million comparative decrease was primarily due to a $0.1 million decrease in interest expense as a result of replacing a higher interest rate loan with a lower interest credit facility, as well as $0.1 million net decrease in losses on equity method investments.
Income taxes
Benefit from income taxes was $11.2 million in 2021, compared to an immaterial expense in 2020. The significant benefit in 2021 was primarily due to the partial $11.3 million release of a deferred tax asset valuation allowance in the second quarter. This recognized tax benefit was derived from our ability to consistently deliver positive net income from continuing operations over the past 3 years and our expectation that current operations will continue to generate future taxable income.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we prepare certain financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), specifically Adjusted EBITDA.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) from continuing operations, excluding the impact of interest expense (net of interest income), income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, and gain (loss) on equity method investments.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate financial performance, analyze the underlying trends in our business and establish operational goals and forecasts that are used when allocating resources. We expect to compute Adjusted EBITDA consistently using the same methods each period.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA is a useful measure because it permits investors to better understand changes over comparative periods by providing financial results that are unaffected by certain non-cash items that are not considered by management to be indicative of our operational performance.
While we believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors when evaluating our business, it is not prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, and therefore should be considered supplemental in nature. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute, for other financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA may differ from similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) from continuing operations, the most directly comparable financial measure as measured in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
Seasonality and Quarterly Fluctuations
None.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is defined as the current amount of readily available cash and the ability to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet the current needs for cash. We assess our liquidity in terms of our cash and cash equivalents on hand and the ability to generate cash to fund our operating activities.
Our principal sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2021 were our cash and cash equivalents of $15.8 million and our $4.5 million of available borrowings on our Credit Facility.
Significant factors which could affect future liquidity include the adequacy of available lines of credit, cash flows generated from operating activities, working capital management and investments.
Our primary capital needs are for working capital obligations and other general corporate purposes, including investments and capital expenditures. Our primary sources of working capital are cash from operations and distributions from investments in real estate ventures. We have historically financed our operations with internally generated funds and borrowings from our credit facilities. For further information on our debt and credit facilities, see Note 7 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We believe we currently have adequate liquidity and availability of capital to fund our present operations and meet our commitments on our existing debt.
Share Repurchase Program
In November 2014, our board of directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing the Company to repurchase up to 429,000 shares of our Class A common stock in one or more open market or privately negotiated transactions. We made no share repurchases under our share repurchase program in 2021 or 2020, and as of December 31, 2021 there are 404,000 shares of our Class A common stock that remain available for repurchase.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $5.1 million in 2021, primarily driven by a $2.8 million incremental cash inflow stemming from changes to our net working capital, including decreased accounts receivable and increased accrued personnel costs. In addition, there was a $2.3 million increase in net income from continuing operations after adjustments for non-cash items that contributed to the comparative increase.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities decreased by $0.4 million in 2021, primarily driven by our $2.0 million real estate investment in BLVD Forty Four, partially offset by a $1.7 million increase in distributions from investments in real estate ventures.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $0.1 million in 2021, primarily driven by a $0.2 million decrease in net loan activity, partially offset by a $0.1 million increase in tax payments related to the net share settlement of equity awards.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, we may have off-balance-sheet unconsolidated investments in real estate ventures and other unconsolidated arrangements with varying structures. For a full discussion of our current investments in real estate ventures, see Note 5 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Accounting policies, methods and estimates are an integral part of the preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP and, in part, are based upon management’s current judgments. Those judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience with regard to past and current events and assumptions about future events. Certain accounting policies, methods and estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to the consolidated financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ from management’s current judgments. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates affecting our consolidated financial statements, areas that are particularly significant include:
•Goodwill impairment
•Investments in real estate ventures at fair value
•Income taxes
Goodwill impairment
On an annual basis as of October 1, and at interim periods when circumstances require, we test the recoverability of our goodwill and intangible assets and review for indicators of impairment. Examples of such indicators include a significant change in the business climate, increased competition, loss of key personnel, significant or unusual changes in market capitalization, negative or declining cash flows, or a decline in actual or planned revenue or earnings compared with actual and projected results of relevant prior periods.
We perform impairment assessments at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, also known as a component. Given that our goodwill balance on our consolidated balance sheets relates entirely to our Comstock Environmental Services ("CES") line of business, we perform our assessments on that single reporting unit.
To test for the recoverability of goodwill, we first perform a qualitative assessment based on economic, industry and company-specific factors the reporting unit to determine whether the existence of events and circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the goodwill is impaired. Based on the results of the qualitative assessment, two additional steps in the impairment assessment may be required. The first step would require a comparison of the reporting unit’s fair value to the respective carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, a second step is performed to measure the amount of impairment loss on a relative fair value basis, if any. We believe the methodology that we use, including both a discounted cash flow model as well as a market multiple model, to review impairment of goodwill, which includes a significant amount of judgment and estimates, provides us with a reasonable basis to determine whether impairment has occurred.
As part of our annual goodwill assessment, we determined that there were potential indicators of impairment based on facts and circumstances that have arisen surrounding the divestiture of CES (see "Recent Developments" section above). Upon performing the quantitative two-step impairment test, we determined that the carrying value of CES significantly exceeded its current fair value, which was estimated using Level 1 inputs. As a result, we recorded a $1.4 million impairment loss in the fourth quarter 2021 to fully write off the remaining goodwill balance. This impairment loss, along with the $0.3 million goodwill impairment loss recorded in our fiscal second quarter, resulted in a cumulative $1.7 million goodwill impairment charge in 2021 that is reflected in net income (loss) from discontinued operations in our consolidated statements of operations.
Investments in real estate ventures at fair value
For investments in real estate ventures reported at fair value, we maintain an investment account that is increased or decreased each reporting period by contributions, distributions, and the difference between the fair value of the investment and the carrying value as of the balance sheet date. These fair value adjustments are reflected as gains or losses in our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of these investments as of the balance sheet date is generally determined using a discounted cash flow analysis, income approach, or sales-comparable approach, depending on the unique characteristics of the real estate venture.
Income taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on the deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. We provide a valuation allowance when we consider it “more likely than not” (greater than a 50% probability) that a deferred income tax asset will not be fully recovered. Adjustments to the valuation allowance are a component of the income tax provision or benefit in our consolidated statements of operations.
In June 2021, based on our recent financial performance and current forecasts of future operating results, we determined that it was more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax assets related to our net operating loss ("NOL") carryforwards would be utilized in future periods. As a result, we recorded an $11.3 million income tax benefit in the second quarter of 2021 that represented a partial release of our valuation allowance.