Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Statistical Information
The information noted below is provided pursuant to Guide 3 -- Statistical Disclosure by Bank Holding Companies.
Description of Information
Page
Reference
Item I. Distribution of Assets, Liabilities and Stockholders'
Equity; Interest Rates and Interest Differential
a. Average Balance Sheets 32
b. Analysis of Net Interest Earnings 33
c. Rate Volume Analysis of Changes in Interest Income and Expense 33
II. Investment Portfolio
a. Maturity Schedule of Investments 41
III. Loan Portfolio
a. Types of Loans 42
b. Maturities and Sensitivity to Changes in Interest Rates 42
c. Other Interest Bearing Assets None
d. Risk Elements 72
V. Deposits
a. Breakdown of Deposits by Categories, Average Balance and Average Rate Paid 32
b. Maturity Schedule of Uninsured Time Certificates of Deposit 48
VI. Return on Equity and Assets 31
VII. Short-term Borrowings 37
CITY HOLDING COMPANY
City Holding Company (the "Company"), a West Virginia corporation headquartered in Charleston, West Virginia, is a registered financial holding company under the Bank Holding Company Act and conducts its principal activities through its wholly owned subsidiary, City National Bank of West Virginia ("City National"). City National is a retail and consumer-oriented community bank with 94 bank branches in West Virginia (58), Kentucky (19), Virginia (13) and Ohio (4). City National provides credit, deposit, and trust and investment management services to its customers in a broad geographical area that includes many rural and small community markets in addition to larger cities including Charleston (WV), Huntington (WV), Martinsburg (WV), Ashland (KY), Lexington (KY), Winchester (VA) and Staunton (VA). In the Company's key markets, the Company's primary subsidiary, City National, generally ranks in the top three relative to deposit market share and the top two relative to branch share (Charleston/Huntington MSA, Beckley/Lewisburg counties, Staunton MSA and Winchester, VA/WV Eastern Panhandle counties). In addition to its branch network, City National's delivery channels include automated-teller-machines ("ATMs"), interactive-teller-machines ("ITMs"), mobile banking, debit cards, interactive voice response systems, and Internet technology. The Company’s business activities are currently limited to one reportable business segment, which is community banking.
COVID-19 Pandemic/Update
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has placed significant health, economic and other major pressure throughout the communities the Company serves, the United States and the entire world. The Company previously implemented a number of procedures in response to the pandemic to support the safety and well-being of our employees, customers and shareholders including pushing as much traffic as possible to our drive-thru facilities, providing extensions and deferrals to loan customers affected by COVID-19 and participating in the CARES Act Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"). The Company continues to closely monitor this pandemic and will continue to make changes to respond to the pandemic as this situation continues to evolve.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The accounting policies of the Company conform to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles and require management to make estimates and develop assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and related footnotes. These estimates and assumptions are based on information available to management as of the date of the financial statements. Actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates. As this information changes, management’s estimates and assumptions used to prepare the Company’s financial statements and related disclosures may also change. The most significant accounting policies followed by the Company are presented in Note One of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein. Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates underlying those amounts, management has identified: (i) the determination of the allowance for credit losses and (ii) income taxes to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Allowance for Credit Losses section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K provides management’s analysis of the Company’s allowance for credit losses and related provision. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the loans' amortized cost basis to present the net amount expected to be collected on the loans. Loans are charged off against the allowance when management believes the uncollectibility of a loan balance is confirmed. Expected recoveries do not exceed the aggregate of amounts previously charged-off and expected to be charged-off. Management estimates the allowance balance using relevant available information, from internal and external sources, relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Historical credit loss experience provides the basis for the estimation of expected credit losses. Adjustments to historical loss information are made for differences in current loan-specific risk characteristics, such as differences in underwriting standards, portfolio mix, delinquency level, or term as well as for changes in environmental conditions, such as changes in unemployment rates, property values, or other relevant factors. These evaluations are conducted at least quarterly and more frequently if deemed necessary. Additionally, all commercial loans within the portfolio are subject to internal risk grading. Risk grades are generally assigned by the primary lending officer and are periodically evaluated by the Company’s internal loan review process.
In evaluating the appropriateness of its allowance for credit losses, the Company stratifies the loan portfolio into six major groupings. The Company has identified the following portfolio segments and measures the allowance for credit losses using the following methods:
Migration is an analysis that tracks a closed pool of loans for a configurable period of time and calculates a loss ratio on only those loans in the pool at the start date based on outstanding balance. Vintage is a predictive loss model that includes a reasonable approximation of probable and estimable future losses by tracking each loan's net losses over the life of the loan as compared to its original balance. For demand deposit overdrafts, the allowance for credit losses is measured using the historical loss rate. Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. Loans evaluated individually are not included in the collective evaluation. When management determines that foreclosure is probable, the expected credit losses are based on the fair value of the collateral at the reporting date, adjusted for selling costs as appropriate.
Expected credit losses are estimated over the contractual term of the loan, adjusted for expected prepayments when appropriate. The contractual term excludes expected extensions, renewals, and modifications unless either of the following applies: management has a reasonable expectation at the reporting date that a troubled-debt restructuring will be executed with an individual borrower or the extension or renewal options are included in the original or modified contract at the reporting date and are not unconditionally cancellable by the Company.
The Company uses a number of economic variables in its scenarios to estimate the allowance for credit losses, with the most significant drivers being an unemployment rate forecast and qualitative adjustments. In the December 31, 2021 estimate, the Company assumed an unemployment forecast range of 3.5% to 5.2%, which has decreased from a range of 4.6% to 9% utilized in the December 31, 2020 estimate. Historical loss rates from periods where the average unemployment rate matches the forecast range are considered when calculating the forecast period loss rate. The impact of the changes in the unemployment forecast range between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021 resulted in a decrease in the ACL of approximately $0.6 million.
Based on sensitivity analysis of all portfolios, a 0.0050% change (slight improvement or decline on bank's scale) in all 11 qualitative risk factors (where assigned) would have a $1.8 million impact on the reserve allocation. Changing each factor by 0.01% (moderate improvement or decline) would have a $3.7 million impact. Management recognizes that these are extreme scenarios and it is very unlikely that all risk factors would change by 0.005% or 0.01% simultaneously. Between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, management assigned a "moderate improvement," or 1 basis point decrease, to the overall economic conditions and unemployment qualitative factors and eliminated the 0.055% COVID-19 qualitative adjustment. Management also assigned a “moderate improvement,” or 1 basis point decrease to 0.01%, to the delinquency trend factor for all pools. In total, the qualitative changes reduced the ACL by approximately $2.9 million.
Income Taxes
The Income Taxes section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K provides management’s analysis of the Company’s income taxes. The Company is subject to federal and state income taxes in the jurisdictions in which it conducts business. In computing the provision for income taxes, management must make judgments regarding interpretation of laws in those jurisdictions. Because the application of tax laws and regulations for many types of transactions is susceptible to varying interpretations, amounts reported in the financial statements could be changed at a later date upon final determinations by taxing authorities. On a quarterly basis, the Company estimates its annual effective tax rate for the year and uses that rate to provide for income taxes on a year-to-date basis. The Company's unrecognized tax benefits could change over the next twelve months as a result of various factors. The Company is currently open to audit under the statute of limitations by the Internal Revenue Service and various state taxing authorities for the years ended December 31, 2018 and forward.
The effective tax rate is calculated by taking the statutory rate and adjusting for permanent and discrete items. The discrete items can vary between periods but historically have remained consistent.
FINANCIAL SUMMARY
The Company’s financial performance over the previous three years is summarized in the following table:
*ROA (Return on Average Assets) is a measure of the effectiveness of asset utilization. ROE (Return on Average Equity) is a measure of the return on shareholders’ investment. ROATCE (Return on Average Tangible Common Equity) is a measure of the return on shareholders’ equity less intangible assets.
BALANCE SHEET ANALYSIS
Selected balance sheet fluctuations and ratios are summarized in the following table (in millions):
Investment securities increased $227.5 million, from $1.21 billion at December 31, 2020, to $1.43 billion at December 31, 2021 due to an increase in deposit balances and decreased loan demand.
Gross loans decreased $78.3 million (2.2%) from December 31, 2020 to $3.54 billion at December 31, 2021. PPP loans decreased $48.8 million from $55.4 million at December 31, 2020 to $6.6 million at December 31, 2021. Excluding outstanding PPP loans (included in the commercial and industrial loan category), total loans decreased $29.4 million, (0.8%), from December 31, 2020 to $3.54 billion at December 31, 2021. Residential real estate loans decreased $38.7 million (2.4%); home equity loans decreased $14.1 million (10.4%); and consumer loans decreased $6.8 million (14.2%). These decreases were partially offset by increases in commercial and industrial loans ($22.1 million, or 7.5%) (excluding PPP loans).
Total deposits increased $273.1 million from December 31, 2020 to $4.93 billion at December 31, 2021. Noninterest bearing demand deposits increased $196.1 million, savings deposits increased $159.4 million, and interest bearing demand deposits increased $108.6 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in time deposits of $191.1 million.
TABLE ONE
AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS AND NET INTEREST INCOME
(In thousands)
1.For purposes of this table, non-accruing loans have been included in average balances and the following net loan fees (in thousands) have been included in interest income:
2.Includes the Company's residential real estate and home equity loan categories.
3.Included in the above table are the following amounts (in thousands) for the accretion of the fair value adjustments related to the Company's acquisitions:
4.Includes the Company’s consumer and DDA overdrafts loan categories.
5.Effective January 1, 2012, the carrying value of the Company's previously securitized loans was reduced to $0.
6.Computed on a fully federal tax-equivalent basis assuming a tax rate of approximately 21%.
NET INTEREST INCOME
2021 2020 2019
TABLE TWO
RATE/VOLUME ANALYSIS OF CHANGES IN INTEREST INCOME AND INTEREST EXPENSE
(In thousands)
1.Fully federal taxable equivalent using a tax rate of approximately 21%.
2021 vs. 2020
The Company’s net interest income increased from $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $155.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company’s tax equivalent net interest income increased $1.2 million, or 0.8%, from $155.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $156.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company recognized $4.0 million of loan fees associated with PPP loans during 2021 as compared to $1.6 million during 2020. However, lower loan yields (which fell 29 basis points) decreased net interest income by $10.0 million. Additionally, lower average loan balances ($95.6 million) lowered net interest income by $4.2 million and a decrease in accretion from fair value adjustments decreased interest income by $1.7 million. Higher investment balances (which increased $262.2 million) increased net interest income by $7.2 million, while investment yields (which decreased by 45 basis points) decreased net interest income by $6.0 million. Lower rates paid on interest bearing liabilities (40 basis points) and lower average time deposit balances (down $172.3 million) increased net interest income by $11.7 million and $2.6 million, respectively. The Company’s reported net interest margin declined from 3.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 2.89% for the year ended December 31, 2021. Excluding the favorable impact of the accretion from the fair value adjustments, the net interest margin would have been 2.85% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 3.08% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
2020 vs. 2019
The Company’s net interest income decreased from $161.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s tax equivalent net interest income decreased $6.5 million, or 4.0%, from $162.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $155.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Lower loan yields (68 basis points) and investment yields (48 basis points) decreased net interest income by $24.5 million and $5.4 million, respectively. These decreases were partially offset by lower rates paid on interest bearing liabilities (40 basis points), higher investment balances ($195.9 million), and higher commercial loan balances ($99.3 million, driven largely by PPP loans) which increased net interest income by $13.1 million, $6.5 million, and $4.7 million, respectively. In addition, the Company recognized $1.6 million of loan fees associated with PPP loans during 2020. The Company’s reported net interest margin declined from 3.59% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 3.16% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding the favorable impact of the accretion from the fair value adjustments, the net interest margin would have been 3.08% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 3.51% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Management of the Company uses measures in its analysis of the Company's performance other than those in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America ("GAAP"). These measures are useful when evaluating the underlying performance of the Company's operations. The Company's management believes that these non-GAAP measures enhance comparability of results with prior periods and demonstrate the effects of significant gains and charges in the current period. The Company's management believes that investors may use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate the Company's financial performance without the impact of those items that may obscure trends in the Company's performance. These disclosures should not be viewed as a substitute for financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP, nor are they comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that may be presented by other companies.
TABLE THREE
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
(In thousands)
NON-INTEREST INCOME AND NON-INTEREST EXPENSE
2021 vs. 2020
Selected income statement fluctuations and ratios are summarized in the following table (dollars in millions):
Non-interest income was $69.6 million for 2021 as compared to $82.7 million for 2020. During 2020, the Company sold the entirety of its Visa Inc. Class B common shares (86,605 shares) in a cash transaction that resulted in a pre-tax gain of $17.8 million, or $0.84 diluted per share on an after-tax basis. Additionally, the Company reported $0.3 million of realized security gains on the sale of investment securities and $0.5 million of unrealized fair value gains on the Company’s equity securities during 2021 compared to $0.9 million of unrealized fair value losses on the Company’s equity securities during 2020. Exclusive of these items, non-interest income increased from $65.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $68.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was largely attributable to an increase of $3.9 million, or 17.0%, in bankcard revenues and a $0.7 million, or 8.8%, increase in trust and investment management fee income. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.7 million, or 15.0%, in other income and a decrease of $0.5 million in bank owned life insurance due to lower death benefit proceeds received during 2021 compared to 2020.
Non-interest expenses increased from $115.3 million for 2020 to $117.2 million for 2021. This increase was primarily due to an increase in telecommunication expenses ($0.7 million), FDIC insurance expense ($0.7 million), bankcard expenses ($0.6 million), occupancy related expenses ($0.3 million), advertising expenses ($0.3 million), and equipment and software related expense ($0.3 million). These increases were partially offset by a decrease in other expenses ($0.6 million) and repossessed asset gains ($0.3 million).
2020 vs. 2019
Selected income statement fluctuations are summarized in the following table (dollars in millions):
Non-interest income was $82.7 million for 2020 as compared to $68.5 million for 2019. During 2020, the Company sold the entirety of its Visa Inc. Class B common shares (86,605 shares) in a cash transaction which resulted in a pre-tax gain of $17.8 million, or $0.84 diluted per share on an after-tax basis. Additionally, the Company reported $0.9 million of unrealized fair value losses on the Company’s equity securities compared to $0.9 million of unrealized fair value gains on the Company’s equity securities during 2019. Exclusive of these items, non-interest income decreased from $67.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $65.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was largely attributable to a decrease of $5.8 million, or 18.3%, in service charges as average deposit balances have increased during the COVID-19
pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million, or 9.3%, in bankcard revenues, an increase of $0.7 million, or 17.3%, in other income (largely due to fees from loan interest rate swap originations), an increase of $0.7 million in bank owned life insurance due to higher death benefit proceeds received during 2020 compared to 2019, and an increase of $0.6 million in trust and investment management fee income.
During 2019, the Company recognized $0.8 million of acquisition and integration expenses associated with the completed acquisitions of Poage Bankshares, Inc. ("Poage") and Farmers Deposit Bancorp, Inc. ("Farmers"). Excluding these expenses, non-interest expenses decreased from $116.8 million for 2019 to $115.3 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in occupancy related expense of $0.8 million, other expenses of $0.8 million (largely on the strength of a gain from the sale of a branch bank location acquired in connection with the acquisition of Farmers), advertising of $0.6 million, repossessed asset losses of $0.4 million, and telecommunication expense of $0.3 million. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in equipment and software related expenses ($1.2 million), bankcard expenses ($0.3 million), and FDIC insurance expense ($0.2 million).
INCOME TAXES
Selected information regarding the Company's income taxes is presented in the table below (dollars in millions):
A reconciliation of the effective tax rate to the statutory rate is included in Note Eleven of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. The Company was in a net deferred tax asset position ($0.1 million) at December 31, 2021 and a net deferred tax liability position ($3.2 million) at December 31, 2020. The increase from net deferred tax liability to net deferred tax asset was largely due to a decrease in the Company's investment valuation, primarily in the mortgage-backed security portfolio.
The components of the Company’s net deferred tax assets/liabilities are disclosed in Note Eleven of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Realization of the most significant net deferred tax assets is primarily dependent on future events taking place that will reverse the current deferred tax assets. The deferred tax asset and/or liability associated with unrealized securities losses and/or gains is the tax impact of the unrealized gains and/or losses on the Company’s available-for-sale security portfolio. The impact of the Company’s unrealized losses is noted in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity as an adjustment to Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss). This deferred tax asset/liability would be realized if the unrealized securities gains/losses on the Company's securities were realized from either the sales or maturities of the related securities. The deferred tax asset associated with the allowance for credit losses is expected to be realized as additional loan charge-offs, which have already been provided for within the Company’s financial statements, and is recognized for tax purposes. The Company believes that it is more likely than not that each of the deferred tax assets will be realized and that no significant valuation allowances were necessary as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
The Company evaluates the adequacy of liquidity at both the Parent Company level and at the banking subsidiary level. At the Parent Company level, the principal source of cash is dividends from its banking subsidiary, City National. Dividends paid by City National to the Parent Company are subject to certain legal and regulatory limitations. Generally, any dividends in amounts that exceed the earnings retained by City National in the current year plus retained net profits for the preceding two years must be approved by regulatory authorities. At December 31, 2021, City National could pay dividends up to $76.9 million without prior regulatory permission.
During 2021, the Parent Company used cash obtained from the dividends received primarily to: (1) pay common dividends to shareholders and (2) fund repurchases of the Company's common shares. Additional information concerning sources and uses of cash by the Parent Company is discussed in Note Eighteen of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company repaid its Subordinated Debentures, assumed as part of its acquisition of Poage, at a price of 100% of the principal amount. These securities were issued in December 2006 and were callable in whole or in part any time after December 22, 2012.
The Parent Company anticipates continuing the payment of dividends, which are expected to approximate $36.1 million on an annualized basis for 2022 based on common shareholders of record at December 31, 2021 at a dividend rate of $2.40 per share for 2022. However, dividends to shareholders can, if necessary, be suspended. In addition to these anticipated cash needs, the Parent Company has operating expenses and other contractual obligations, which are estimated to require $1.2 million of additional cash over the next 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, the Parent Company reported a cash balance of $26.9 million and management believes that the Parent Company’s available cash balance, together with cash dividends from City National, will be adequate to satisfy its funding and cash needs over the next twelve months. Excluding the dividend payments discussed above, the Parent Company has no significant commitments or obligations in years after 2022.
City National manages its liquidity position in an effort to effectively and economically satisfy the funding needs of its customers and to accommodate the scheduled repayment of borrowings. Funds are available to City National from a number of sources, including depository relationships, sales and maturities within the investment securities portfolio, and borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank ("FHLB") and other financial institutions. As of December 31, 2021, City National’s assets are significantly funded by deposits and capital. City National maintains borrowing facilities with the FHLB and other financial institutions that can be accessed as necessary to fund operations and to provide contingency funding mechanisms. As of December 31, 2021, City National had the capacity to borrow an additional $2.1 billion from the FHLB and other financial institutions under existing borrowing facilities. City National maintains a contingency funding plan, incorporating these borrowing facilities, to address liquidity needs in the event of an institution-specific or systemic financial industry crisis. Also, although it has no current intention to do so, City National could liquidate its unpledged securities, if necessary, to provide an additional funding source. City National also segregates certain mortgage loans, mortgage-backed securities, and other investment securities in a separate subsidiary so that it can separately monitor the asset quality of these primarily mortgage-related assets, which could be used to raise cash through securitization transactions or obtain additional equity or debt financing if necessary.
The Company manages its asset and liability mix to balance its desire to maximize net interest income against its desire to minimize risks associated with capitalization, interest rate volatility, and liquidity. With respect to liquidity, the Company has chosen a conservative posture and believes that its liquidity position is strong. As illustrated in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, the Company generated $102.3 million of cash from operating activities during 2021, primarily from interest income received on loans and investments, net of interest expense paid on deposits and borrowings.
The Company has obligations to extend credit, but these obligations are primarily associated with existing home equity loans that have predictable borrowing patterns across the portfolio. The Company has investment security balances with carrying values that totaled $1.43 billion at December 31, 2021, and that greatly exceeded the Company’s non-deposit sources of borrowing, which totaled $312 million.
The Company’s net loan to asset ratio is 58.7% as of December 31, 2021 and deposit balances fund 82.0% of total assets as compared to 79.5% for its peers (Bank Holding Company Peer Group, as of the most recent data available as of September 30, 2021, which includes commercial banks with assets ranging from $3 billion to $10 billion). Further, the Company’s deposit mix has a very high proportion of transaction and savings accounts that fund 64.2% of the Company’s total assets and the Company uses time deposits over $250,000 to fund 2.2% of total assets compared to its peers, which fund (4.3)% of total assets with such deposits.
Capital Resources
During 2021, Shareholders’ Equity decreased $20 million, or 2.9%, from $701 million at December 31, 2020 to $681 million at December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to common share repurchases of $59 million, cash dividends declared of $36 million, and other comprehensive loss of $17 million (due to a decrease in the Company's investment valuation), partially offset by net income of $88 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased approximately 760,000 common shares at a weighted average price of $77.21 per share as part of a one million share repurchase plan authorized by the Board of Directors in March 2021. At December 31, 2021, the Company could repurchase approximately 315,000 shares under the current plan.
The Basel III Capital Rules require City Holding and City National to maintain minimum CET 1, Tier 1 and Total Capital ratios, along with a capital conservation buffer, effectively resulting in new minimum capital ratios (which are shown in the table below). The capital conservation buffer is designed to absorb losses during periods of economic stress. Banking institutions with a ratio of CET 1 capital to risk-weighted assets above the minimum but below the conservation buffer (or below the combined capital conservation buffer and countercyclical capital buffer, when the latter is applied) will face constraints on dividends, equity repurchases and compensation based on the amount of the shortfall. The Basel III Capital Rules also provide for a "countercyclical capital buffer" that is applicable to only certain covered institutions and does not have any current applicability to City Holding Company or City National Bank.
The Company’s regulatory capital ratios for both City Holding and City National include the 2.5% capital conservation buffer and are illustrated in the following tables (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, management believes that City Holding Company, and its banking subsidiary, City National, were "well capitalized." City Holding is subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the Federal Reserve, while City National is subject to regulatory capital requirements administered by the OCC and the FDIC. Regulatory agencies can initiate certain mandatory actions if either City Holding or City National fails to meet the minimum capital requirements, as shown above. As of December 31, 2021, management believes that City Holding and City National meet all capital adequacy requirements.
In November 2019, the federal banking regulators published final rules implementing a simplified measure of capital adequacy for certain banking organizations that have less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets. Under the final rules, which went into effect on January 1, 2020, depository institutions and depository institution holding companies that have less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets and meet other qualifying criteria, including a leverage ratio of greater than 9%, off-balance-sheet exposures of 25% or less of total consolidated assets and trading assets plus trading liabilities of 5% or less of total consolidated assets, are deemed "qualifying community banking organizations" and are eligible to opt into the "community bank leverage ratio framework." A qualifying community banking organization that elects to use the community bank leverage ratio framework and that maintains a leverage ratio of greater than 9% is considered to have satisfied the generally applicable risk-based and leverage capital requirements under the Basel III Rules and, if applicable, is considered to have met the "well capitalized" ratio requirements for purposes of its primary federal regulator’s prompt corrective action rules, discussed below. The final rules include a two-quarter grace period during which a qualifying community banking organization that temporarily fails to meet any of the qualifying criteria, including the greater-than-9% leverage capital ratio requirement, is generally still deemed "well capitalized" so long as the banking organization maintains a leverage capital ratio greater than 8%. A banking organization that fails to maintain a leverage capital ratio greater than 8% is not permitted to use the grace period and must comply with the generally applicable requirements under the Basel III Rules and file the appropriate regulatory reports. The Company and its subsidiary bank do not have any immediate plans to elect to use the community bank leverage ratio framework but may make such an election in the future.
Contractual Obligations
The Company has various financial obligations that may require future cash payments according to the terms of the obligations. Demand, both noninterest- and interest-bearing, and savings deposits are, generally, payable immediately upon demand at the request of the customer. Therefore, the contractual maturity of these obligations is presented in the following table as "less than one year." Time deposits, typically certificates of deposit, are customer deposits that are evidenced by an agreement between the Company and the customer that specify stated maturity dates; early withdrawals by the customer are subject to penalties assessed by the Company. Short-term borrowings and long-term debt represent borrowings of the Company and have stated maturity dates. Operating leases between the Company and the lessor have stated expiration dates and renewal terms.
TABLE FOUR
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The composition of the Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 is presented in the following table (in thousands):
(1)Includes interest on both fixed- and variable-rate obligations. The interest associated with variable-rate obligations is based upon interest rates in effect at December 31, 2021. The contractual amounts to be paid on variable-rate obligations are affected by market interest rates that could materially affect the contractual amounts to be paid.
The Company’s liability for uncertain tax positions at December 31, 2021 was $1.8 million pursuant to ASC Topic 740. This liability represents an estimate of tax positions that the Company has taken in its tax returns that may ultimately not be sustained upon examination by tax authorities. As the ultimate amount and timing of any future cash settlements cannot be predicted with reasonable reliability, this estimated liability has been excluded from the contractual obligations table.
As disclosed in Note Fourteen of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company has entered into agreements with its customers to extend credit or to provide conditional commitments to provide payment on drafts presented in accordance with the terms of the underlying credit documents (including standby and commercial letters of credit). The Company also provides overdraft protection to certain demand deposit customers that represent an unfunded commitment. As a result of the Company’s off-balance sheet arrangements for 2021 and 2020, no material revenue, expenses, or cash flows were recognized. In addition, the Company had no other indebtedness or retained interests nor entered into agreements to extend credit or provide conditional payments pursuant to standby and commercial letters of credit.
INVESTMENTS
The investment portfolio is structured to provide flexibility in managing liquidity needs and interest rate risk, while providing acceptable rates of return.
The majority of the Company’s investment securities continue to be mortgage-backed securities. These securities are collateralized by both residential and commercial properties. The mortgage-backed securities in which the Company has invested are predominantly issued by government-sponsored agencies such as Fannie Mae (“FNMA”), Freddie Mac (“FHLMC”) and Ginnie Mae (“GNMA”).
The Company's municipal bond portfolio of $272 million as of December 31, 2021 has an average tax equivalent yield of 2.50% with an average maturity of 13.1 years. The average dollar amount invested in each security is $1.2 million. The portfolio has 92% rated "A" or better and the remaining portfolio is unrated, as the issuances represented small issuances of revenue bonds. Additional credit support has been purchased by the issuer for 28% of the portfolio, while 72% has no additional credit support. Management re-underwrites 100% of the portfolio on an annual basis, using the same guidelines that are used to underwrite its commercial loans. Revenue bonds were 55% of the portfolio, while the remaining 45% were general obligation bonds. Geographically, the portfolio supports the Company's footprint, with 17% of the portfolio being
from municipalities throughout West Virginia, and the remainder from communities in Texas, Washington, Ohio and various other states.
The weighted average yield of the Company's investment portfolio is presented in the following table (dollars in thousands):
Weighted-average yields on tax-exempt obligations of states and political subdivisions have been computed on a taxable-equivalent basis using the federal statutory tax rate of 21%. Average yields on investments available-for-sale are computed based on amortized cost. Mortgage-backed securities have been allocated to their respective maturity groupings based on their contractual maturity.
TABLE FIVE
LOAN PORTFOLIO
Loans decreased $78.3 million (2.2%) from December 31, 2020 to $3.54 billion at December 31, 2021. PPP loans decreased $48.8 million from $55.4 million at December 31, 2020 to $6.6 million at December 31, 2021. Excluding outstanding PPP loans (included in the commercial and industrial loan category), total loans decreased $29.4 million, (0.8%), from December 31, 2020 to $3.54 billion at December 31, 2021. The composition of the Company’s loan portfolio as of the dates indicated follows (in thousands):
The commercial and industrial ("C&I") loan portfolio consists of loans to corporate and other legal entity borrowers, primarily small to mid-size industrial and commercial companies. C&I loans typically involve a higher level of risk than other loan types, including industry specific risks such as the pertinent economy, new technology, labor rates and cyclicality, as well as customer specific factors, such as cash flow, financial structure, operating controls and asset quality. Collateral securing these loans includes equipment, machinery, inventory, receivables and vehicles. C&I loans decreased $27 million to $346 million at December 31, 2021, largely due to a decrease in PPP loans, which decreased from $55 million at December 31, 2020 to $7 million at December 31, 2021. Excluding the decrease in PPP loans, C&I loans increased $21 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
Commercial real estate loans consist of commercial mortgages, which generally are secured by nonresidential and multi-family residential properties, including hotel/motel and apartment lending. Commercial real estate loans are to many of the same customers and carry similar industry risks as C&I loans, but have different collateral risk. Commercial real estate loans remained flat at $1.48 billion at December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, $12 million of the commercial real estate loans were for commercial properties under construction.
In order to group loans with similar risk characteristics, the portfolio is further segmented by product types:
◦Commercial 1-4 Family loans consist of residential single-family, duplex, triplex, and fourplex rental properties and totaled $107.9 million as of December 31, 2021. Risk characteristics are driven by rental housing demand as well as economic and employment conditions. These properties exhibit greater risk than multi-family properties due to fewer income sources.
◦The Hotel portfolio is comprised of all lodging establishments and totaled $311.3 million as of December 31, 2021. Risk characteristics relate to the demand for both business and personal travel.
◦Multi-family consists of 5 or more family residential apartment lending. The portfolio totaled $215.7 million as of December 31, 2021. Risk characteristics are driven by rental housing demand as well as economic and employment conditions.
◦Non-residential commercial real estate includes properties such as retail, office, warehouse, storage, healthcare, entertainment, religious, and other nonresidential commercial properties. The non-residential product type is further segmented into owner- and non-owner occupied properties. Nonresidential non-owner occupied commercial real
estate totaled $639.8 million while nonresidential owner-occupied commercial real estate totaled $204.2 million as of December 31, 2021. Risk characteristics relate to levels of consumer spending and overall economic conditions.
The Company categorizes commercial loans by industry according to the North American Industry Classification System ("NAICS") to monitor the portfolio for possible concentrations in one or more industries. Management monitors industry concentrations against internally established risk-based capital thresholds. As of December 31, 2021, City National was within its internally designated concentration limits. As of December 31, 2021, City National's loans to borrowers within the Lessors of Nonresidential Buildings categories exceeded 10% of total loans (14%). No other NAICS industry classification exceeded 10% of total loans as of December 31, 2021. Management also monitors non-owner occupied commercial real estate as a percent of risk based capital (based upon regulatory guidance). At December 31, 2021, the Company had $1.4 billion of commercial loans classified as non-owner occupied and was within its designated concentration threshold.
Residential real estate loans decreased $39 million from December 31, 2020 to $1.55 billion at December 31, 2021. Residential real estate loans include loans for the purchase or refinance of consumers' residence and first-priority home equity loans allow consumers to borrow against the equity in their home. These loans primarily consist of single family three- and five-year adjustable rate mortgages with terms that amortize up to 30 years. City National also offers fixed-rate residential real estate loans. Residential purchase real estate loans are generally underwritten to comply with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guidelines, while first priority home equity loans are underwritten with typically less documentation, lower loan-to-value ratios and shorter maturities. Additionally, the Company periodically purchases residential mortgage loans. The credit and collateral documents for each potential purchased loan are reviewed to ensure the credit metrics are acceptable to management. At December 31, 2021, $17 million of the residential real estate loans were for properties under construction.
Home equity loans decreased $14 million from December 31, 2020 to $122 million at December 31, 2021. City National's home equity loans represent loans to consumers that are secured by a second (or junior) priority lien on a residential property. Home equity loans allow consumers to borrow against the equity in their home without paying off an existing first priority lien. These loans include home equity lines of credit ("HELOC") and amortized home equity loans that require monthly installment payments. Second priority lien home equity loans are underwritten with less documentation than first priority lien residential real estate loans but typically have similar loan-to-value ratios and other terms as first priority lien residential real estate loans. The amount of credit extended is directly related to the value of the real estate securing the loan at the time the loan is made.
All mortgage loans, whether fixed rate or adjustable rate, are originated in accordance with acceptable industry standards and comply with regulatory requirements. Fixed rate mortgage loans are processed and underwritten in accordance with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac guidelines, while adjustable rate mortgage loans are underwritten in accordance with City National's internal loan policy.
Consumer loans may be secured by automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles, certificates of deposit and other personal property, or they may be unsecured. The Company manages the risk associated with consumer loans by monitoring such factors as portfolio size and growth, internal lending policies and pertinent economic conditions. City National's underwriting standards are continually evaluated and modified based upon these factors. Consumer loans decreased $7 million from 2020 to $41 million at December 31, 2021.
The following table shows the scheduled maturity of loans outstanding as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
The maturity table above is based on actual loan maturity dates and does not consider prepayments or any other
assumptions.
ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The Company adopted ASU No. 2016-13, "Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments" effective January 1, 2020, using the modified retrospective method for all financial assets measured at amortized cost and off-balance sheet credit exposures. ASU No. 2016-13 replaced the incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. The new current expected credit losses model ("CECL") applies to the allowance for credit losses, available-for-sale and held-to-maturity debt securities, purchased financial assets with credit deterioration and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures. Results for reporting periods beginning after January 1, 2020 are presented under ASU No. 2016-13, while prior period amounts continue to be reported in accordance with previously applicable GAAP.
Management systematically monitors the loan portfolio and the appropriateness of the allowance for credit losses on a quarterly basis to provide for expected losses inherent in the portfolio. Management assesses the risk in each loan type based on historical trends, the general economic environment of its local markets, individual loan performance and other relevant factors. The Company's estimate of future economic conditions utilized in its provision estimate is primarily dependent on expected unemployment ranges over a two-year period. Beyond two years, a straight line reversion to historical average loss rates is applied over the life of the loan pool in the migration methodology. The vintage methodology applies future average loss rates based on net losses in historical periods where the unemployment rate was within the forecasted range.
Individual credits in excess of $1 million are selected at least annually for detailed loan reviews, which are utilized by management to assess the risk in the portfolio and the appropriateness of the allowance.
Determination of the Allowance for Credit Losses "ACL" is subjective in nature and requires management to periodically reassess the validity of its assumptions. Differences between actual losses and estimated losses are assessed such that management can timely modify its evaluation model to ensure that adequate provision has been made for risk in the total loan portfolio.
As a result of the Company’s quarterly analysis of the adequacy of the ACL, the Company recorded a recovery of credit losses of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision for credit losses of $10.7 million for the comparable period in 2020. The determination of the Company’s allowance for credit losses is largely dependent on expected unemployment ranges. Due to improvements in the outlook for unemployment ranges utilized by the Company and adjustments to other qualitative and other factors, during 2021 the Company partially recovered a portion of the provision for credit losses incurred in the quarter ended March 31, 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Based on the Company’s analysis of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses and in consideration of the known factors utilized in computing the allowance, management believes that the allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2021 is adequate to provide for expected losses inherent in the Company’s loan portfolio. Future provisions for credit losses will be dependent upon trends in loan balances including the composition of the loan portfolio, changes in loan quality and loss experience trends, and recoveries of previously charged-off loans, among other factors.
TABLE SIX
ALLOCATION OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The allocation of the allowance for credit losses by portfolio segment and the percent of loans in each category to total loans is shown in the table below (dollars in thousands). The allocation of a portion of the allowance in one portfolio segment does not preclude its availability to absorb losses in other portfolio segments.
The ACL decreased from $24.5 million at December 31, 2020 to $18.2 million at December 31, 2021. Below is a summary of the changes in the components of the ACL from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
The allowance attributed to the commercial real estate loan portfolio decreased $3.7 million from $11.0 million at December 31, 2020 to $7.3 million at December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the unemployment forecast range, a reduction in qualitative factor adjustments, and a payoff and partial charge-off of a previously identified individually analyzed loan.
The allowance attributed to the residential real estate portfolio decreased $2.4 million from $8.1 million at December 31, 2020 to $5.7 million at December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the unemployment forecast range, a reduction in qualitative factor adjustments, and a decrease in loan balances.
The following table shows asset quality ratios as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
GOODWILL
The Company evaluates the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets annually as of November 30th, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances warrant, such as a material adverse change in the Company's business. Goodwill is considered to be impaired when the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are considered impaired if their carrying value exceeds their estimated fair value. As described in Note One of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company conducts its business activities through one reportable business segment - community banking. Fair values are estimated by reviewing the Company’s stock price as it compares to book value and the Company’s reported earnings. In addition, the impact of future earnings and activities is considered in the Company’s analysis. The Company had approximately $109 million of goodwill at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and no impairment was required to be recognized in 2021 or 2020, as the estimated fair value of the Company has continued to exceed its book value.
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT
The Company has time certificates of deposit that meet or exceed the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 totaling an estimated $352.8 million. Scheduled maturities of uninsured time certificates of deposit are estimated at December 31, 2021 and are summarized in the table below (in thousands).
TABLE SEVEN
MATURITY DISTRIBUTION OF UNINSURED CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The Company determines the fair value of its financial instruments based on the fair value hierarchy established in ASC Topic 820, whereby the fair value of certain assets and liabilities is an exit price, representing the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. ASC Topic 820 establishes a three-level hierarchy for disclosure of assets and liabilities recorded at fair value. The hierarchy classification is based on whether the inputs in the methodology for determining fair value are observable or unobservable. Observable inputs reflect market-based information obtained from independent sources (Level 1 or Level 2), while unobservable inputs reflect management’s estimate of market data (Level 3). Assets and liabilities that are actively traded and have quoted prices or observable market data require a minimal amount of subjectivity concerning fair value. Management’s judgment is necessary to estimate fair value when quoted prices or observable market data are not available.
At December 31, 2021, approximately 24% of total assets, or $1.45 billion, consisted of financial instruments recorded at fair value. Most of these financial instruments used valuation methodologies involving observable market data, collectively Level 1 and Level 2 measurements, to determine fair value. At December 31, 2021, approximately $24 million of derivative liabilities were recorded at fair value using methodologies involving observable market data. The Company does not believe that any changes in the unobservable inputs used to value the financial instruments mentioned above would have a material impact on the Company’s results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources. See Note Seventeen of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding ASC Topic 820 and its impact on the Company’s financial statements.
LEGAL ISSUES
The Company is engaged in various legal actions that it deems to be in the ordinary course of business. As these legal actions are resolved, the Company could realize impacts to its financial performance in the period in which these legal actions are ultimately decided. There can be no assurance that current actions will have immaterial results, or that no material actions may be presented in the future.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Note Two, "Recent Accounting Pronouncements," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, discusses recently issued new accounting pronouncements and their expected impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.