Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help the reader understand the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of Choice Hotels International, Inc. and its subsidiaries (together the "Company", "we", "us", or "our") contained in this report. MD&A is provided as a supplement to - and should be read in conjunction with - our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to cause disruptions to the global economy and the hospitality industry, including in the United States, where more than 80% of our franchised hotels are located. Since its onset, the COVID-19 pandemic has led governments and other authorities and businesses around the world at multiple times to impose or recommend measures intended to control its spread, including temporary closures of and occupancy limits on many businesses, travel restrictions, cancellation of events, social distancing measures and other governmental regulations. As a result, the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences have reduced travel and demand for hotel rooms, which has adversely impacted, both financially and operationally and at varying degrees throughout the pandemic, the hospitality industry generally and the Company. The development of effective vaccines, the on-going distribution of such vaccines and other containment efforts have been significant positive developments that we believe have contributed to improved operating metrics since the second quarter of 2021. However, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact the hospitality industry generally and our operations remains uncertain and will depend largely on future developments, including the rate and pace of vaccination in the broader population, the severity and duration of resurgences or variants of the virus, the effectiveness of actions by government authorities and the public to continue to contain the pandemic, and the potential for adverse changes in consumer sentiment with respect to travel during the pandemic.
The impacts of COVID-19 on the Company's business were first experienced toward the end of the first quarter of 2020, with domestic occupancy levels ranging between 25.5% and 32.5% in the last ten days of March 2020 resulting in significant decreases in revenue per available room ("RevPAR"). These trends steadily improved, albeit remained significantly impacted, over the remainder of 2020, resulting in full year 2020 domestic RevPAR declining approximately 30.7% compared to full year 2019. The Company continued to experience significant negative impacts through the first quarter of 2021, although an increase in leisure travel reservations was observed in March 2021 that steadily improved through the remainder of 2021. The fourth quarter 2021 domestic RevPAR experienced an increase of approximately 52.2% and 13.9% relative to fourth quarter 2020 and fourth quarter 2019, respectively. As of both December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, less than 1% of the Company's domestic hotel system had temporarily suspended operations due to governmental restrictions or a franchisee’s election.
While the ultimate impact and duration of COVID-19 is uncertain and will depend on future developments, which are difficult to predict, the Company believes that it will continue to benefit in the long-term from its primarily franchise-only business model, which has historically provided a relatively stable earnings stream and low capital expenditure requirements. Further, as of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $1.1 billion in cash and additional borrowing capacity through its senior unsecured revolving credit facility.
Based on our business model and information known at this time, the Company believes that cash flows from operations and available financing capacity are adequate to meet the expected future operating, investing and financing needs of the business.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented measures in 2020 to focus on the safety of our customers, employees, franchisees and their staff, while at the same time seeking to mitigate the impact on franchisees' and our Company's financial position and operations. The duration of these measures cannot be predicted at this time. The measures that remained in effect during the fourth quarter of 2021 included, but were not limited to, the following:
•Preserving fee-deferral programs for domestic and international franchisees.
•Continuing to extend capital-intensive brand deadlines and offer more flexible brand standard options to assist franchisees.
•Advising franchisees on benefits and eligibility requirements of government relief SBA programs and other CARES Act and American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 provisions.
•Maintaining a proactive, ongoing multi-channel franchisee outreach and education program that is actively assisting our franchisees in accessing available capital.
While a recovery in the hospitality industry has commenced, industry projections anticipate that recovery to 2019 operating performance will occur over multiple years. As the industry recovery continues, the Company believes it will continue to benefit from the faster rebound of leisure demand as a result of its higher share of leisure travel mix relative to competitors. The Company's properties are also well distributed in drive-to markets, which the Company believes will lead in the demand recovery and foreseeable future for the industry. We believe these points are illustrated by the Company's RevPAR results for full year and fourth quarter 2021, which both reflect growth relative to the comparable 2019 periods.
In April 2020, in light of uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended future, undeclared dividends and activity under the Company's share repurchase program. Given our strong liquidity and credit profile, on May 7, 2021, the Company's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock and approved the resumption of the share repurchase program. On September 9, 2021, the Company's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock. Additionally, on December 6, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved a 6% increase in the quarterly cash dividend and declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.2375 per share of common stock, which was paid in January 2022.
While the Company believes that the long-term fundamentals of the business remain strong, it will continue to adjust business contingency plans as the COVID-19 pandemic evolves. For additional information, refer to Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are primarily a hotel franchisor with franchise agreements and owned hotels representing 7,030 hotels open comprising 579,746 rooms and 924 hotels under construction, awaiting conversion or approved for development comprising 79,915 rooms as of December 31, 2021, located in 50 states, the District of Columbia and nearly 40 countries and territories outside the United States. Our brand names include Comfort Inn®, Comfort Suites®, Quality®, Clarion®, Clarion PointeTM, Ascend Hotel Collection®, Sleep Inn®, Econo Lodge®, Rodeway Inn®, MainStay Suites®, Suburban Extended Stay Hotel®, WoodSpring Suites®, Everhome Suites®, and Cambria® Hotels (collectively, the "Choice brands").
The Company's primary segment is the hotel franchising business, which represents approximately 96% of the Company's total revenues. The Company's domestic operations are conducted through direct franchising relationships and the ownership of six Cambria hotels, while its international franchise operations are conducted through a combination of direct franchising and master franchising relationships. Master franchising relationships are governed by master franchising agreements which generally provide the master franchisee with the right to use our brands and sub-license the use of our brands in a specific geographic region, usually for a fee.
Our business strategy is to conduct direct franchising in those international markets where both franchising is an accepted business model and we believe our brands can achieve significant scale. We typically elect to enter into master franchise agreements in those markets where direct franchising is currently not a prevalent or viable business model. When entering into master franchising relationships, we strive to select partners that have professional hotel and asset management capabilities together with the financial capacity to invest in building the Choice brands in their respective markets. Master franchising relationships typically provide lower revenues to the Company as the master franchisees are responsible for managing certain necessary services (such as training, quality assurance, reservations and marketing) to support the franchised hotels in the master franchise area and, therefore, retain a larger percentage of the hotel franchise fees to cover their expenses. In certain circumstances, the Company has and may continue to make equity investments in our master franchisees. As a result of master franchise relationships and international market conditions, our revenues are primarily concentrated in the United States. Therefore, our description of our business is primarily focused on the domestic operations, which encompasses the United States and Caribbean countries and territories.
Our Company generates revenues, income and cash flows primarily from our hotel franchising operations and the initial, relicensing and continuing royalty fees attributable to our franchise agreements. Revenues are also generated from partnerships with qualified vendors and travel partners that provide value-added solutions to our platform of guests, hotels, six owned hotels, and other sources. Historically, the hotel industry has been seasonal in nature. For most hotels, demand is ordinarily lower in November through February than during the remainder of the year. Our principal source of revenues is franchise fees based on the gross room revenues or number of rooms of our franchised properties. The Company’s franchise fees, as well as its owned hotels revenues, normally reflect the industry’s seasonality and historically have been lower in the first and fourth quarters than in the second and third quarters. However, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, historical trends may not be reliable to predict performance in the immediate future.
With a primary focus on hotel franchising, we benefit from the economies of scale inherent in the franchising business. The fee and cost structure of our franchising business provides opportunities to improve operating results by increasing the number of franchised hotel rooms and effective royalty rates of our franchise contracts resulting in increased initial and relicensing fee
revenue, ongoing royalty fees, and procurement services revenues. In addition, our operating results can also be improved through our company-wide efforts related to improving property-level performance and expanding the number of partnerships with travel-related companies.
The principal factors that affect the Company’s results are: the number and relative mix of hotel rooms in the various hotel lodging price categories; growth in the number of hotel rooms owned and under franchise; occupancy and room rates achieved by the hotels in our system; the effective royalty rate achieved on our franchise agreements; the level of franchise sales and relicensing activity; the number of qualified vendor arrangements and travel related partnerships and the level of engagement with these partners by our franchisees and guests; and our ability to manage costs. The number of rooms in our hotel system and the occupancy and room rates at those properties significantly affect the Company’s results because our fees are based upon room revenues or the number of rooms at owned and franchised hotels. To varying degrees, all of these factors have been and may continue to be disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The key industry standard for measuring hotel-operating performance is RevPAR, which is calculated by multiplying the percentage of occupied rooms by the average daily room rate realized. Our variable overhead costs associated with franchise system growth of our established brands have historically been less than incremental royalty fees generated from new franchises. Accordingly, over the long-term, any continued growth of our franchise business should enable us to realize benefits from the operating leverage in place and improve operating results. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our annual 2021 results and anticipated trends are discussed above under the heading "Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic" and Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
We are required by our franchise agreements to use the marketing and reservation system fees we collect for system-wide marketing and reservation system activities. These expenditures, which include advertising costs and costs to maintain our central reservations and property management systems, enhance awareness and consumer preference for our brands and deliver guests to our franchisees. Greater awareness and preference promotes long-term growth in business delivery to our franchisees and increases the desirability of our brands to hotel owners and developers, which ultimately increases franchise fees earned by the Company. Due to increased RevPAR growth during the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2021 and our disciplined management of discretionary marketing and reservation system expenditures, marketing and reservation revenues exceeded expenses for full year 2021.
Our Company articulates its mission as a commitment to our franchisees’ profitability by providing our franchisees with hotel franchises that strive to generate the highest return on investment of any hotel franchise. We have developed an operating system dedicated to our franchisees’ success that focuses on delivering guests to hotels and reducing hotel operating costs. As discussed above, the Company has taken and is continuing to take measures to combat the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. We believe these measures support the Company's preparedness and complement the strategic priorities we execute against to create value for our shareholders over the long-term. These key long-term goals are as follows:
Profitable Growth. Our success is dependent on improving the performance of our hotels, increasing our system size by selling additional hotel franchises with a focus on revenue-intense chain scales and markets, improving our effective royalty rate, expanding our qualified vendor programs and travel-related partnerships and maintaining a disciplined cost structure. As noted above, we have introduced several temporary measures designed to assist franchisees during the COVID-19 pandemic. We attempt to improve our revenues and overall profitability by providing a variety of products and services designed to increase business delivery and/or reduce operating and development costs. These products and services include national marketing campaigns, a guest loyalty program, a central reservation system, property and yield management programs and systems, revenue management services, quality assurance standards, qualified vendor relationships and partnerships with other travel-related companies that provide services to our franchisees and guests. We believe that healthy brands, which deliver a compelling return on investment, will enable us to sell additional hotel franchises and raise royalty rates. We have multiple brands that meet the needs of many types of guests, and can be developed at various price points and applied to both new and existing hotels. This ensures that we have brands suitable for creating growth in a variety of market conditions. Improving the performance of the hotels in our system, strategically growing the system through additional franchise sales, and improving franchise agreement pricing while maintaining a disciplined cost structure are the keys to profitable growth. As disclosed above, prior to the second quarter of 2021, the Company's hotels experienced declines in occupancy and RevPAR resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The declines impacted the profitability of the Company and the negative impact to the Company could return if a resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacts travel.
Maximizing Financial Returns and Creating Value for Shareholders. Our capital allocation decisions, including capital structure and uses of capital, are intended to maximize our return on invested capital and create value for our shareholders. We believe our historically strong and predictable cash flows create a strong financial position that provides us a competitive advantage. We maintain a capital structure intended to generate high financial returns and use our excess cash flow to provide returns to our shareholders primarily through share repurchases, dividends and investing in growth opportunities. In April 2020, in light of uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended future, undeclared dividends and activity under
the Company's share repurchase program. Given our strong liquidity and credit profile, the Company's board of directors declared on May 7, 2021, a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock and approved resumption of the share repurchase program. On September 9, 2021, the Company's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock. Additionally, on December 6, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved a 6% increase in the quarterly cash dividend and declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.2375 per share of common stock, which was paid in January 2022.
In addition to our hotel franchising business, we have also developed or acquired six Cambria hotels. We intend to continue to strategically develop hotels to increase the presence of our brands in the United States, drive greater guest satisfaction and brand preference, and ultimately increase the number of franchise agreements awarded. When developing hotels, we seek key markets with strong growth potential that will deliver strong operating performance and improve the recognition of our brands. Our hotel development and ownership efforts currently focus on the Cambria Hotels and Everhome Suites brands. We believe our owned hotels provide us the opportunity to support and accelerate growth of our brands. We do not anticipate owning hotels on a permanent basis and expect to target dispositions to a franchisee in the future.
The Company also allocates capital to financing, investment and guaranty support to incentivize franchise development for certain brands in strategic markets and to explore growth opportunities in business areas that are adjacent or complementary to our core hotel franchising business, which leverage our core competencies and are additive to our franchising business model. The timing and amount of these investments are subject to market and other conditions.
We believe our growth investments and strategic priorities, when properly implemented, will enhance our profitability, maximize our financial returns and continue to generate value for our shareholders. The ultimate measure of our success will be reflected in the items below.
Results of Operations: Royalty fees, operating income, net income and diluted earnings per share ("EPS") represent key measurements of our financial performance. These measurements are primarily driven by the operations of our hotel franchise system and therefore, our analysis of the Company's operations is primarily focused on the size, performance and potential growth of the hotel franchise system, as well as our variable overhead costs.
Our discussion of results excludes the Company’s marketing and reservation system revenues and expenses. The Company's franchise agreements require the payment of marketing and reservation system fees to be used exclusively by the Company for expenses associated with providing franchise services such as central reservation systems, national marketing, and media advertising. The Company is obligated to expend the marketing and reservation system fees it collects from franchisees in accordance with the franchise agreements. Furthermore, franchisees are required to reimburse the Company for any deficits generated by these marketing and reservation system activities. Over time, the Company expects cumulative revenues and expenses to break even and therefore, no income or loss will be generated from marketing and reservation system activities. As a result, the Company generally excludes the financial impacts of this program from the analysis of its operations.
Due to the seasonal nature of the Company’s hotel franchising business and the multi-year investments required to support franchise operations, in addition to the Company's incremental spend to support franchisees and lower marketing and reservation system fees for certain periods most significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, quarterly and/or annual deficits may be generated. During the year ended December 31, 2021, marketing and reservation system revenues exceeded expenses by $83.9 million. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 marketing and reservation system expenses exceeded revenues by $44.3 million and $1.7 million, respectively.
Refer to MD&A heading "Operations Review" for additional analysis of our results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources: Historically, the Company has generated significant cash flows from operations. Since our business has not historically required significant reinvestment of capital, we typically utilize cash in ways that management believes provide the greatest returns to our shareholders which include share repurchases and dividends. The Company's declaration of quarterly dividends and activity under the share repurchase program were temporarily suspended at the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, as detailed above within the Maximizing Financial Returns and Creating Value for Shareholders section.
We believe the Company’s cash flow from operations and available financing capacity is sufficient to meet the expected future operating, investing and financing needs of the business. Refer to MD&A heading "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for additional analysis.
Inflation: We believe that moderate increases in the rate of inflation will generally result in comparable or greater increases in hotel room rates. We are monitoring the implications of governmental assistance programs related to COVID-19 on future inflation trends and any resulting impacts on our business.
Non-GAAP Financial Statement Measurements
The Company utilizes certain measures which do not conform to generally accepted accounting principles accepted in the United States ("GAAP") when analyzing and discussing its results with the investment community. This information should not be considered as an alternative to any measure of performance as promulgated under GAAP. The Company’s calculation of these measurements may be different from the calculations used by other companies and therefore, comparability may be limited. We have included a reconciliation of these measures to the comparable GAAP measurement below as well as our reasons for reporting these non-GAAP measures.
Revenues, excluding marketing and reservation system activities: The Company utilizes revenues, excluding marketing and reservation system activities, rather than total revenues when analyzing the performance of the business. Marketing and reservation activities are excluded since the Company is contractually required by its franchise agreements to utilize the fees collected specifically for system-wide marketing and reservation activities. This non-GAAP measure is a commonly used measure of performance in our industry and facilitates comparisons between the Company and its competitors.
Calculation of Revenues, excluding marketing and reservation system activities
Operations Review
Comparison of 2021 and 2020 Operating Results
Summarized financial results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
Results of Operations
The Company recorded income before income taxes of $376.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a $323.5 million increase from the same period of the prior year. The increase in income before income taxes primarily reflects a $307.3 million increase in operating income, a $16.6 million loss on the extinguishment of debt in 2020, a $2.3 million decrease in interest expense, partially offset by a $2.7 million decrease in interest income.
Operating income increased $307.3 million primarily due to a $133.9 million increase in royalty revenues, a $128.1 million increase in the net surplus generated from marketing and reservation system activities, the recognition of $14.8 million in impairments of long-lived assets in 2020, a $11.8 million increase in other revenue, an $8.9 million increase in owned hotels revenues in excess of expense, a $5.2 million increase in procurement services revenues, and a $3.3 million decrease in selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”).
The primary reasons for these fluctuations, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, are described in more detail below.
Royalty Fees
Domestic royalty fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $131.2 million to $382.4 million from $251.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 52%. The increase in domestic royalties reflects a 47.5% increase in domestic RevPAR. System-wide RevPAR increased due to a 17.3% increase in average daily rates and a 1,180 basis point increase in occupancy. The increase in domestic royalties is partially offset by a decrease in the number of domestic franchised hotel rooms and a 7 basis point increase in the effective royalty rate from 4.94% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 5.01% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
A summary of the Company’s domestic franchised hotels operating information for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
A summary of domestic hotels and rooms in our franchise system at December 31, 2021 and 2020 by brand is as follows:
As of both December 31, 2021 and 2020, less than 1% of the Company's domestic hotel system had temporarily suspended operations due to governmental restriction or a franchisee’s election. These temporarily suspended hotels are included in the summary table above of domestic hotels in our franchise system.
International royalty fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $2.7 million to $14.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of improvements in RevPAR performance, despite reductions of the international franchise system size by 70 hotels (from 1,180 as of December 31, 2020 to 1,110 as of December 31, 2021) and 12,731 rooms (from 133,295 as of December 31, 2020 to 120,564 as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, approximately 2% and 5%, respectively, of the Company's international branded hotels temporarily suspended operations due to governmental restriction or a franchisee’s election.
As a result of the acquisition of AMResorts®, the Company’s relationship with AMResorts® was terminated during the fourth quarter of 2021 and 17 domestic and 37 international open AMResorts®-branded hotels exited the Ascend Hotel Collection portfolio.
We expect the uncertainty surrounding the potential duration of the pandemic, including resurgences and new variants, as well as the rate and pace of vaccinations around the world, to continue to have the potential to impact the number of domestic and international hotels that remain open and operating.
Initial Franchise and Relicensing Fees
Initial franchise fees are fees paid to the Company when a franchisee executes a franchise agreement; relicensing fees include fees charged to new owners of a franchised property whenever an ownership change occurs and the property remains in the franchise system, as well as fees required to renew existing franchise agreements.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company awarded 528 franchise agreements representing 49,784 rooms compared to 427 franchise agreements representing 35,308 rooms for the year ended December 31, 2020. Domestic franchise agreements awarded for new construction hotels totaled 175 representing 16,787 rooms during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 126 contracts representing 11,847 rooms for the year ended December 31, 2020. Conversion hotel awarded franchise agreements totaled 353 representing 32,997 rooms for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 301 agreements representing 23,461 rooms for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company awarded 346 domestic relicensing contracts during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 204 executed during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company awarded 24 domestic renewal agreements during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 38 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Initial franchise and relicensing fees are generally collected at the time the franchise agreement is awarded. However, the recognition of revenue is deferred until the hotel is open or the franchise agreement is terminated. Upon hotel opening, revenue is recognized ratably as services are provided over the enforceable period of the franchise license agreement. Upon the termination of a franchise agreement, previously deferred initial and relicensing fees are recognized immediately in the period the agreement is terminated. Initial franchise and relicensing fee revenue increased $0.4 million from $25.9 million to $26.3 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 876 franchised hotels with 75,163 rooms under construction, awaiting conversion or approved for development in its domestic system as compared to 966 hotels and 79,470 rooms at December 31, 2020. The number of new construction franchised hotels in the Company’s domestic pipeline decreased from 727 at December 31, 2020 to 659 at December 31, 2021. New construction hotels typically average 18 to 36 months to open after the franchise agreement is executed. The number of conversion franchised hotels in the Company’s domestic pipeline decreased from 217 at December 31, 2020 to 239 hotels at December 31, 2021. Conversion hotels typically open three to six months after the execution of a franchise agreement. The Company had an additional 48 franchised hotels with 4,752 rooms under construction, awaiting conversion or approved for development in its international system as of December 31, 2021 compared to 56 hotels and 6,794 rooms at December 31, 2020. Fluctuations in the Company’s pipeline are primarily due to the timing of hotel openings and the timing of signing new franchise agreements. While the Company’s hotel pipeline provides a strong platform for growth, a hotel in the pipeline does not always result in an open and operating hotel due to various factors. Given the uncertainty as to the potential duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its severity, there is additional uncertainty with respect to the opening of new construction hotels, which are reliant on, amongst other things, access to liquidity, availability of construction labor, and local governmental approvals and entitlements, all of which may be constrained during the duration of the pandemic.
Procurement Services: Procurement services revenues increased $5.2 million from $45.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. These results reflect an increase in fees generated from travel-related partnerships and qualified vendors resulting from increased occupancy during 2021 at our franchised hotels.
Owned Hotels: The Company's revenues, net of expenses, from owned hotels increased $8.9 million from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. These results reflect improved operating performance at our owned hotels and the addition of an owned hotel during the fourth quarter of 2021 (refer to Note 24 of our consolidated financial statements).
Other Revenues: Other revenues increased $11.8 million from $16.9 million the year ended December 31, 2020 to $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 driven by an increase in termination fees, non-compliance fees and other franchising revenues.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses: The cost to operate the business is reflected in selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") on the consolidated statements of income. SG&A expenses were $145.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $3.3 million from December 31, 2020.
SG&A expenses for the years end December 31, 2021 and 2020 include approximately $1.9 million and $2.3 million, respectively, related to the Company's alternative growth initiatives and expenses related to the operations of an office building.
Excluding the SG&A for alternative growth initiatives and office building operations, SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $2.9 million to $143.7 million in the current year. This fluctuation is primarily due to a $26.9 million decrease in provision for credit losses in accounts and notes receivable. This is partially offset by approximately $24.0 million in cost increases for general corporate purposes and lifting of certain cost mitigation measures related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including compensation and benefits; impairments against franchise agreement acquisition intangible assets; and an increase in the Company's deferred compensation liabilities based on increases in the underlying investments.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets: For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a $1.2 million charge related to a prospective development project the Company is no longer pursing, a $4.3 million impairment charge related to the long-lived assets of a commercial office building owned by the Company, and a $9.2 million impairment charge related to a parcel of real estate. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a $0.3 million impairment charge resulting from a parcel of land meeting held for sale classification in October 2021.
Interest Expense: The Company recorded interest expense of $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $2.3 million from the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense is a result of lower effective interest rates on outstanding borrowings in the comparative periods.
Interest Income: Interest income decreased $2.7 million to $5.0 million in the current year primarily due to an increase in certain loans being in non-accrual of interest status resulting from impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The notes receivable relate to the Company’s program to incentivize development of its Cambria Hotel and Everhome Suites brands.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt: During the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $0.6 million related to the early pay off of a construction loan in the amount of $33.1 million, inclusive of accrued and unpaid interest.
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $16.0 million related to the Tender Offer and early pay off of the Term Loan, as such terms are defined below.
Other Gains: The Company recorded other net gains of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to other net gains of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gains for the year ended December 31, 2021 relate to increases in the Company's deferred compensation assets based on increases in the underlying investments, partially offset by foreign currency transaction losses.
Equity in Net Loss of Affiliates: The Company recorded net losses of $15.9 million from its unconsolidated affiliates during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net losses of $15.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These investments in affiliates relate to the Company's program to offer equity support to qualified franchisees to develop and operate Cambria Hotels in strategic markets.
The activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects other-than-temporary impairments of multiple unconsolidated affiliates resulting in losses of $19.3 million, partially offset by sales of ownership interests of and distributions resulting from sales of underlying assets from multiple unconsolidated affiliates resulting in gains of $6.9 million.
The activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects other-than-temporary impairments of four unconsolidated affiliates resulting in losses of $7.3 million and increased losses of operating affiliate hotels as impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Refer to Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense: The Company's effective income tax rates were 23.3% and (42.2)% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU 2016-16, which provides guidance on recognition of current income tax consequences for intercompany asset transfers (other than inventory) at the time of transfer. On January 1, 2020, the Company completed a reorganization of its foreign legal entity structure. In accordance with ASU 2016-16, the Company recorded a $34.6 million tax benefit and a corresponding deferred tax asset due to the reorganization. In 2020, due to a decrease in the forecasted international income resulting from adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company recorded a valuation allowance of $5.7 million reflecting a change in the anticipated realizability of this deferred tax asset.
The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower than the U.S. federal income tax rate of 21.0% due to the impact of our international reorganization under ASU 2016-16 (partially offset by the related valuation allowance), $3.0 million tax credits recognized during the year, $3.1 million of additional tax benefit related to compensation, and the impact of foreign operations, partially offset by the impact of state income taxes and a change in estimated uncertain tax positions.
The effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, was higher than the U.S. federal income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of state income taxes, $1.7 million of additional tax expense related to compensation, and a $1.5 million reduction in the net carrying value of our Dutch deferred tax asset, partially offset by $3.7 million of tax credits recognized during the year.
Refer to Choice Hotels International, Inc. 2020 10-K Annual Report "Comparison of 2020 and 2019 Operating Results" under Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis for details regarding changes between 2020 and 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our Company historically generates strong and predictable operating cash flows primarily from our hotel franchising operations and the initial, relicensing and continuing royalty fees attributable to our franchise agreements. Our capital allocation decisions, including capital structure and uses of capital, are intended to maximize our return on invested capital and create value for our shareholders, while maintaining a strong balance sheet and financial flexibility. The Company's short-term and long-term liquidity requirements primarily arise from working capital needs, debt obligations, income tax payments, dividend payments, share repurchases, capital expenditures and investments in growth opportunities.
The Company's 2012 Senior Notes mature on July 1, 2022 with a principal maturity, net of unamortized deferred issuance costs, of $216.4 million.
In April 2020, in light of uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended future, undeclared dividends and activity under the Company's share repurchase program. Given our strong liquidity and credit profile, the Company's board of directors declared on May 7, 2021, a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock and approved resumption of the share repurchase program. On September 9, 2021, the Company's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock. Additionally, on December 6, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved a 6% increase in the quarterly cash dividend and declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.2375 per share of common stock, which was paid in January 2022. As a result, the Company paid dividends totaling approximately $25.0 million during 2021 and, subject to future board of director declarations, expects to pay dividends totaling $52.8 million during 2022.
Our board of directors authorized a program which permits us to offer financing, investment, and guaranty support to qualified franchisees, and allows us to acquire or develop and resell hotels to incentivize franchise development of our brands in strategic markets. We deploy capital pursuant to this program opportunistically to promote growth of our brands. With respect to our hotel development and ownership, affiliate investments, and lending, the Company had approximately $473.2 million in support of the Cambria Hotels and Everhome Suites brands currently reflected on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, which it generally targets to recycle within a five year period, and expects our outstanding investment to not exceed $975 million at any point in time based on current board of directors' authorization. The deployment and annual pace of future financial support activities will depend upon market and other conditions.
The Company also strategically deploys capital in the form of franchise agreement acquisition payments across our brands to incentivize franchise development. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had commitments to extend an additional $278.6 million for these purposes provided the conditions of the payment are met by its franchisees.
The Company's primary sources of liquidity as of December 31, 2021 consisted of $1.1 billion in cash and available borrowing capacity through its senior unsecured revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with the financial covenants of its credit agreements and expects to remain in such compliance. Based on our business model and information known at this time, the Company believes that cash, available borrowing capacity, and cash flows from operations will provide sufficient liquidity to meet the expected future operating, investing and financing needs of the business for at least the next 12 months.
Operating Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $383.7 million and $110.1 million, respectively. Operating cash flows increased $273.6 million primarily due to an increase in operating income, excluding certain non-cash charges, and timing of working capital items.
In conjunction with brand and development programs, we strategically make certain payments to franchisees as an incentive to enter into new franchise agreements or perform-designated improvements to properties under existing franchise agreements ("franchise agreement acquisition costs"). If the franchisee remains in the franchise system in good standing over the term specified in the incentive agreement, the Company forgives the incentive ratably. If the franchisee exits our franchise system or is not operating their franchise in accordance with our quality or credit standards and is terminated, the franchisee must repay the unamortized incentive payment plus interest. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company's net advances for these purposes totaled $38.2 million, $36.5 million, and $38.9 million, respectively. The timing and amount of these cash flows are dependent on various factors including the implementation of various development and brand incentive
programs, the level of franchise sales and the ability of our franchisees to complete construction or convert their hotels to one of the Company’s brands. At December 31, 2021, the Company had commitments to extend an additional $278.6 million for these purposes provided the conditions of the payment are met by its franchisees.
The Company’s franchise agreements require the payment of marketing and reservation system fees. In accordance with the terms of our franchise agreements, the Company is obligated to use these marketing and reservation system fees to provide marketing and reservation services. To the extent revenues collected exceed expenditures incurred, the Company has a commitment to the franchisee system to make expenditures in future years. Conversely, to the extent expenditures incurred exceed revenues collected, the Company has the contractual enforceable right to recover such advances in future periods through additional fee assessments or reduced spending. During the year ended 2021, marketing and reservation system revenues exceeded expenses by $83.9 million. During the years ended 2020 and 2019, marketing and reservation system expenses exceeded revenues by $44.2 million and $1.7 million, respectively.
Investing Activities
Our board of directors authorized a program which permits us to offer financing, investment, and guaranty support to qualified franchisees, and allows us to acquire or develop and resell hotels to incentivize franchise development of our brands in strategic markets. We are currently engaged in these financial support activities to encourage acceleration of the growth of our Cambria Hotels and Everhome Suites brands, primarily in strategic markets and locations. With respect to our hotel development and ownership, affiliate investments, and lending, the Company had approximately $473.2 million outstanding in support of the Cambria Hotels and Everhome Suites brands currently reflected on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, which it generally targets to recycle within a five year period, and expects our outstanding investment to not exceed $975 million at any point of time based on current board of directors' authorization. We expect to continue to deploy capital in these manners in support of our brands. The deployment and annual pace of future financial support activities will depend upon market and other conditions, including among others, our franchise sales results, the environment for new construction hotel development and the hotel lending environment, and our assessment of the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash utilized for investing activities totaled $78.9 million, $24.5 million and $251.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in cash utilized for investing activities from 2020 to 2021 primarily reflects the following items:
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, capital expenditures in property and equipment totaled $74.3 million, $33.6 million, and $57.3 million, respectively. The increase in capital expenditures during 2021 primarily reflects costs incurred to support the continued growth of the Cambria Hotels brand, including acquisition of a land parcel in the third quarter of 2021 to develop into a Cambria hotel.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company realized proceeds of $6.1 million from the sale of a commercial office building previously awarded to the Company pursuant to a court settlement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company realized proceeds of $10.6 million from the sale of one parcel of land. The Company did not sell any land parcels during the year ended December 31, 2020.
In September 2021, the Company reached a settlement with a borrower holding a loan classified as collateral-dependent, collateralized by an operating hotel. The key terms of the settlement resulted in a deed in lieu of foreclosure on the operating hotel in exchange for releasing obligations pursuant to the senior and mezzanine loans and the associated franchise agreement. The Company accounted for the acquisition of the hotel as an asset acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2021 and acquired net cash of $0.3 million.
Prior to July 23, 2019, the Company held a 40% ownership interest of an affiliate that owned five Cambria Hotels recorded as an investment in affiliates of $40.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company redeemed the remaining 60% ownership interest in four of the hotels for approximately $169.0 million, net of cash acquired.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company realized proceeds of $9.2 million from the sale of state historic rehabilitation tax credits earned from the improvements made to this building, which were applied to lower the basis of the owned hotel property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company sold the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit and made payments, net of sales proceeds, of $10.8 million for net costs incurred to complete the disposition. There were no business dispositions during the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
The Company maintains equity method investments in affiliates related to the Company's program to offer equity support to qualified franchisees to develop and operate Cambria Hotels in strategic markets. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company invested $2.8 million, $5.5 million, and $27.8 million, respectively, to support these efforts. In
addition, during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company received distributions and sales proceeds from these affiliates totaling $15.6 million, $10.8 million and $19.2 million, respectively. To the extent existing unconsolidated affiliates proceed to the hotel construction phase, the Company is committed to make additional capital contributions totaling $7.5 million to support these efforts.
The Company has entered into various limited payment guaranties with regards to the Company’s investments in affiliates. The maximum exposure of principal incidental to these limited payment guaranties is $5.7 million, plus unpaid expenses and accrued unpaid interest. The Company believes the likelihood of having to perform under the aforementioned limited payment guaranties was remote as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. In the event of performance, the Company has recourse for one of the transactions in the form of a membership interest pledge as collateral for our guaranty. Refer to Note 23 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
The Company provides financing to franchisees primarily for hotel development efforts in the form of notes receivable. These loans bear interest and are expected to be repaid in accordance with the terms of the loan arrangements. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company advanced $20.1 million, $9.8 million, and $20.7 million for these purposes, respectively. In addition, the Company received repayments totaling $0.2 million, $6.5 million, and $14.2 million for these purposes, respectively. At December 31, 2021, the Company had commitments to extend an additional $7.5 million for these purposes provided certain conditions are met by its franchisees.
Financing Activities
Financing cash flows relate primarily to the Company’s borrowings, open market treasury stock repurchases, acquisition of shares in connection with the exercise or vesting of equity awards, and dividends.
Debt
Restated Senior Unsecured Credit Facility
On August 20, 2018, the Company entered into the Restated Senior Unsecured Credit Agreement (the "Restated Credit Agreement"), which amended and restated the Company’s existing senior unsecured revolving credit agreement, dated July 21, 2015.
The Restated Credit Agreement provides for a $600 million unsecured credit facility with a maturity date of August 20, 2023, subject to optional one-year extensions that can be requested by the Company prior to each of the first, second and third anniversaries of the closing date of the Restated Credit Agreement. The effectiveness of such extensions are subject to the consent of the lenders under the Restated Credit Agreement and certain customary conditions. The Restated Credit Agreement also provides that up to $35 million of borrowings under the Restated Credit Agreement may be used for alternative currency loans and up to $25 million of borrowings under the Restated Credit Agreement may be used for swingline loans. The Company may from time to time designate one or more wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company as additional borrowers under the Restated Credit Agreement, subject to the consent of the lenders and certain customary conditions.
On July 2, 2019, the Company exercised a one-year extension option on the Restated Credit Agreement, extending the maturity date from August 20, 2023 to August 20, 2024. On August 12, 2020, the Company exercised an additional one-year extension on the Restated Credit Agreement for $525 million of the $600 million total capacity in exchange for a fee of $0.3 million. The extended maturity date is August 20, 2025. On August 11, 2021, the Company executed a one-year extension on the senior unsecured credit facility for $540 million of the $600 million total capacity in exchange for fees of $0.4 million. The extended maturity date is August 20, 2026.
There are no subsidiary guarantors under the Restated Credit Agreement. However, if certain subsidiaries of the Company subsequently incur certain recourse debt or become obligors in respect of certain recourse debt of the Company or certain of its other subsidiaries, the Restated Credit Agreement requires such obligated subsidiaries to guarantee the Company’s obligations under the Restated Credit Agreement (the "springing guarantee"). In the event that these subsidiary guarantees are triggered under the Restated Credit Agreement, the same subsidiary guarantees would be required under the Company’s $400 million senior unsecured notes due 2022 and certain hedging and bank product arrangements, if any, with lenders that are parties to the Restated Credit Agreement.
On February 18, 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment to the Amended and Restated Senior Unsecured Credit Agreement (the "Amendment") among the Company, Deutsche Bank AG New York Branch, as administrative agent and the lenders party thereto. The Amendment, among other things, removes the springing guarantee and other provisions and references in the Restated Credit Agreement related to the potential existence of subsidiary guarantors.
The Company may at any time prior to the final maturity date increase the amount of the Restated Credit Agreement or add one or more term loan facilities under the Restated Credit Agreement by up to an additional $250 million in the aggregate to the extent that any one or more lenders commit to being a lender for the additional amount of such term loan facility and certain other customary conditions are met.
The Restated Credit Agreement provides that the Company may elect to have borrowings bear interest at a rate equal to (i) LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 90 to 150 basis points or (ii) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0 to 50 basis points, in each case, with the margin determined according to the Company’s senior unsecured long-term debt rating or under circumstances as set forth in the Restated Credit Agreement, the Company’s total leverage ratio in the event that such total leverage ratio is less than 2.5 to 1.0. On August 11, 2021, we amended the Restated Credit Agreement to provide customary provisions for the replacement of LIBOR with an alternative benchmark rate if it is publicly announced that the administrator of LIBOR has ceased or will cease to provide LIBOR, or if it is publicly announced by the applicable regulatory supervisor that LIBOR is no longer representative.
The Restated Credit Agreement requires the Company to pay a fee on the total commitments, calculated on the basis of the actual daily amount of the commitments (regardless of usage) times a percentage per annum ranging from 0.075% to 0.25% (depending on the Company’s senior unsecured long-term debt rating or under circumstances as set forth in the Restated Credit Agreement, the Company’s total leverage ratio in the event that such total leverage ratio is less than 2.5 to 1.0).
The Restated Credit Agreement requires that the Company and its restricted subsidiaries comply with various covenants, including with respect to restrictions on liens, incurring indebtedness, making investments and effecting mergers and/or asset sales. With respect to dividends, the Company may not declare or make any payment if there is an existing event of default or if the payment would create an event of default.
The Restated Credit Agreement imposes financial maintenance covenants requiring the Company to maintain a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 2.5 to 1.0 and a total leverage ratio of not more than 4.5 to 1.0 or, on up to two nonconsecutive occasions, 5.5 to 1.0 for up to three consecutive quarters following a material acquisition commencing with the fiscal quarter in which such material acquisition occurred. The Company maintains an Investment Grade Rating, as defined in the Restated Credit Agreement, and therefore is not currently required to comply with the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio covenant.
The Restated Credit Agreement includes customary events of default, the occurrence of which, following any applicable cure period, would permit the lenders to, among other things, declare the principal, accrued interest and other obligations of the Company under the Restated Credit Agreement to be immediately due and payable. At December 31, 2021, the Company maintained a total leverage ratio of 2.34x and was in compliance with all financial covenants under the Restated Credit Agreement. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company utilized excess cash on hand to pay down the senior unsecured revolving credit facility balance in full; the facility remains undrawn as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021.
Debt issuance costs incurred in connection with the Restated Credit Agreement are amortized on a straight-line basis, which is not materially different than the effective interest method, through maturity. Amortization of these costs is included in interest expense in the consolidated statements of income.
The proceeds of the Restated Credit Agreement are generally expected to be used for general corporate purposes, including working capital, debt repayment, stock repurchases, dividends, investments and other permitted uses set forth in the Restated Credit Agreement.
Term Loan
To preserve financial flexibility and liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, on April 16, 2020, the Company entered into a credit agreement (the "Credit Agreement"), which provided for the $250 million Term Loan (the "Term Loan") with a scheduled maturity date of April 15, 2021, subject to an optional one-year extension if requested by the Company prior to the initial maturity date. The Term Loan and all accrued but unpaid interest thereon was required to be repaid in full on the maturity date.
The Credit Agreement provided that the Company may elect to have the Term Loan bear interest at a rate equal to (i) LIBOR (subject to a floor of 1.00%) plus a margin ranging from 200 to 275 basis points or (ii) a base rate plus a margin ranging from 100 to 175 basis points, in each case, with the margin determined according to the Company’s senior unsecured long-term debt rating.
The proceeds of the Term Loan were utilized to reduce borrowings on the Company’s senior unsecured revolving credit facility. The Term Loan was subsequently paid off in full in July 2020 utilizing the proceeds of the 2020 Senior Notes described
below. In combination with the Tender Offer, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $16.0 million in the third quarter of 2020.
Senior Unsecured Notes Due 2031
On July 23, 2020, the Company issued unsecured senior notes in the principal amount of $450 million (the "2020 Senior Notes") bearing a coupon of 3.70% with an effective rate of 3.86%. The 2020 Senior Notes will mature on January 15, 2031, with interest to be paid semi-annually on January 15th and July 15th beginning January 15, 2021. The Company used the net proceeds of the 2020 Senior Notes, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, to repay the Term Loan in full and fund the purchase price of the 2012 Senior Notes tendered and accepted by the Company for purchase pursuant to the tender offer (discussed below under "Senior Unsecured Notes due 2022").
Interest on the 2020 Senior Notes is payable semi-annually on January 15th and July 15th of each year, commencing on January 15, 2021. The interest rate payable on the 2020 Senior Notes will be subject to adjustment based on certain rating events. The Company may redeem the 2020 Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at its option at the applicable redemption price before maturity. If the Company redeems the 2020 Senior Notes prior to October 15, 2030 (three months prior to the maturity date) (the “2020 Notes Par Call Date”), the redemption price will be equal to the greater of (a) 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, or (b) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled principal and interest payments that would have been payable had the 2020 Senior Notes matured on the 2020 Notes Par Call Date, discounted to the redemption date on a semi-annual basis at the applicable Treasury Rate plus 50 basis points, plus accrued and unpaid interest. If the Company redeems the 2020 Senior Notes on or after the 2020 Notes Par Call Date, the redemption price will equal 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Additionally, at the option of the holders of the 2020 Senior Notes, the Company may be required to repurchase all or a portion of the 2020 Senior Notes of a holder upon the occurrence of a change of control event at a price equal to 101% of their aggregate principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, to the date of repurchase.
Senior Unsecured Notes Due 2029
On November 27, 2019, the Company issued unsecured senior notes in the principal amount of $400 million (the "2019 Senior Notes") at a discount of $2.4 million, bearing a coupon of 3.70% with an effective rate of 3.88%. The 2019 Senior Notes will mature on December 1, 2029, with interest to be paid semi-annually on December 1st and June 1st. The Company used the net proceeds of this offering, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, to repay the previously outstanding senior notes in the principal amount of $250 million due August 28, 2020, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
The Company may redeem the 2019 Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at its option at the applicable redemption price before maturity. If the Company redeems the 2019 Senior Notes prior to September 1, 2029 (three months prior to the maturity date) (the “2019 Notes Par Call Date”), the redemption price will be equal to the greater of (a) 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, or (b) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled principal and interest payments that would have been payable had the 2019 Senior Notes matured on the 2019 Notes Par Call Date, discounted to the redemption date on a semi-annual basis at the applicable Treasury Rate plus 30 basis points, plus accrued and unpaid interest. If the Company redeems the 2019 Senior Notes on or after the 2019 Notes Par Call Date, the redemption price will equal 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Additionally, at the option of the holders of the 2019 Senior Notes, the Company may be required to repurchase all or a portion of the 2019 Senior Notes of a holder upon the occurrence of a change of control event at a price equal to 101% of their aggregate principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, to the date of repurchase.
Senior Unsecured Notes Due 2022
On June 27, 2012 the Company issued unsecured senior notes with a principal amount of $400 million (the "2012 Senior Notes") at par, bearing a coupon of 5.75% with an effective rate of 6.00%. The 2012 Senior Notes will mature on July 1, 2022, with interest to be paid semi-annually on January 1st and July 1st. The Company utilized the net proceeds of this offering, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, together with borrowings under the Company's senior unsecured senior credit facility, to pay a special cash dividend to stockholders totaling approximately $600.7 million paid on August 23, 2012.
The Company may redeem the 2012 Senior Notes at its option at a redemption price equal to the greater of (a) 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed and (b) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled principal and interest payments from the redemption date to the date of maturity discounted to the redemption date on a semi-annual basis at the Treasury Rate, plus 50 basis points. Additionally, at the option of the holders of the 2012 Senior Notes, the Company may be required to repurchase all or a portion of the 2012 Senior Notes of a holder upon the occurrence of a change of control event at a price equal to 101% of their aggregate principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, to the date of repurchase.
On July 9, 2020, the Company commenced the tender offer (the "Tender Offer") to purchase up to $160.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Company’s 2012 Senior Notes subject to increase or decrease. The Tender Offer was subsequently upsized to $180.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2012 Notes. On July 23, 2020, the Company amended the Tender Offer by increasing the aggregate principal maximum tender amount from $180.0 million to $183.4 million. The Tender Offer settled on July 24, 2020 for $197.8 million, including an early tender premium, settlement fees, and accrued interest paid. In combination with the early pay off of the Term Loan, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $16.0 million in the third quarter of 2020.
The Company's 2012 Senior Notes mature on July 1, 2022 with a principal maturity, net of unamortized deferred issuance costs, of $216.4 million.
Construction Loan
In March 2018, the Company entered into a construction loan agreement for the rehabilitation and development of a former office building into a Cambria Hotel through a consolidating affiliate with a commercial lender, which was secured by the building. The construction was completed and the hotel opened in the third quarter of 2019, resulting in the satisfaction of the completion guaranty. On March 5, 2020, the Company paid off the construction loan in the amount of $33.1 million inclusive of accrued and unpaid interest and recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.6 million.
Fixed Rate Collateralized Mortgage
On December 30, 2014, a court awarded the Company title to an office building as settlement for a portion of an outstanding loan receivable for which the building was pledged as collateral. In conjunction with the court award, the Company also assumed the $9.5 million mortgage on the property with a fixed interest rate of 7.26%. The mortgage was collateralized by the office building, required monthly payments of principal and interest and matured in December 2020 with a balloon payment due of $6.9 million. Payments were made in each quarter of 2020, with the balloon payment of $6.9 million made at maturity in December 2020.
Economic Development Loans
The Company entered into economic development agreements with various governmental entities in conjunction with the relocation of its corporate headquarters in April 2013. In accordance with these agreements, the governmental entities agreed to advance approximately $4.4 million to the Company to offset a portion of the corporate headquarters relocation and tenant improvement costs in consideration of the employment of permanent, full-time employees within the jurisdictions. At December 31, 2021, the Company had been fully advanced the amounts due pursuant to these agreements. These advances bear interest at a rate of 3% per annum.
Repayment of the advances is contingent upon the Company achieving certain performance conditions. Performance conditions are measured annually on December 31st and primarily relate to maintaining certain levels of employment within the various jurisdictions. If the Company fails to meet an annual performance condition, the Company may be required to repay a portion or all of the advances including accrued interest by April 30th following the measurement date. Any outstanding advances at the expiration in 2023 of the Company's current ten year corporate headquarters lease in 2023 will be forgiven in full. The advances will be included in long-term debt in the Company's consolidated balance sheets until the Company determines that the future performance conditions will be met over the entire term of the agreement and the Company will not be required to repay the advances. The Company accrues interest on the portion of the advances that it expects to repay. The Company was in compliance with all applicable current performance conditions as of December 31, 2021.
Transfer of Interest
In a prior year, the Company transferred $24.4 million of a $50.1 million outstanding note receivable with a maturity date of November 30, 2019 to a third party. In February 2019, the Company mutually agreed with the counter party to repurchase the $24.4 million previously transferred prior to the maturity date. At both December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no remaining balances on the consolidated balance sheets pursuant to this transfer.
Dividends
In April 2020, in light of uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended future, undeclared dividends. Given our strong liquidity and credit profile, on May 7, 2021 the Company's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock and approved resumption of the share repurchase program. On September 9, 2021, the Company's board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.225 per share of common stock. Additionally, on December 6, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved a 6% increase in the quarterly cash dividend and declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.2375 per share of common stock, which was paid in January 2022. The declaration of future dividends is subject to the discretion of our board of directors.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid $25.0 million in cash dividends. We expect that cash dividends will continue to be paid in the future, subject to declaration by our board of directors, future business performance, economic conditions, changes in tax regulations and other matters. Based on our present dividend rate and outstanding share count, aggregate annual regular dividends for 2022 are estimated to be approximately $52.8 million.
The Company may not declare or make any payment if there is an existing event of default under the Restated Credit Agreement or if the payment would create an event of default.
Share Repurchases
In 1998, we instituted a share repurchase program which has generated substantial value for our shareholders.
In April 2020 in light of uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended activity under our share repurchase program. On May 7, 2021, the Company's board of directors approved resumption of the share repurchase program.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased 57,754 shares of its common stock under the share repurchase program at a total cost of $7.3 million. In total through December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased 51.7 million shares of its common stock (including 33.0 million prior to the two-for-one stock split effected in October 2005) under the program at a total cost of $1.5 billion. Considering the effect of the two-for-one stock split, the Company has repurchased 84.7 million shares at an average price of $17.63 per share. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 3.3 million shares remaining under the current share repurchase authorization.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company redeemed 54,441 shares of common stock at a total cost of $6.0 million from employees to satisfy the option exercise price and statutory minimum tax-withholding requirements related to the exercising of stock options and vesting of PVRSUs and restricted stock grants. These redemptions were outside the share repurchase program.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received proceeds of $11.1 million from stock options exercised by employees.
The following table summarizes material contractual obligations (excluding previously addressed debt obligations; financing, investment, guaranty, and franchise agreement acquisition commitments to franchisees; and deferred compensation plan liabilities) as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Commitments for leases not yet commenced represents future fixed payments, excluding anticipated tenant allowances, under leases that are not included in the consolidated balance sheet. For future lease payments related to leases that have commenced and are included in the consolidated balance sheet, refer to Note 19 in our consolidated financial statements.
The total amount of unrecognized tax positions and the related interest and penalties totaled $11.5 million at December 31, 2021. Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing and amounts of payments in connection with these positions, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. Refer to Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our accounting policies comply with principles generally accepted in the United States. We have described below those policies that we believe are critical and require the use of complex judgment or significant estimates in their application. Additional discussion of these policies is included in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are primarily derived from franchise agreements with third-party hotel owners. Franchise fees include the following:
•Royalty fees. Royalty fees are earned in exchange for a license to brand intellectual property typically based on a percentage of gross room revenues. These fees are billed and collected monthly and revenues are recognized in the same period that the underlying gross room revenues are earned by the Company’s franchisees.
•Initial franchise and relicensing fees. Initial and relicensing fees are charged when (i) new hotels enter the franchise system; (ii) there is a change of ownership; or (iii) existing franchise agreements are extended. These fees are recognized as revenue ratably as services are provided over the enforceable period of the franchise agreement. The enforceable period is the period from hotel opening to the first point the franchisee or the Company can terminate the franchise agreement without incurring a significant penalty. Deferred revenues from initial and relicensing fees will typically be recognized over a five to ten-year period, unless the franchise agreement is terminated and the hotel exits the franchise system whereby remaining deferred amounts will be recognized to revenue in the period of termination.
•Other revenue. Other revenue is a combination of miscellaneous non-marketing and reservation system fees, inclusive of quality assurance, non-compliance and franchisee training fees, and is recognized in the period the designated transaction or event has occurred.
•Marketing and reservation system revenues. The Company’s franchise agreements require the payment of marketing and reservation system fees. The Company is obligated to use these marketing and reservation system fees to provide marketing and reservation services such as advertising, providing a centralized reservation and property management system, providing reservation and revenue management services, and performing certain franchise services to support the operation of the overall franchise system. These services are comprised of multiple fees including the following:
▪Fees based on a percentage of gross room revenues are recognized in the period the gross room revenue was earned, based on the underlying hotel’s sales or usage.
▪Fees based on the occurrence of a designated transaction or event are recognized in the period the transaction or event occurred.
▪System implementation fees charged to franchisees are deferred and recognized as revenue over the term of the franchise agreement.
▪Marketing and reservation system activities also include revenues generated from the Company’s guest loyalty program. The revenue recognition of this program is discussed in Choice Privileges Loyalty Program below.
Marketing and reservation system expenses are those expenses incurred to facilitate the delivery of marketing and reservation system services, including direct expenses and an allocation of costs for certain administrative activities required to carry out marketing and reservation services. Marketing and reservation system expenses are recognized as services are incurred or goods are received, and as such may not equal marketing and reservation system revenues in a specific period but are expected to equal revenues earned from franchisees over time. The Company’s franchise agreements provide the Company the right to advance monies to the franchise system when the needs of the system surpass the balances currently available and recover such advances in future periods through additional fee assessments or reduced spending. During the years ended December 31, 2021, marketing and reservation system revenues exceeded expenses by $83.9 million. The surplus generated during the year ended December 31, 2021 is a result of increased marketing and reservation fees generated and disciplined management of discretionary expenditures.
Sales commissions earned by Company personnel upon execution of a franchise agreement (“franchise sales commissions”) meet the requirement to be capitalized as an incremental cost of obtaining a contract with a customer. Capitalized franchise sales commission are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated benefit period of the
arrangement, unless the franchise agreement is terminated and the hotel exits the system whereby remaining capitalized amounts will be expensed in the period of termination.
We make certain payments to customers as an incentive to enter into new franchise agreements (“franchise agreement acquisition cost”). We capitalize such payments as intangible assets. These intangibles are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated benefit period of the arrangement as an offset to royalty fees and marketing and reservation system fees. Impairments from adverse franchise agreement activity, including terminations and significant delinquencies in construction or invoice payments, are recorded within the SG&A expenses and marketing and reservation system expenses.
The Company also earns revenues on contracts incidental to the support of operations for franchised hotels, including purchasing operations:
•Procurement services revenues. The Company generates procurement services revenues from qualified vendors. Procurement services revenues are generally based on marketing services provided by the Company on behalf of and access provided to our qualified vendors to hotel owners and guests. The Company provides these services in exchange for either fixed consideration or a percentage of revenues earned by the qualified vendor pertaining to purchases by the Company’s franchisees or guests. Fixed consideration is allocated and recognized ratably to each period over the term of the agreement. Variable consideration is recognized in the period when sales to franchisees or guests from vendors are known or cash payment has been remitted. Qualified vendor revenues are recognized within Procurement services revenue.
Owned Hotels
The Company owned six hotels at December 31, 2021 and five hotels at December 31, 2020, from which the Company derives revenues. As a hotel owner, the Company has performance obligations to provide accommodations to hotel guests and in return the Company earns a nightly fee for an agreed upon period that is generally payable at the time the hotel guest checks out of the hotel. The Company typically satisfies the performance obligations over the length of the stay and recognizes the revenue on a daily basis, as the hotel rooms are occupied and services are rendered.
Other ancillary goods and services at owned hotels are purchased independently of the hotel stay at standalone selling prices and are considered separate performance obligations, which are satisfied at the point in time when the related good or service is provided to the guest. These primarily consist of food and beverage, incidentals and parking fees.
Choice Privileges Loyalty Program
Choice Privileges is the Company’s frequent guest loyalty program, which enables members to earn points based on their spending levels with the Company’s franchisees. The points, which the Company accumulates and tracks on the members’ behalf, may be redeemed for free accommodations or other benefits (e.g., gift cards to participating retailers). The Company collects from franchisees a percentage of loyalty program members’ gross room revenue from completed stays to operate the program. At such time points are redeemed for free accommodations or other benefits, the Company reimburses franchisees or third parties based on a rate derived in accordance with the franchise or vendor agreement.
Loyalty points represent a performance obligation attributable to usage of the points, and thus revenues are recognized at the point in time when the loyalty points are redeemed by members for benefits. The transaction price is variable and determined in the period when the loyalty points are earned and the underlying gross room revenues are known. No loyalty program revenues are recognized at the time the loyalty points are issued.
The Company is an agent in coordinating delivery of the services between the loyalty program member and franchisee or third party, and as a result, revenues are recognized net of the cost of redemptions. The estimated value of future redemptions is reflected in current and non-current Liability for guest loyalty program in our consolidated balance sheets. The liability for guest loyalty program is developed based on an estimate of the eventual redemption rates, including the on-going impacts anticipated from the COVID-19 pandemic on future redemption behavior, and point values using various actuarial methods. These significant judgments determine the required point liability attributable to outstanding points, which is relieved as redemption costs are processed. The amount of the loyalty program fees in excess of the point liability represents current and non-current Deferred revenue, which is recognized to revenue as points are redeemed including an estimate of future forfeitures (“breakage”). The anticipated redemption pattern of the points is the basis for current and non-current designation of each liability. Loyalty program point redemption revenues are recognized within marketing and reservation system revenue in the consolidated statements of income. Changes in the estimates used in developing the breakage rate or other expected future program operations could result in material changes to the liability for guest loyalty program and deferred revenues.
The Company maintains various agreements with third-party partners, including the co-branding of the Choice Privileges credit card. The agreements typically provide for use of the Company’s marks, limited access to the Company’s distribution channels, and sale of Choice Privileges points, in exchange for fees primarily comprising variable consideration paid each month. Choice Privileges members can earn points through participation in the partner’s program. Partner agreements include multiple performance obligations. The primary performance obligations are brand intellectual property and material rights for free or discounted goods or services to hotel guests. Allocation of fixed and variable consideration to the performance obligations is based on standalone selling price as estimated based on market and income methods, which represent significant judgments. The amounts allocated to brand intellectual property are recognized on a gross basis over time using the output measure of time elapsed, primarily within Procurement services revenue. The amounts allocated to material rights for free or discounted goods or services to hotel guests are recognized to revenue as points are redeemed including an estimate of breakage, primarily within Marketing and reservation system revenue.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, Intangibles, and Goodwill
The Company groups its long-lived assets, including property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets (e.g., franchise rights, franchise agreement acquisition costs), at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. The Company evaluates the potential impairment of its long-lived asset groups annually as of December 31 or earlier when other circumstances indicate that the Company may not be able to recover the carrying value of the asset group. When indicators of impairment are present, recoverability is assessed based on undiscounted expected cash flows. If the undiscounted expected cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset group, an impairment charge is measured and recorded, as applicable, for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the asset group. The fair value of long-lived asset groups are estimated primarily using discounted cash flow analyses representing the highest and best use by an independent market participant. Significant management judgment is involved in evaluating indicators of impairment and developing any required projections to test for recoverability or estimate fair value. Furthermore, if management uses different projections or if different conditions occur in future periods, future-operating results could be materially impacted.
The Company did not identify any indicators of impairment of long-lived assets from the Hotel Franchising reporting unit during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, other than impairments on franchise sales commission assets and franchise agreement acquisition cost intangibles primarily resulting from terminations of franchisees from the Choice system or significant delinquencies in construction or invoice payments. During 2019, the Company recognized impairments of long-lived assets attributable to the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit, as discussed further below.
During 2020, the Company recognized impairments attributable to the long-lived assets of a commercial office building and a real estate parcel.
•On December 30, 2014, a court awarded the Company title to a commercial office building as settlement of a portion of an outstanding loan receivable for which the building was pledged as collateral. At the time of settlement, a single tenant fully occupied the building. The initial lease term expiration was in December 2020 and the tenant had extension options for up to 30 years. Prior to initial lease term expiration, the tenant provided notice that the lease renewal options would not be exercised. Management identified this as a triggering event requiring the interim reevaluation of the commercial office building's long-lived assets. The long-lived asset group had a carrying value prior to recoverability evaluation of $11.1 million in property and equipment and $0.2 million in intangible assets as of September 30, 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, recoverability of the long-lived asset group was assessed based on undiscounted expected cash flows of the asset group aligned with management’s present long-term strategy for the building, and management concluded the undiscounted expected cash flows were less than the carrying amount of the asset group. An impairment charge was recorded for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the asset group. To estimate the fair value of the long-lived asset group, the Company utilized a combination of market and income approach valuation methods. The Company recognized a non-cash pretax long-lived asset group impairment charge in the amount of $4.3 million during the third quarter of 2020. In 2021, the Company committed to a plan to sell the commercial office building. The building was sold in November 2021 for $6.1 million, resulting in a gain of $13 thousand reflected within gain (loss) on sale of business and assets, net on the consolidated statements of income in the fourth quarter of 2021.
•During the third quarter of 2018, the Company purchased the remaining membership interests in a VIE previously accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The VIE held a real estate parcel and the purchase was accounted for an asset acquisition. The financial results of the 100% owned entity have been consolidated in the Company's financial statements since August 2018. The real estate parcel represents a long-lived asset group with a carrying value prior to recoverability evaluation of $29.5 million in other assets as of December 31, 2020. Based on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company’s assessment of the highest and best use of the real estate parcel changed and therefore, the recoverability of the long-lived asset group was re-assessed based on undiscounted
expected cash flows of the asset group from a sale, which were less than the carrying value of the asset group. An impairment charge was recorded for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the asset group. To estimate the fair value of the long-lived asset group, the Company utilized market approach valuation methods. The Company recognized a non-cash pre-tax long-lived asset group impairment charge in the amount of $9.2 million during the fourth quarter of 2020.
The Company evaluates the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives annually as of December 31 or earlier upon the occurrence of substantive unfavorable changes in economic conditions, industry trends, costs, cash flows, or ongoing declines in market capitalization that indicate that the Company may not be able to recover the carrying amount of the asset. In evaluating these assets for impairment, the Company may elect to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit or the indefinite lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If the conclusion is that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying value, then no further testing is required. If the conclusion is that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying value, then a quantitative impairment test is performed whereby the carrying value is compared to the fair value of the asset and an impairment charge is recognized, as applicable, for the excess of the carrying value over the fair value. The Company may elect to forgo the qualitative assessment and move directly to the quantitative impairment tests for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles. The Company determines the fair value of its reporting units and indefinite-lived intangibles using income and market methods.
Goodwill is allocated to the Company's reporting units. The Company's reporting units are determined primarily by the availability of discrete financial information relied upon by chief operating decision maker ("CODM") to assess performance and make operating segment resource allocation decisions. As of December 31, 2021, the Company's goodwill is allocated to the Hotel Franchising reporting unit. The Company performed the qualitative impairment analysis for the Hotel Franchising reporting unit, concluding that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount. As such, no impairment was recorded and a quantitative test was not required.
Historically, goodwill was partially allocated to the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit. The Company performed the quantitative test for the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit during prior periods, including the first quarter of 2019, determining that the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeded the fair value. As a result, the Company recognized a goodwill impairment of $3.1 million in the first quarter of 2019. In addition, during the first quarter of 2019, the Company recognized a long-lived asset group impairment charge for the full amount of SaaS for vacation rentals long-lived assets of $7.3 million.
To estimate the fair value of the SaaS for vacation rentals long-lived asset group, the Company utilized a combination of income and market approach valuation methods via performance of a discounted cash flow analysis and quoted market prices. In performing the quantitative tests in the first quarter of 2019, the Company determined the fair value of the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit utilizing a combination of market and income approach valuation methods via performance of a DCF analysis and quoted market prices. There were significant judgments and assumptions used in the DCF and market-based models including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, long-term growth rates, discount rate, and our selection of guideline company revenue multiples. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis for the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit reflect expectations based upon recent operating performance and projected future performance. Discount rate assumptions were based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting unit and market conditions.
The SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit was sold during the second quarter of 2019, resulting in the write-off of the remaining goodwill and recognition of a loss on sale.
Other than the SaaS for vacation rentals reporting unit, the Company did not record any impairment of goodwill or intangible assets with indefinite lives during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Valuation of Investments in Affiliates
The Company evaluates an investment in an affiliate for impairment when circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable, for example due to loan defaults, significant under performance relative to historical or projected operating performance, and significant negative industry, market or economic trends. When there is indication that a loss in value has occurred, the Company evaluates the carrying value compared to the estimated fair value of the investment. Fair value is based upon internally-developed discounted cash flow models, third-party appraisals, and if appropriate, current estimated net sales proceeds from pending offers. If the estimated fair value is less than carrying value, management uses its judgment to determine if the decline in value is other-than-temporary. In determining this, the Company considers factors including, but not limited to, the length of time and extent of the decline, loss of values as a percentage of the cost, financial condition and near-term financial projections, the Company's intent and ability to recover the lost value, and current economic conditions. For declines
in value that are deemed other-than-temporary, impairments are charged to earnings. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized impairment charges of $19.3 million and $7.3 million, respectively, related to multiple investments in affiliates accounted for under the equity method. The impairment charges are classified as equity in net loss of affiliates in the consolidated statements of income. The Company recognized no impairment charges during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Notes & Accounts Receivable and Expected Credit Losses
The Company provides financing in the form of notes receivable loans to franchisees to support the development of properties in strategic markets. The Company has developed a systematic methodology to determine its allowance for credit losses across our portfolio of notes receivable loans. The Company monitors the risk and performance of our portfolio by the level of security in collateral (i.e., senior, subordinated or unsecured), which is the Company's credit quality indicator. As each of the Company’s notes receivable loans has unique risk characteristics, the Company deploys its methodology to calculate allowances for credit losses at the individual notes receivable loan level.
The Company primarily utilizes a discounted cash flow ("DCF") technique to measure the credit allowance, influenced by the key economic variables of each note receivable loan. The Company identified the key economic variables for these loans to be loan-to-cost ("LTC") or loan-to-value ("LTV") ratios and debt service coverage ratio ("DSCR"). The LTC or LTV ratio represents the loan principal relative to the project cost or value and is an indication of the ability to be re-paid principal at loan maturity. The DSCR represents property-specific net operating income as a percentage of the interest and principal payments incurred (i.e., debt service) on all debt of the borrower for the property and is an indication of the ability of the borrower to timely pay amounts due during the term of the loan. The LTC or LTV ratios and DSCR are considered during loan underwriting as indications of risk and, accordingly, we believe these factors are the most representative risk indicators for calculating the allowance for credit loss. Loans with higher LTC or LTV ratios and lower DSCR ratios generally are representative of loans with greater risk and, accordingly, have higher credit allowances as a percentage of loan principal. Conversely, loans with lower LTC or LTV ratios and higher DSCR ratios generally are representative of loans with lesser risk and, accordingly, have lower credit allowances as a percentage of loan principal. In preparing or updating a DCF model as the basis for the credit allowance, the Company develops various recovery scenarios and, based on the key economic variables and present status of the loan and underlying collateral, applies a probability-weighting to the outputs of the scenarios.
Collateral-dependent financial assets are financial assets for which repayment is expected to be derived substantially through the operation or sale of the collateral and where the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty. For collateral-dependent loans, expected credit losses are based on the fair value of the collateral, less selling costs if repayment will be from the sale of the collateral. The Company calculates fair value of the collateral using a DCF technique to project cash flows or a market approach via quoted market prices. In developing cash flow projections, the Company will review the borrower's financial statements for the property, economic trends, industry projections for the market where the property is located, and comparable sales capitalization rates.
Accounts receivable consist primarily of franchise and related fees due from hotel franchisees and are recorded at the invoiced amount. The allowance for credit losses is the Company’s best estimate of the amount of expected credit losses inherent in the accounts receivable balance. The Company determines the allowance considering historical write-off experience, review of aged receivable balances and customer payment trends, the economic environment, and other available evidence.
The Company records provisions for credit losses on accounts receivable in SG&A expenses and marketing and reservation system expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. When the Company determines that an account is not collectible, the account is written-off to the associated allowance for credit losses.
Historically, the Company has considered its credit risk associated with accounts receivables to be partially mitigated due to the dispersion of these receivables across a large number of geographically diverse franchisees. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded provisions for credit losses on accounts receivable of $15.6 million in SG&A expenses and $26.0 million in marketing and reservation system expenses, in consideration of the economic and credit conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and estimates of other expected credit losses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded reversals of provisions for credit losses on accounts receivable of $4.4 million in SG&A expenses and $7.3 million in marketing and reservation system expenses, after experiencing improved collections and economic and credit conditions.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded using the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not such assets will be unrealized. Historically, deferred United States income taxes have not been recorded for temporary
differences related to investments in certain foreign subsidiaries and corporate affiliates. The temporary differences consisted primarily of undistributed earnings that are considered permanently reinvested in operations outside the United States. Due to the changes resulting from the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the Company has implemented a new foreign dividend policy effective during the quarter ended September 30, 2018. As a result of the new policy, the Company intends to limit any future foreign distributions to income which has been previously subject to US taxation, for which relevant taxes have been recorded. Nonetheless, the Company will continue to assert that any other outside basis difference of the foreign subsidiaries will be permanently (or indefinitely) reinvested outside of the U.S. Consequently, the Company has not recorded any additional deferred taxes for this item in 2021.
With respect to uncertain income tax positions, a tax liability is recorded in full when management determines that the position does not meet the more likely than not threshold of being sustained on examination. A tax liability may also be recognized for a position that meets the more likely than not threshold, based upon management’s assessment of the position’s probable settlement value. The Company records interest and penalties on unrecognized tax benefits in the provision for income taxes. Additional information regarding the Company’s unrecognized tax benefits is provided in Note 15 to consolidated financial statements.
New Accounting Standards
Refer to the "Recently Adopted & Issued Accounting Standards" section of Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements for information related to our adoption and assessment of new accounting standards in 2021.