Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis presents management’s perspective of our business, financial condition and overall performance. This information is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our past performance, current financial condition and outlook for the future and should be read in conjunction with Item 8 of Part II of this report.
Introduction
We are an independent exploration and production company engaged in the acquisition, exploration and development of properties to produce oil, natural gas and NGL from underground reservoirs. We own a large and geographically diverse portfolio of onshore U.S. unconventional natural gas and liquids assets, including interests in approximately 8,200 oil and natural gas wells. Upon closing of the Chief Acquisition and divestiture of our assets in the Powder River Basin in Wyoming, our portfolio will be focused on three operating areas including the natural gas resource plays in the Marcellus Shale in the northern Appalachian Basin in Pennsylvania (“Marcellus”) and the Haynesville/Bossier Shales in northwestern Louisiana (“Haynesville”) and the liquids-rich resource play in the Eagle Ford Shale in South Texas (“Eagle Ford”).
Our strategy is to create shareholder value by generating sustainable Free Cash Flow from our oil and natural gas development and production activities. We continue to focus on improving margins through operating efficiencies and financial discipline and improving our Environmental, Social, and Governance (“ESG”) performance. To accomplish these goals, we intend to allocate our human resources and capital expenditures to projects we believe offer the highest cash return on capital invested, to deploy leading drilling and completion technology throughout our portfolio, and to take advantage of acquisition and divestiture opportunities to strengthen our portfolio. We also intend to continue to dedicate capital to projects that reduce the environmental impact of our oil and natural gas producing activities. We continue to seek opportunities to reduce cash costs (production, gathering, processing and transportation and general and administrative) per barrel of oil equivalent production through operational efficiencies by, among other things, improving our production volumes from existing wells.
Leading a responsible energy future is foundational to Chesapeake's success. Our core values and culture demand we continuously evaluate the environmental impact of our operations and work diligently to improve our ESG performance across all facets of our Company. Our path to leading a responsible energy future begins with our initiative to achieve net-zero direct greenhouse gas emissions by 2035, which we announced in February 2021. To meet this challenge, we have set meaningful initial goals including:
•Eliminate routine flaring from all new wells completed from 2021 forward, and enterprise-wide by 2025;
•Reduce our methane intensity to 0.09% by 2025 (achieved 0.08% in 2021); and
•Reduce our GHG intensity to 5.5 by 2025 (achieved 5.0 in 2021).
In July 2021, we announced our plan to receive independent certification of our natural gas production under the MiQ methane standard and EO100 Standard for Responsible Energy Development. Certified natural gas was available in our Haynesville assets as of the end of 2021, and we expect it to be available in our legacy Marcellus assets by the end of the second quarter of 2022. The MiQ certification will provide a verified approach to tracking our commitment to reduce our methane intensity to 0.09% by 2025, as well as support our overall objective of achieving net-zero direct greenhouse gas emissions by 2035.
Our results of operations as reported in our consolidated financial statements for the 2021 Successor Period, 2021 Predecessor Period, 2020 Predecessor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period are in accordance with GAAP. Although GAAP requires that we report on our results for the periods January 1, 2021 through February 9, 2021 and February 10, 2021 through December 31, 2021 separately, management views our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 by combining the results of the 2021 Predecessor Period and the 2021 Successor Period because management believes such presentation provides the most meaningful comparison of our results to prior periods. We are not able to compare the 40 days from January 1, 2021 through February 9, 2021 operating results to any of the previous periods reported in the consolidated financial statements and do not believe reviewing this period in isolation would be useful in identifying any trends in, or reaching any conclusions regarding, our overall operating performance. We believe the key performance indicators such as operating revenues and expenses for the 2021 Successor Period combined with the 2021 Predecessor Period provide more meaningful comparisons to other periods and are useful in understanding operational trends. Additionally, there were no changes in policies between the periods, and any material impacts as a result of fresh start accounting were included within the discussion of these changes. These combined results do not comply with GAAP and have not been prepared as pro forma results under applicable regulations, but are presented because we believe they provide the most meaningful comparison of our results to prior periods.
Recent Developments
Vine Acquisition
On November 1, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Vine pursuant to a definitive agreement with Vine dated August 10, 2021. The transaction strengthens Chesapeake’s competitive position, meaningfully increasing our Free Cash Flow outlook and deepening our inventory of premium natural gas locations, while preserving the strength of our balance sheet.
Chief Acquisition and Powder River Basin Divestiture
On January 25, 2022, we announced our planned Chief Acquisition and the planned divestiture of our Powder River Basin assets. These transactions, which are subject to certain customary closing conditions, including certain regulatory approvals, are expected to close in the first quarter of 2022. In conjunction with the Vine Acquisition, these transactions simplify and refocus our asset portfolio, concentrating on three operating areas and advancing our highest-return assets in the Marcellus and Haynesville gas basins.
Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, and Chief Operating Officer
On April 27, 2021, we announced the departure of Doug Lawler from his positions as Chief Executive Officer and Director of Chesapeake, effective April 30, 2021. Michael A. Wichterich, the Chairman of our Board of Directors, served as Interim Chief Executive Officer while the Board of Directors conducted a search for a new Chief Executive Officer.
On October 11, 2021, we announced that the Board of Directors appointed Domenic “Nick” Dell’Osso Jr. as President and Chief Executive Officer and as member of the Board of Directors, effective October 11, 2021. Additionally, on October 11, 2021, the Board of Directors appointed Michael A. Wichterich, who resigned as Interim Chief Executive Officer upon the appointment of Mr. Dell’Osso, as Executive Chairman of the Company.
On November 30, 2021, we announced that the Board of Directors appointed Mohit Singh as Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, effective December 6, 2021.
On January 25, 2022, we announced that the Board of Directors appointed Josh Viets as Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, effective February 1, 2022.
Emergence from Bankruptcy
On the Petition Date, the Debtors filed the Chapter 11 Cases under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code in the Bankruptcy Court. On June 29, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order authorizing the joint administration of the Chapter 11 Cases under the caption In re Chesapeake Energy Corporation, Case No. 20-33233. Subsidiaries with noncontrolling interests, consolidated variable interest entities and certain de minimis subsidiaries (collectively, the “Non-Filing Entities”) were not part of the bankruptcy filing. The Non-Filing Entities continued to operate in the ordinary course of business.
The Bankruptcy Court confirmed the Plan and the Debtors entered the Confirmation Order on January 16, 2021. The Debtors emerged from bankruptcy on the Effective Date. In connection with our exit from bankruptcy, we filed a registration statement with the SEC to facilitate future sales of our equity by certain holders of our New Common Stock and warrants. See Item 1 Business, Item 3 Legal Proceedings, Item 5 Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities and Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this report for a complete discussion of our Chapter 11 proceedings.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Impact on Global Demand for Oil and Natural Gas
The global spread of COVID-19, created, and continues to create, significant volatility, uncertainty, and economic disruption during 2020 through 2021. The pandemic has reached more than 200 countries and territories and has resulted in widespread adverse impacts on the global economy and on our customers and other parties with whom we have business relations. To date, we have experienced limited operational impacts as a result of COVID-19 or related governmental restrictions. While we cannot predict the full impact that COVID-19 or the related significant disruption and volatility in the oil and natural gas markets will have on our business, cash flows, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, we believe demand is recovering and prices will continue to be positively impacted in the near term. For additional discussion regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A Risk Factors in this report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity Overview
For the 2021 Successor Period, our primary sources of capital resources and liquidity have consisted of internally generated cash flows from operations, and our primary uses of cash have been for the development of our oil and natural gas properties, acquisitions of additional oil and natural gas properties and return of value to shareholders through dividends. Historically, our primary sources of capital resources and liquidity have consisted of internally generated cash flows from operations, borrowings under certain credit agreements and dispositions of non-core assets. Our ability to issue additional indebtedness, dispose of assets or access the capital markets was substantially limited during the Chapter 11 Cases and required court approval in most instances. Accordingly, our liquidity in the 2021 and 2020 Predecessor Periods depended mainly on cash generated from operations and available funds under certain credit agreements including the DIP Facility in the 2021 Predecessor Period and revolving credit facility in the 2020 Predecessor Period.
We believe we have emerged from the Chapter 11 Cases as a fundamentally stronger company, built to generate sustainable Free Cash Flow with a strengthened balance sheet, geographically diverse asset base and continuously improving ESG performance. As a result of the Chapter 11 Cases, we reduced our total indebtedness by $9.4 billion by issuing equity in a reorganized entity to the holders of our FLLO Term Loan, Second Lien Notes, unsecured notes and allowed general unsecured claimants.
We believe our cash flow from operations, cash on hand and borrowing capacity under the Exit Credit Facility, as discussed below, will provide sufficient liquidity during the next 12 months and the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had $2.625 billion of liquidity available, including $905 million of cash on hand and $1.720 billion of aggregate unused borrowing capacity available under the Exit Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under our Exit Credit Facility - Tranche A Loans, and $221 million in borrowings under our Exit Credit Facility - Tranche B Loans. See Note 6 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this report for further discussion of our debt obligations, including principal and carrying amounts of our senior notes.
Dividend
With our strong liquidity position, we initiated a new dividend strategy in 2021. We paid dividends of $119 million on our New Common Stock in the 2021 Successor Period. See Note 12 for further discussion.
On August 10, 2021, we announced a variable return program that will result in the payment of an additional dividend, payable beginning in March 2022, equal to the sum of Adjusted Free Cash Flow from the prior quarter less the base dividend, multiplied by 50%. On February 23, 2022, we declared a quarterly dividend payable of $1.7675 per share, which will be paid on March 22, 2022 to stockholders of record at the close of business on March 7, 2022. The dividend consists of a base quarterly dividend in the amount of $0.4375 per share and a variable quarterly dividend in the amount of $1.33 per share. In January 2022, we announced our intent to increase the base quarterly dividend to $0.50 per share beginning in the second quarter of 2022.
The declaration and payment of any future dividend, whether fixed or variable, will remain at the full discretion of the Board and will depend on the Company’s financial results, cash requirements, future prospects and other relevant factors. The Company’s ability to pay dividends to its stockholders is restricted by (i) Oklahoma corporate law, (ii) its Certificate of Incorporation, (iii) the terms and provisions of its Credit Agreement and (iv) the terms and provisions of the indentures governing its 5.50% Senior Notes due 2026, 5.875% Senior Notes due 2029 and 6.75% senior notes due 2029.
Derivative and Hedging Activities
Our results of operations and cash flows are impacted by changes in market prices for oil, natural gas and NGL. We enter into various derivative instruments to mitigate a portion of our exposure to commodity price declines, but these transactions may also limit our cash flows in periods of rising commodity prices. Our oil, natural gas and NGL derivative activities, when combined with our sales of oil, natural gas and NGL, allow us to better predict the total revenue we expect to receive. See