ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
OVERVIEW
The Company was organized on August 13, 2014 as a Nevada corporation under Chapter 78 of the Nevada Revised Statutes as WeWin Group Corp. With FINRA approval on December 20, 2018 the Company’s name changed to AllyMe Group, Inc. During this period the Company’s trading symbol remained “WWIN.”. On June 16, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved the new name “NEXT-ChemX Corporation”, and approval of this change was granted by FINRA on July 22, 2021. The Company’s new trading symbol “CHMX” was granted on July 30, 2021. The Company’s principal office is located at 1111 W 12th Street, Unit 113, Austin Texas 78703.
The Company qualifies as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act or JOBS Act which became law in April 2012. The definition of an “emerging growth company” is a company with an initial public offering of common equity securities which occurred after December 8, 2011, and has less than $1 billion of total annual gross revenues during last completed fiscal year. An emerging growth company may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include, but are not limited to:
● not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended, or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
● reduced obligations with respect to financial data, including presenting only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of selected financial data;
● reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports, proxy statements, and registration statements;
● exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments not previously approved; and
● an exemption from compliance with the requirement of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding the communication of critical audit matters in the auditor’s report on the financial statements.
We have elected to take advantage of certain reduced reporting requirements. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different than you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
In addition, the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with certain new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Overview of the Business
The goal of the Company is to commercialize its novel proprietary Membrane Extraction Technology is the principal asset of the business. Membrane Extraction Technology is an Ion Extraction Technology based upon unique chemistry: by using the very high surface area of special “Hollow Fiber Membranes” ions and metal ions may be extracted from liquid solutions. Our Membrane Extraction Technology mimics nature’s biophysical processes enabling the technology to extract ions from a liquid solution at ambient temperatures and pressures even where ions exist in low concentrations.
The Membrane Extraction Technology has many areas of application, however the Company will initially concentrate on the following sectors:
● Lithium Extraction from Natural Brines, Geothermal Wells, or Leach Solutions;
● Extracting Fatty Acids from Vegetable Oils for More Economical Refining; and
● Extracting of Radioactive Ions from Nuclear Plant Stored Water.
The primary focus of the Company is the extraction of lithium from naturally occurring brines and geothermal sources. The Company has developed a system for extracting the key additional naturally occurring ions in the lithium brine solutions tested to date and provides a most efficient extraction with the minimal disruption to the environment. Using the Company’s system water resources will not be depleted by evaporation or contamination and can be returned to the aquifers or lakes from which they were drawn. The work on Fatty Acid extraction from vegetable oils and radioactive ions from contaminated water is delayed due to the geopolitical situation in Ukraine.
In mid-June of 2021, the Company opened its development facility in Illinois under the direction of the inventing scientist of our Membrane Extraction Technology. At this laboratory facility, lab equipment was acquired, and chemical engineers were recruited to set up laboratory test systems to extract certain elements, such as low concentrations of lithium from liquids. The testing allowed us to determine preliminary dynamics of extraction to support the preparation of additional intellectual property protection strategy. Minimal necessary laboratory equipment was acquired due to our modest financial capabilities as well as various hollow fiber modules to test which commercially available hollow fiber membranes in packages modules would work with our process.
Work proceeds on the engineering of the pilot testing plant which will test specific brines under controlled conditions to finalize the commercial advantage of the system. In 2021, we began a process of collaboration and hiring of experts to focus on the design and engineering of the system. Work is underway and will continue through 2022 to engineer commercially operating tubular Modules containing an optimized configuration We plan to supply scalable Extraction Plants in 40’ containers which have an optimal number of modules for each process. These container systems will be located at the customer extraction sites. Our revenue model is to provide the extraction service for either a tolling fee or under a cost savings revenue sharing model.
The Company is pursuing an aggressive intellectual property protection strategy. The Company has engaged the Navitas Intellectual Property Group LLC of Denver, Colorado for its international intellectual property requirements. This group is headed by Michael D. McIntosh and David F. Dockery, both highly specialized chemical processing and material science patent attorneys. Navitas is working closely with the Company’s research and development team to identify processing, materials and markets to pursue patent protection. In turn, Navitas works with the Company’s management to identify regions of the world to pursue desired protection. In 2021 the Company filed for patent protection for novel aspects of its Lithium recovery developments. Additional patent applications are currently in progress dealing with oil purification, further aspects of Lithium processing and recovery, metals recycling and other developments. Company is also focusing on novel membrane characteristics, production and uses. Details of these applications are confidential until published pursuant to international patent publication requirements.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes the results of our operations during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and provides information regarding the dollar and percentage increase or (decrease) from the current 12-month period to the prior 12-month period:
We recorded a net loss of $1,784,370 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net profit of $345,049 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 due to a significant increase in operating expenses mainly as a result of payroll, amortization of intangible asset, and accrued contractor fees incurred in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had total current assets of $12,029 a working capital deficit of $1,459,168 and an accumulated stockholders’ equity of $1,712,486. Cash used in operation activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 was $701,790, while our operations generated $183,495 in cash in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Our revenues were $0 in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These factors raised substantial doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Management believes that the Company’s cash on hand will be sufficient to fund all Company obligations and commitments for the next twelve months when supported by understandings from principal shareholders and affiliates. Historically, we have depended on loans from our principal shareholders and their affiliated companies to provide us with working capital as required. There is no guarantee that such funding will be available when required and there can be no assurance that our stockholders, or any of them, will continue making loans or advances to us in the future. The Company is actively seeking between $3-5 million to support its plans to complete the commercialization of the lithium extraction process as well as to fund other processes, equipment purchases, expenses, overheads and operating capital.
At December 31, 2021, the Company issued two notes payable to a related party in the aggregate amount of $5,900, which was received from the related party to fund operation. This amount was payable on November 11, 2021. Also, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the company issued a number of convertible notes to third parties for a total of $672,500 and a $15,000 convertible note payable was issued to a related party.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Seasonality
Our operating results are not affected by seasonality.
Inflation
Our business and operating results are not affected in any material way by inflation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Securities and Exchange Commission issued Financial Reporting Release No. 60, “Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies” suggesting that companies provide additional disclosure and commentary on their most critical accounting policies. In Financial Reporting Release No. 60, the Securities and Exchange Commission has defined the most critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and operating results and require management to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The nature of our business generally does not call for the preparation or use of estimates. Due to the fact that the Company does not have any operating business, we do not believe that we do not have any such critical accounting policies.