Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and the related notes included in Part II Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in this report provides an analysis of our financial condition and results of operations and reasons for material changes therein for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 ("2020 and 2019"). This discussion contains “forward-looking statements” reflecting our current expectations, estimates, and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to several factors. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, capital expenditures, economic and competitive conditions, regulatory changes, and other uncertainties, as well as those factors discussed below and elsewhere herein. Please read Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements. Please read the risk factors and other cautionary statements described under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere herein. Except as required by applicable law, we assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Charah Solutions, Inc.
Charah Solutions, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, “Charah Solutions,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) was incorporated in Delaware in 2018 in connection with our initial public offering in June 2018 and, together with its predecessors, has been in business since 1987. Since our founding, we have continuously worked to anticipate our customers’ evolving environmental needs, increasing the number of services we provide through our embedded presence at their power generation facilities. Our multi-service platform allows customers to gain efficiencies from sourcing multiple required offerings from a single, trusted partner compared to service providers with a more limited scope.
Overview
We are a leading national service provider of mission-critical environmental services and byproduct recycling to the power generation industry. We offer a suite of remediation and compliance services, byproduct services, raw material sales and Environmental Risk Transfer (“ERT”) services. We also design and implement solutions for complex environmental projects (such as coal ash pond closures) and facilitate coal ash recycling through byproduct marketing and other beneficial use services. We believe we are a partner of choice for the power generation industry due to our quality, safety, domain experience, and compliance record, all of which are key criteria for our customers. In 2021, we performed work at more than 40 coal-fired generation sites nationwide.
On November 19, 2020, the Company sold its Allied Power Holdings LLC (“Allied”) subsidiary engaged in maintenance, modification and repair services to the nuclear and fossil power generation industry to an affiliate of Bernhard Capital Partners Management, LP (“BCP”), the Company’s majority shareholder, in an all-cash deal for $40 million (the “Allied Transaction”) subject to customary adjustments for working capital and other adjustments as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. As described in further detail in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, the company has presented Allied as discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes.
We operate as a single operating segment, reflecting the suite of end-to-end services we offer our utility partners and how our chief operating decision maker reviews consolidated financial information to evaluate results of operations, assess performance and allocate resources for these services. We provide the following services through our one segment: remediation and compliance services, byproduct services, raw material sales and ERT services. Remediation and compliance services are associated with our customers’ need for multi-year environmental improvement and sustainability initiatives, whether driven by regulatory requirements, power generation customer initiatives or consumer expectations and standards. Byproduct services consist of recurring and mission-critical coal ash management and operations for coal-fired power generation facilities while also supporting both our power generation customers’ desire to recycle their recurring and legacy volumes of coal combustion residuals (“CCRs”), commonly known as coal ash, and our ultimate end customers’ need for high-quality, cost-effective supplemental cementitious materials (“SCMs”) that provide a sustainable, environmentally-friendly substitute for Portland cement in concrete. Our raw materials sales provide customers with the raw materials that are essential to their business while also providing the sourcing, logistics, and management needed to facilitate these raw materials transactions around the globe. ERT services represent an innovative solution designed to meet utility customers' evolving and increasingly complex plant closure and environmental remediation needs. These customers need to retire and decommission older or underutilized assets while maximizing the asset's value and improving the environment. Our ERT services manage the sites' environmental remediation requirements, benefiting the communities and lowering the utility customers' costs
COVID-19 Update
The pandemic caused by a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has impacted many aspects of our operations, directly and indirectly, including our employees, the services we provide at our customers’ power generation facilities, our suppliers and the overall market. We, along with our utility partners, have implemented the precautionary health and safety measures recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”) in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including, but not limited to: an employee health status questionnaire, taking daily temperatures, enhanced sanitation practices and cleaning surfaces throughout each shift, and increasing the number of hand sanitizing stations. We have also implemented social distancing measures such as staggering shift start and stop times and break times with additional break spaces to support social distancing as well as holding safety meetings outside of the site trailer. Furthermore, we have implemented work-from-home measures for the majority of office employees. Understanding that the COVID-19 challenge is evolving, based on new information and feedback, we continue to monitor the situation and update our proactive measures in coordination with our customers. We continue to work closely with our utility partners and concrete producer customers to meet their needs and monitor any potential slowdowns of byproduct recycling and marketing services if there is decreased demand for construction materials.
The COVID-19 pandemic presents potential new risks to the Company’s business, including logistical, supply chain and other challenges that may continue to affect demand for services, which are driven by construction activity, and the timing of our remediation and compliance services projects, due to delays in new contract awards and increasing costs and declining availability for certain machinery and equipment.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We use a variety of financial and operational metrics to assess the performance of our operations, including:
•Revenue;
•Gross Profit;
•Operating Income;
•Adjusted EBITDA; and
•Adjusted EBITDA Margin.
Revenue
We analyze our revenue by comparing actual revenue to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods to assess our performance. We believe that revenue is a meaningful indicator of the demand and pricing for our services.
Gross Profit
We analyze our gross profit, which we define as revenue less cost of sales, to measure our financial performance. We believe gross profit is a meaningful metric because it provides insight into our revenue streams' financial performance without consideration of Company overhead. When analyzing gross profit, we compare actual gross profit to our internal projections for a given period and prior periods to assess our performance.
Operating Income
We analyze our operating income, which we define as revenue less cost of sales, general and administrative expenses, gain on change in contingent payment liability and impairment expense to measure our financial performance. We believe operating income is a meaningful metric because it provides insight into profitability and operating performance based on our assets' cost basis. We also compare operating income to our internal projections for a given period and to prior periods.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We view Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures, as important indicators of performance because they allow for an effective evaluation of our operating performance compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. before income from discontinued operations, net of tax, interest expense, net, loss on extinguishment of debt, impairment expense, gain on change in contingent payment liability, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, the Brickhaven contract deemed termination revenue reversal and transaction-related expenses and other items. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to total revenue. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for more information and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Key Factors Affecting Our Business and Financial Statements
Ability to Capture New Contracts and Opportunities
Our ability to grow revenue and earnings is dependent on maintaining and increasing our market share, renewing existing contracts, and obtaining additional contracts from proactive bidding on contracts with new and existing customers. We proactively work with existing customers ahead of contract end dates to attempt to secure contract renewals. We also leverage the embedded long-term nature of our customer relationships to obtain insight and capture new business opportunities across our platform.
Seasonality of Business
Based on historical trends, we expect our operating results to vary seasonally. Variations in normal weather patterns can also cause changes in energy consumption which may influence the demand and timing of associated services for our byproduct services offerings. Our byproduct services and raw material sales are also negatively affected during winter months when the use of cement and cement products is generally lower. Inclement weather can impact construction-related activities associated with pond and landfill remediation, which affects the timing of revenue generation for our remediation and compliance services.
Project-Based Nature of Environmental Remediation Mandates
We believe there is a significant pipeline of coal ash ponds and landfills that will require remediation and/or closure in the future. Due to their scale and complexity, these environmental remediation projects are typically completed over longer periods. As a result, our revenue from these projects can fluctuate over time. Some of our revenue from projects is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost input method of accounting for GAAP purposes, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs. This method is the most accurate measure of our contract performance because it depicts the company’s performance in transferring control of goods or services promised to customers according to a reasonable measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. The timing of revenue recorded for financial reporting purposes may differ from actual billings to customers, sometimes resulting in costs and billing in excess of actual revenue. Because of the risks in estimating gross profit margins for long-term jobs, actual results may differ from these estimates.
Byproduct Recycling Market Dynamics
There is a growing demand for recycled coal ash across various applications driven by market forces and governmental regulations, creating the need to dispose of coal ash in an environmentally sensitive manner. Pricing of byproduct services and raw material sales are driven by supply and demand market dynamics as well as the chemical and physical properties of the ash. As demand increases for the end-products that use CCRs’ (i.e., concrete for construction and infrastructure projects), the demand for recycled coal ash also typically rises. These fluctuations affect the relative demand for our services. In recessionary periods, construction and infrastructure spending and the corresponding need for concrete may decline. However, this unfavorable effect may be partially offset by an increase in the demand for recycled coal ash during recessionary periods, given that coal ash is more cost-effective than other alternatives.
Power Generation Industry Spend on Environmental Liability Management and Regulatory Requirements
The power generation industry has increased annual spending on environmental liability management. We believe this results from regulatory requirements and consumer pressure, and the industry’s increasing focus on environmental stewardship. Continued increases in spending on environmental liability management by our customers should result in increased demand for services across our platform.
Many power generation entities are experiencing an increased need to retire and decommission older or less economically viable generating assets while minimizing costs and maximizing the value of the assets and improving the environment. Our ERT services allow these partners to remove the environmental risk and insurance obligations and place control and oversight with a company specializing in these complex remediation and reclamation projects. We believe our broad set of service capabilities, track record of quality service and safety, exacting environmental standards, and a dependable and experienced labor force is a significant competitive advantage. Our work, mission and culture are directly aligned with meeting environmental, sustainability, and governance (“ESG”) standards and providing innovative services to solve our utility customers’ most complex environmental challenges. We believe that we are an industry leader in quality, safety, and compliance, and we are committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and preserving our environment for a cleaner energy future.
Cost Management and Capital Investment Efficiency
Our principal operating costs consist of labor, material and equipment costs and equipment maintenance. We focus on cost management and efficiency, including monitoring labor costs, both in terms of wage rates and headcount, along with other costs such as materials and equipment. We believe we maintain a disciplined approach to capital expenditure decisions, typically associated with specific contract requirements. Furthermore, we strive to extend our equipment's useful life by applying a well-planned routine maintenance program.
How We Generate Revenue
Our remediation and compliance services primarily consist of designing, constructing, managing, remediating and closing ash ponds and landfills on customer-owned sites.
Our byproduct services include recycling recurring and contracted volumes of coal-fired power generation waste byproducts, such as fly ash, bottom ash, IGCC slag and gypsum byproducts, each of which can be used for various industrial purposes. Byproduct services also include the management of coal ash which is mission-critical to power plants’ daily operations including silo management, on-site ash transportation and capture, and disposal of combustion byproducts from coal-power operations. More than 90% of our services work is time and materials based, cost reimbursable or unit price contracts, which significantly reduces the risk of loss on contracts and provides gross margin visibility. Revenue from management contracts is recognized when the ash is hauled to the landfill or the management services are provided. Revenue from the sale of ash is recognized when it is delivered to the customer. Revenue from construction contracts is recognized using the cost-to-cost input method.
Our raw materials sales provide customers with the raw materials that are essential to their business while also providing the sourcing, logistics, and management needed to facilitate these raw materials transactions around the globe.
Revenue from construction contracts is recognized using the cost-to-cost input method. Revenue from management contracts is recognized when the ash is hauled to the landfill or the management services are provided. Revenue from the sale of ash is recognized when it is delivered to the customer. This combination of one-stop related services deepens customer connectivity and drives long-term relationships, which we believe are critical for renewing existing contracts, winning incremental business from existing customers at new sites and adding new customers.
Overview of Financial Results
In 2021, we won approximately $840 million in contracted new business awards compared to $715 million in 2020 and $430 million in 2019. The 2021 awards span all of our lines of business and included two ERT projects, two large and several mid-size and smaller remediation and compliance projects, several ash marketing agreements, and multiple renewals of existing contracts. Revenue contributions from these new awards will be recognized beginning in 2021 and 2022 and, for some awards, continue beyond 2022. We believe that our unique ability to provide a single-source solution for large-scale and complex environmental challenges continues to position us well to capture a significant portion of a large and growing addressable market, although the timing of future awards is uncertain. We believe that regulatory developments in several states as well as at the federal level will positively impact our business opportunities over time as state legislatures and the EPA become more prescriptive in their requirements to remediate ash ponds. In addition, customer interest in our ERT services and our EnviroSourceTM ash beneficiation technology remains strong. We made significant progress on a major ERT project in
2021 and announced two additional ERT projects in 2021 and early 2022, with the acquisitions of both expected to close in the second quarter of 2022. We also have contracts for EnviroSourceTM under discussion with potential utility customers.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we completed a significant refinancing, issuing $135.0 million of unsecured senior notes and approximately 2.9 million shares of common stock for $13.0 million. Proceeds from the refinancing were used to repay all loans and borrowings outstanding under our Credit Facility, which totaled $126.5 million. We terminated the Credit Facility and replaced it with a new asset-based lending facility in November 2021, as discussed below in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements.” These transactions improved our financial flexibility, extended our debt maturity profile and reduced our debt service requirements. We believe they enhance our ability to grow our business.
Our primary ongoing sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash on the balance sheet, cash flows generated by operating activities and availability under our asset-based lending facility. In part due to longer sales cycles, driven by the increase in the size, scope and complexity of remediation and compliance projects that we are bidding on, we have experienced contract initiation delays and project completion delays that have adversely affected our revenue and overall liquidity. Our lengthy and complex projects require us to expend large sums of working capital, and delays in payment receipts, project commencement or project completion can adversely affect our financial position and the cash flows that typically fund our expenditures. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Our Debt Agreements-Existing Credit Facility” below for more information about the Credit Facility.
Results of Operations
A discussion of results of operations changes between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is included below. A discussion of changes between the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 can be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on March 24, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The table below sets forth our selected operating data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue. Revenue increased $60.8 million, or 26.2%, to $293.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $232.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase in remediation and compliance services revenue of $79.8 million from the commencement of new project work. This increase was partially offset by (i) lower raw materials sales of $13.6 million resulting from reduced supply from international sources due to supply chain constraints resulting from significantly higher ocean cargo rates that have led to a decrease in profitable imported fly ash sales opportunities and (ii) lower byproduct services revenue of $5.3 million primarily due to the dissolution of our Ash Ventures LLC joint venture in the second quarter of 2021.
Gross Profit. Gross profit increased $3.1 million, or 13.6%, to $25.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenue, gross profit was 8.8% and 9.8% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by an increase in revenue as discussed above, partially offset by a lower gross profit margin percentage. The decline in gross profit margin was primarily driven by issues at certain remediation and compliance projects, most of which are nearing completion, resulting from construction delays and supply chain issues, mostly affecting the fourth quarter of 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased $8.1 million, or 23.9%, to $42.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $34.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the absence of a $7.1 million reduction in expense from the expiration of our purchase option liability on our structural fill sites.
Gain on sales-type lease. Gain on sales-type lease increased $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the recognition of a parcel transferred under a sales-type lease at an ERT project as discussed in Note 6, Balance Sheet Items, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Gains on sales of real estate, property and equipment, net. Gains on sales of real estate, property and equipment, net increased $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the commencement of operations on the Gibbons Creek ERT project in 2021 that led to sales of certain parcels of land acquired and increased scrap sales from the demolition of the power plant, as well as due to the sale of certain grinding-related assets.
Gain on ARO settlement. Gain on ARO settlement increased $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to differences between the estimated costs used in the measurement of the fair value of the Company's AROs and the actual costs incurred for specific remediation tasks recognized on a proportionate basis.
Other operating expenses from ERT services. Other operating expenses from ERT services increased $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to expenses associated with the commencement of operations on the Gibbons Creek ERT project in 2021.
Gain on Change in Contingent Payment Liability. A gain on the change in contingent payment liability resulted in a $9.7 million benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 and did not recur in 2021. We reduced the associated liability because we determined that certain performance sales levels using the grinding technology mentioned below would not be achieved.
Impairment Expense. Impairment expense decreased $37.2 million to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $38.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily driven by (i) the non-recurrence of a $21.0 million impairment of the Charah Solutions trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset, (ii) a decrease of $9.8 million of impairments of certain grinding technology equipment and construction in progress assets and intangible asset, and (iii) the non-recurrence of a $6.4 million impairment related to our structural fill site asset resulting from the expiration of the purchase option liability.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net increased $1.5 million, or 10.5%, to $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher debt balances, a higher weighted-average cost of capital associated with equipment financing and an increase in amortization of debt issuance costs.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on extinguishment of debt decreased $8.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the absence of the Company’s Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”) of our previous Credit Facility. The Company expensed $5.2 million in amendment fees and wrote off $3.4 million in previously capitalized debt issuance costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income (Loss) from Equity Method Investment. Income (loss) from equity method investment increased $2.7 million to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a loss from equity investment of $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase period-over-period was primarily attributable to the absence of a $3.8 million impairment of our investment in the joint venture that resulted from the fair value of our investment being less than its carrying value at December 31, 2020, partially offset by a decrease in operating income from our equity method investment due to the joint venture arrangement ending during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit. Income tax (expense) benefit decreased by $1.6 million to a $0.7 million expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a $0.9 million benefit during the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in balance was primarily driven by an increase in the valuation allowance recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as we were not able to conclude it was more likely than not certain deferred tax assets will be realized. Furthermore, during the year ended December 31, 2021 the income tax expense was attributed to the impact of accelerated tax depreciation and amortization of tax goodwill on the valuation allowance.
Income from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, decreased $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the sale of our subsidiary through the Allied Transaction during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Loss. Net loss decreased $48.9 million, or 89.4%, to $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $54.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Consolidated Balance Sheet
The following table is a summary of our overall financial position:
Assets
Total assets increased $63.1 million, driven primarily by:
▪$37.7 million in property and equipment additions, net of disposals, resulting from the Gibbons Creek Transaction and new capital leases entered into during the year ended December 31, 2021;
▪$30.0 million in cash and restricted cash due to $10.2 million in cash used in operating activities, $56.4 million in cash provided by investing activities and $16.3 million in cash used in financing activities;
▪$8.5 million in increases to contract assets resulting from the commencement of new remediation and compliance services project work that has led to additional costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings and retainage;
▪$6.0 million in increases to other assets resulting from a lease receivable recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the sales-type lease discussed in Note 6, Balance Sheet Items, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements; and
▪$2.7 million in increases to trade accounts receivable, net from the commencement of new remediation and compliance services and the timing of receipts of outstanding payments from customers.
These increases were partially offset by:
▪$16.7 million in property and equipment depreciation expense during the year ended December 31, 2021; and
▪$7.9 million in intangible asset amortization expense during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liabilities
Total liabilities increased $54.6 million, primarily driven by:
•$156.3 million in proceeds from long-term debt;
•$37.3 million in increases to current and non-current asset retirement obligations (“AROs”) resulting from the AROs acquired in Gibbons Creek Transaction and partially offset by ARO liabilities settled and gain on ARO settlement during the year ended December 31, 2021;
•$24.5 million in new capital lease obligations entered into during the year ended December 31, 2021; and
•$17.0 million in increases to accounts payables and accrued expenses from the commencement of new remediation and compliance services and the timing of payments to vendors.
These increases were partially offset by:
•$154.8 million in principal payments of long-term debt;
•$13.4 million in new debt issuance costs from our Notes offering and asset-based lending credit agreement;
•$12.0 million in net payments on our line of credit under our previous Credit Facility;
•$7.4 million in payments of the working capital adjustment and other items for the Allied Transaction; and
•$4.8 million in principal payments on capital lease obligations.
Mezzanine Equity
Total mezzanine equity increased $8.1 million primarily driven by paid-in-kind dividends and accretion associated with our Preferred Stock.
Total Equity
Total equity increased $0.5 million, driven primarily by $13.0 million from the issuance of common stock and $2.7 million in share-based compensation, partially offset by $8.7 million in paid in-kind and deemed dividends associated with our Preferred Stock, a $5.8 million net loss and $0.5 million in taxes paid related to the net settlement of shares.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary ongoing sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash on the balance sheet, cash flows generated by operating activities, borrowings under the Notes, proceeds from the issuance of common stock and availability under our asset-based lending credit agreement. Due to longer sales cycles, driven by the increase in the size, scope and complexity of remediation and compliance projects that we are bidding on, we have experienced contract initiation delays and project completion delays that have adversely affected our revenue and overall liquidity. Our long and complex projects require us to
expend large sums of working capital, and delays in payment receipts, project commencement or project completion can adversely affect our financial position and the cash flows that typically fund our expenditures.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $24.3 million and borrowing capacity under our Asset Based Lending Credit Agreement of $13.2 million, for total liquidity of $37.5 million. We believe our cash on hand and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to cover our working capital requirements and debt obligations for the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table is a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash and restricted cash (used in) provided by operating activities decreased $22.7 million to $10.2 million of net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $12.5 million of net cash provided by operating activities. The change in cash flows provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to:
▪a decrease in net loss of $48.9 million.
▪a decrease in non-working capital adjustments to net loss of $71.3 million, primarily due to a decrease of $39.9 million in impairment expense, an increase of $24.1 million in (gain) loss on sale of property and equipment, a decrease of $8.0 million in loss on extinguishment of debt, $5.6 million in gain on a sales-type lease, $3.6 million in gain on ARO settlements, an increase of $2.7 million in (income) loss from equity method investment and a decrease of $1.6 million in paid-in-kind interest on long-term debt. These changes were partially offset by the absence of $9.7 million in gain on change in contingent payment liability and an increase of $4.7 million in depreciation and amortization during the year ended December 31, 2021.
▪a decrease of $0.3 million from all other operating activities.
Investing Activities
Net cash and restricted cash provided by investing activities increased $14.4 million to $56.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $42.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash flows provided by investing activities was primarily attributable to a $37.2 increase in proceeds from the sales of real estate, property and equipment, primarily from real estate and scrap sales associated with the Gibbons Creek Transaction, $34.9 million in cash and restricted cash received from the Gibbons Creek Transaction, and $1.0 million of distributions received from our equity method investment. These increases were partially offset by the absence of $34.9 million of proceeds from the sale of a subsidiary, net of subsidiary cash, $7.0 million in proceeds received from a sales-leaseback transaction, payments of $7.4 million of the working capital adjustment and other items resulting from the Allied Transaction and an increase in capital and land improvement expenditures of $4.2 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash and restricted cash used in financing activities decreased $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, to $16.3 million as compared to $31.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash flows used in financing activities was primarily attributable to a $156.3 million increase in proceeds received from long-term debt, $13.0 million of proceeds received from the issuance of common stock and a decrease of $1.4 million in distributions to our non-controlling interest. These changes were partially offset by an $159.5 million increase in principal payments on long-term debt and capital lease obligations, the absence of $24.3 million of proceeds received from Preferred Stock issuance, an $11.8 million increase in payments of debt issuance costs and the change in net activity of $5.0 million on the line of credit.
Working Capital
Our working capital, which we define as total current assets less total current liabilities, totaled $31.5 million at December 31, 2021 as compared to $21.5 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase in net working capital for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to:
•increases in restricted cash associated with the Gibbons Creek Transaction and the cash collateral deposits for our letters of credit;
•increases in contract assets and trade accounts receivable primarily due to an increase in the number of remediation and compliance projects and changes in the timing of the related billings and collections associated with these projects; and
•decreases in current maturities of capital lease obligations and notes payable due to the refinance of our previous Credit Facility into the Notes and our use of the proceeds from the Notes, along with cash from the sale of equity to B. Riley, to fully repay and terminate the Credit Facility as it became due and payable.
These changes were partially offset by:
•increases in the current portion of our asset retirement obligations primarily driven by the AROs acquired in the Gibbon Creek Transaction and the estimated timing of such remediation activities; and
•increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, primarily driven by an increase in the number of remediation and compliance projects and changes in the timing of the related payments to vendors associated with these projects.
Our Debt Agreements
Senior Notes
On August 25, 2021, the Company completed an offering of $135.0 million, in the aggregate, of the Company’s Notes, which amount includes the exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase an additional $5.0 million aggregate principal amount of Notes.
The Notes were sold pursuant to the Company’s Registration Statement on Form S-1, as amended (File No. 333-258650), which was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 20, 2021. The Notes were issued pursuant to the First Supplemental Indenture (the “First Supplemental Indenture”), dated as of August 25, 2021, between the Company and Wilmington Savings Fund Society, FSB, as trustee (the “Trustee”). The First Supplemental Indenture supplements the Indenture entered into by and between the Company and the Trustee, dated as of August 25, 2021 (the “Base Indenture” and, together with the First Supplemental Indenture, the “Indenture”).
The public offering price of the Notes was 100.0% of the principal amount. The Company received proceeds before payment of expenses and other fees of $135.0 million. The Company used the proceeds, along with cash from the issuance of $13.0 million of common stock, to fully repay and terminate the Company’s Credit Facility, as defined below.
The Notes bear interest at the rate of 8.50% per annum. Interest on the Notes is payable quarterly in arrears on January 31, April 30, July 31 and October 31 of each year, commencing October 31, 2021. The Notes will mature on August 31, 2026.
The Company may redeem the Notes for cash in whole or in part at any time (i) on or after August 31, 2023 and prior to August 31, 2024, at a price equal to 103% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption, (ii) on or after August 31, 2024 and prior to August 31, 2025, at a price equal to 102% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption, and (iii) on or after August 31, 2025 and prior to maturity, at a price equal to 100% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. On and after any redemption date, interest will cease to accrue on the redeemed Notes. If the Company is redeeming less than all of the Notes, the Trustee will select the Notes to be redeemed by such method as the Trustee deems fair and appropriate in accordance with methods generally used at the time of selection by fiduciaries in similar circumstances.
The Indenture also contains customary event of default and cure provisions. If an uncured default occurs and is continuing, the Trustee or the holders of not less than 25% in aggregate principal amount of the Notes may declare the Notes to be immediately due and payable.
The Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and rank equal in right of payment with the Company’s existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness.
As a result of the issuance of the Notes, $12,116 of third-party fees were capitalized as debt issuance costs that will be amortized through interest expense, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations using the effective interest method through the maturity date of the Notes.
Asset-Based Lending Credit Agreement
On November 9, 2021, the Company entered into a new Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“JPMorgan”), as administrative agent, the lenders party thereto and certain subsidiary guarantors named therein. The Credit
Agreement provides for a four-year senior secured revolving credit facility with initial aggregate commitments from the lenders of $30.0 million, which includes $5.0 million available for swingline loans, plus an additional $5.0 million of capacity available for the issuance of letters of credit if supported by cash collateral provided by the Company (with a right to increase such amount by up to an additional $5.0 million) (“Aggregate Revolving Commitments”). Availability under the Credit Agreement is subject to a borrowing base calculated based on the value of certain eligible accounts receivable, inventory, and equipment of the Company and subject to redeterminations made in good faith and in the exercise of permitted discretion of JPMorgan. Proceeds of the Credit Agreements may be used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
The Credit Agreement provides for borrowings of either base rate loans or Eurodollar loans. Principal amounts borrowed are payable on the maturity date with such borrowings bearing interest that is payable (i) with respect to base rate loans, monthly and (ii) with respect to Eurodollar loans, the last day of each Interest Period (as defined below); provided that if any Interest Period for a Eurodollar loan exceeds three months, interest will be payable on the respective dates that fall every three months after the beginning of such Interest Period. Eurodollar Loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the Adjusted LIBOR for one, three or six months (the “Interest Period”), plus an applicable margin of 2.25%. Base rate loans bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the greatest of (i) the agent bank’s reference rate, (ii) the federal funds effective rate plus 50 basis points and (iii) the rate for one month Adjusted LIBOR loans plus 100 basis points, plus an applicable rate of 125 basis points. The Credit Agreement contains a provision for sustainability adjustments annually that will impact the applicable margin by between positive 0.05% and negative 0.05% based on the achievement, or lack thereof, of certain metrics agreed upon between JPMorgan and the Company and publicly reported through the Company’s annual non-financial sustainability report.
The Credit Agreement is guaranteed by certain of the Company’s subsidiaries and is secured by substantially all of the Company’s and such subsidiaries’ assets. The Credit Agreement contains customary restrictive covenants for asset-based loans that may limit the Company’s ability to, among other things: incur additional indebtedness, sell assets, make loans to others, make investments, pay cash dividends to common stockholders, limit or restrict payments of cash dividends on preferred equity, enter into mergers, make certain restricted payments, incur liens, and engage in certain other transactions without the prior consent of the lenders.
A covenant testing period (“Covenant Testing Period”) is a period in which excess availability (which is defined in the Credit Agreement as the sum of availability and an amount up to $1.0 million) is less than the greater of (a) 12.5% of the lesser of the aggregate revolving commitments and the borrowing base, (b) the lesser of $7.5 million and the PP&E Component as defined in the Credit Agreement, and (c) $3.5 million, for three consecutive business days. During a Covenant Testing Period, the Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement, determined for any period of twelve (12) consecutive months ending on the last day of each fiscal quarter, of at least 1.00 to 1.00.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has not drawn on the Credit Agreement. Outstanding letters of credit under this Credit Agreement were $19,027 as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $13.4 million of outstanding letters of credit with JPMorgan and $5.6 million with Bank of America, N.A.
As a result of entering into the Credit Agreement, $1,366 of third-party fees were capitalized as debt issuance costs that will be amortized through interest expense, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations using the effective interest method through the maturity date of the Credit Agreement.
Letter of Credit Cash Collateralization Promissory Note
On August 25, 2021, Charah, LLC issued a Secured Promissory Note (the “Promissory Note”), as the borrower, in favor of B. Riley Commercial Capital, LLC, as the noteholder (the “Noteholder”), evidencing a loan in aggregate principal amount of $17.9 million made by the Noteholder to Charah, LLC. The loan outstanding under the Promissory Note bore interest at a rate of eight percent (8%) per annum and was set to mature on the thirteen-month anniversary of the effective date of the Promissory Note. The proceeds of the Promissory Note were used by the Company and its subsidiaries to collateralize the Company's existing letters of credit issued through Bank of America, N.A. The loan was repaid in full during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Previous Credit Facility
On September 21, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”) by and among us, the lenders party thereto from time to time and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Administrative Agent”). The Credit Facility included:
•A revolving loan not to exceed $50.0 million (the “Revolving Loan”);
•A term loan of $205.0 million (the “Closing Date Term Loan”); and
•A commitment to loan up to a further $25.0 million in term loans, which expired in March 2020 (the “Delayed Draw Commitment” and the term loans funded under such Delayed Draw Commitment, the “Delayed Draw Term Loan,” together with the Closing Date Term Loan, the “Term Loan”).
Pursuant to the terms of the Credit Facility and its related amendments, all amounts associated with the Revolving Loan and the Term Loan under the Credit Facility were set to mature in July 2022. The interest rates per annum applicable to the loans under the Credit Facility were based on a fluctuating rate of interest measured by reference to, at our election, either (i) the Eurodollar rate, currently LIBOR, or (ii) an alternative base rate. Various margins were added to the interest rate based on our consolidated net leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility). Customary fees were payable regarding the Credit Facility and included (i) commitment fees for the unused portions of the Credit Facility and (ii) fees on outstanding letters of credit. Amounts borrowed under the Credit Facility were secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company.
The Credit Facility contained various customary representations, warranties, restrictive covenants, certain affirmative covenants, including reporting requirements, and customary events of default.
Outstanding letters of credit under the previous Credit Facility were $11.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, using the proceeds from the Notes, along with cash from the sale of equity to B. Riley, to fully repay and terminate the Credit Facility, the Company paid $114.1 million of outstanding principal on the Closing Date Loan and $12.3 million of outstanding loans on the Revolver. Further, the Company paid $2.0 million of previously accrued fees required as consideration for Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement that was otherwise due and payable on the maturity date. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company wrote off unamortized debt issuance costs of $0.6 million as a result of this refinancing, which is included in loss on extinguishment of debt in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Equipment Financing Facilities and Capital Lease Equipment Financing
We have entered into various equipment financing arrangements to finance the acquisition of certain equipment (the “Equipment Financing Facilities”). As of December 31, 2021, we had $17.2 million of equipment notes outstanding. Each of the Equipment Financing Facilities includes non-financial covenants, and, as of December 31, 2021, we complied with all such covenants.
We have entered into various equipment capital lease financing arrangements to finance the acquisition of certain equipment. As of December 31, 2021, we had $30.4 million of future minimum lease payments related to this equipment.
Series A Preferred Stock
As a condition to the Third Amendment, the Company entered into an agreement with an investment fund affiliated with Bernhard Capital Partners Management, LP (“BCP”) to sell 26,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Preferred Stock”), for net proceeds of approximately $25.2 million in a private placement (the “Preferred Stock Offering”). The Preferred Stock has an initial liquidation preference of $1,000 per share and pays a dividend at the rate of 10% per annum in cash, or 13% if the Company elects to pay dividends in-kind by adding such amount to the liquidation preference. Upon meeting certain “specified payment conditions,” the Company has the ability under the Asset-Based Lending Credit Agreement to pay cash dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock. However, the Company intends to pay dividends-in-kind for the foreseeable future. We used proceeds from the Preferred Stock Offering for liquidity and general corporate purposes.
For more information related to the Series A Preferred Stock, see Note 12 “Mezzanine Equity" to the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Common Stock Issuances
In August 2021, the Company executed a stock purchase agreement with a previously unrelated third party, B. Riley, and issued 2.9 million shares of common stock at $4.50 per share in a private placement for total proceeds of $13.0 million. Pursuant to the terms of the stock purchase agreement, B. Riley entered into an Investor Rights Agreement and appointed one director to the Company's board of directors.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table sets forth our material cash requirements from contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
(1)We lease equipment and office facilities under non-cancellable operating leases.
(2)Contingent payments for acquisitions and the asset retirement obligation are not included in the table above because such payments' timing is uncertain. There are no uncertain tax positions.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. before income from discontinued operations, net of tax, interest expense, net, loss on extinguishment of debt, impairment expense, gain on change in contingent payment liability, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, equity-based compensation, the Brickhaven contract deemed termination revenue reversal and transaction-related expenses and other items. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to total revenue.
We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are useful performance measures because they allow for an effective evaluation of our operating performance compared to our peers, without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net loss attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. in arriving at Adjusted EBITDA because these amounts are either non-recurring or can vary substantially within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures and the method by which the assets were acquired. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net loss attributable to Charah Solutions, Inc. determined according to GAAP. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in Adjusted EBITDA. Our Adjusted EBITDA presentation should not be construed as an indication that our results will be unaffected by the items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA. Our computations of Adjusted EBITDA may not be identical to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We use Adjusted EBITDA margin to measure our business's success in managing our cost base and improving profitability. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss attributable to Charah Solutions Inc., our most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, along with our Adjusted EBITDA margin.
The table below represents the consolidated financial information of Charah Solutions for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(1)Represents amounts for continuing operations only.
(2)Represents expenses associated with the Amendment to the Credit Facility, non-recurring legal costs and expenses and other miscellaneous items.
(3)Adjusted EBITDA margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents the ratio of Adjusted EBITDA to total revenue. We use Adjusted EBITDA margin to measure the success of our businesses in managing our cost base and improving profitability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. In connection with preparing our financial statements, we are required to make assumptions and estimates about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expense, and related disclosures. We base our assumptions, estimates, and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant when preparing our consolidated financial statements. Regularly, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates, and judgments to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ materially from our assumptions and estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included herein. Our critical accounting policies are described below to provide a better understanding of our estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Significant accounting estimates are important to the representation of our financial position and results of operations and involve our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances through the date of the issuance of our financial statements.
Revenue
To determine revenue recognition for contracts, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. This evaluation requires significant judgment, and the decision to combine a group of contracts or separate a combined or single contract into multiple performance obligations could change the amount of revenue and profit recorded in a given period. Contracts are considered to have a single performance obligation if the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts primarily because we provide a service that involves multiple inter-related and integrated tasks to achieve the completion of a specific, single project. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation for contracts with multiple performance obligations using our best estimate of the stand-alone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract.
For sales and service contracts where we have the right to consideration from the customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value received by the customer based on our performance to date, revenue is recognized at a point in time when services are performed and contractually billable. Certain service contracts contain provisions dictating fluctuating rates per unit for the certain services in which the rates are not directly related to changes in the Company’s effort to perform under the contract. We recognize revenue based on the stand-alone selling price per unit for such contracts, calculated as the average rate per unit over the term of those contractual rates. This creates a contract asset or liability for the difference between the revenue recognized and the amount billed to the customer.
Under the typical payment terms of our services contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, at periodic intervals (e.g., weekly, biweekly or monthly).
We recognize revenue over time, as performance obligations are satisfied, for substantially all of our construction contracts due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. For most of our construction contracts, the customer contracts with us to provide a service that involves multiple inter-related and integrated tasks to complete a specific, single project and is therefore accounted for as a single performance obligation. We recognize revenue using the cost-to-cost input method, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs. This method is the most accurate measure of our contract performance because it depicts the company’s performance in transferring control of goods or services promised to customers according to a reasonable measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation.
Contract costs include all direct material, labor and subcontractor costs and indirect costs related to contract performance. The costs incurred that do not relate directly to transferring a service to the customer are excluded from the input method used to recognize revenue. Project mobilization costs are generally charged to the project as incurred when they are an integrated part of the performance obligation being transferred to the client. Pre-contract costs are expensed as incurred unless they are expected to be recovered from the client.
It is common for our contracts to contain contract provisions that give rise to variable consideration such as unpriced change orders or volume discounts that may either increase or decrease the transaction price. We estimate the amount of variable consideration at the expected value or most likely amount, depending on which is determined to be more predictive of the amount to which the Company will be entitled. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price when it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur or when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include such amounts in the transaction price are based largely on our assessment of legal enforceability, anticipated performance, industry business practices, and any other information (historical, current or forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. Variable consideration associated with unapproved change orders is included in the transaction price only to the extent of costs incurred.
We provide limited warranties to customers for work performed under our contracts. Such warranties are not sold separately, assure that the services comply with the agreed-upon specifications and legal requirements and do not provide customers with a service in addition to assurance of compliance with agreed-upon specifications. Accordingly, these types of warranties are not considered to be separate performance obligations. Historically, warranty claims have not resulted in material costs incurred by the Company.
Due to the nature of the work required to be performed on many of our performance obligations, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts, we routinely review and update our contract-related estimates through a disciplined project review process in which management reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations and the estimated costs at completion. As part of this process, management reviews information including, but not limited to, outstanding contract matters, progress towards completion, program schedule and the associated changes in estimates of revenue and costs. Management must make assumptions and estimates regarding the availability and productivity of labor, the complexity of the work to be performed, the availability and cost of materials, the performance of subcontractors, and the availability and timing of funding from the customer, along with other risks inherent in performing services under all contracts where we recognize revenue over-time using the cost-to-cost method.
We recognize changes in contract estimates on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the changes are identified. Such changes in contract estimates can result in recognition of revenue in a current period for performance obligations that were satisfied or partially satisfied in prior periods. Changes in contract estimates may also result in the reversal of previously recognized revenue if the current estimate differs from the previous estimate. If at any time the estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the total loss in the period it is identified.
Contracts are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements. Most of our contract modifications are for goods or services that are not distinct from existing contracts due to the significant integration provided in
the context of the contract and are accounted for as if they were part of the original contract. The effect of a contract modification on the transaction price and our measure of progress for the performance obligation to which it relates is recognized as an adjustment to revenue (either as an increase in or a reduction of revenue) on a cumulative catch-up basis. We account for contract modifications when the modification results in the promise to deliver additional goods or services that are distinct and the increase in the price of the contract is for the same amount as the stand-alone selling price of the additional goods or services included in the modification.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the cost of an acquisition purchase price over the fair value of acquired net assets, and such amounts are reported separately as goodwill on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Our total goodwill resulted from applying “push-down” accounting associated with BCP’s January 2017 acquisition of a controlling equity position in Charah Management and the acquisition of certain assets and liabilities of SCB.
Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at least annually, at October 1st of each year, or more often if events or circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. We test goodwill of the Company as a whole since we concluded the Company was a single reporting unit. We may elect to perform a qualitative assessment of our reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the reporting units' fair value is greater than their carrying value. If a qualitative assessment is not performed, or if as a result of a qualitative assessment it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then the reporting unit’s fair value is compared to its carrying value. We performed a quantitative assessment of the Company using a market approach whereby the market capitalization of the Company was compared to its carrying value. The market capitalization was derived from the Company's publicly traded stock price.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We assess our trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset at least annually as of October 1 for impairment, or more frequently if certain events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset below its carrying value. The Charah Solutions trade name fair value is based upon the income approach, primarily utilizing the relief from royalty methodology. This methodology assumes that a third party would be willing to pay a royalty to obtain the rights to use the comparable asset in place of ownership. An impairment loss is recognized when the intangible asset's estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. Fair value calculation requires significant judgments in determining both the assets’ estimated cash flows and the appropriate discount and royalty rates applied to those cash flows to determine fair value. Variations in economic conditions or a change in general consumer demands, operating results estimates or the application of alternative assumptions could produce significantly different results.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we performed a quantitative assessment of our trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset and determined there was no impairment. For the period between the impairment testing date and year-end, there were no indicators of impairment. If actual future results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, we may be required to record impairment charges in the future. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment of our Charah Solutions trade name intangible asset of $21.0 million. As part of the October 1, 2020 annual impairment test, we identified a decrease in the royalty rate used in the valuation primarily attributable to the Company's recent performance.
Some of the inherent estimates and assumptions used in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset are outside management control, including interest rates, cost of capital, tax rates and credit ratings. As for the indefinite-lived intangible asset, the most significant assumptions used are the revenue growth rate, the royalty rate, and the discount rate. A decrease in the revenue growth rate, a decrease in the royalty rate, or an increase in the discount rate could result in a future impairment. We will continue to monitor our Charah Solutions trade name for any triggering events or other signs of impairment. We may be required to perform additional impairment testing based on changes in the economic environment, disruptions to our business, significant declines in our operating results and other factors that could result in impairment charges in the future. Although management cannot predict when improvements in macroeconomic conditions will occur, if contract awards decline significantly in the future or if operational activity deteriorates significantly from current levels, it is reasonably likely the Company will be required to record impairment charges in the future.
Deferred Taxes, Valuation Allowance
As discussed in Note 21, Income Taxes, to our consolidated financial statements, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. We record a valuation allowance to reduce certain deferred tax assets to amounts that are more-likely-than-not to be realized. We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the valuation allowance and adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. The factors used to assess the likelihood of realization include our forecast of future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, future reversals of existing
taxable temporary differences and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets.
Based on the available evidence as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we could not conclude it is more likely than not certain deferred tax assets will be realized. Therefore, a valuation allowance of $19.9 million and $17.2 million, respectively, was recorded against our deferred tax assets. We will continue to evaluate the need for a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets in future periods.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The Company has land and structural fill assets with corresponding obligations to restore such assets at the end of their operation. Estimating the future closure and post-closure costs is difficult and requires management to make estimates and judgments because these obligations are over many years in the future. Asset retirement obligations (“ARO”) associated with retiring long-lived assets are recognized as a liability in the period in which a legal obligation is incurred and becomes determinable. The ARO liability reflects the estimated present value of the closure and post-closure activities associated with the Company’s land and structural fill assets. The Company utilizes current retirement costs to estimate the expected cash outflows for retirement obligations.
Inherent in the present value calculation are numerous assumptions and judgments, including the ultimate settlement amounts, inflation factors, credit-adjusted discount rates, timing of settlement, and changes in the legal, regulatory, environmental and political environments. To the extent future revisions to these assumptions impact the present value of the existing ARO liability, a corresponding adjustment is made to the land and/or structural fill balance. Accretion expense is recognized over time as the discounted liability is accreted to its expected settlement value. Gains and losses on ARO settlement are recognized as specific remediation tasks are performed. These gains and losses are determined based on the differences between the estimated costs used in the measurement of the fair value of the Company's AROs and the actual costs incurred for specific remediation tasks recognized on a proportionate basis.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” to our historical consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, included elsewhere herein, for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Under the JOBS Act, we meet the definition of an “emerging growth company,” which allows us to have an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act. We intend to take advantage of all of the reduced reporting requirements and exemptions, including the longer phase-in periods for adopting new or revised financial accounting standards under Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act until we are no longer an emerging growth company.