ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion includes forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for certain cautionary information regarding forward-looking statements and see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A, for certain factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those predicted in those statements. This discussion should also be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW AND BUSINESS OUTLOOK
We are a global leader in chemistry solutions and highly engineered equipment and technologies that help companies drill for and produce oil and gas safely, efficiently and sustainably around the world. Our products provide efficient and safe operations throughout the lifecycle of a well with a focus on the production phase of wells. Our business is organized into four reportable segments: Production Chemical Technologies, Production & Automation Technologies, Drilling Technologies, and Reservoir Chemical Technologies and we refer to the Production Chemical Technologies segment and Reservoir Chemical Technologies segment together as the Chemical Technologies business.
Recent Events
On July 2, 2021, we acquired Scientific Aviation, Inc. (“Scientific”), a market leader in site-specific and regional methane emissions monitoring solutions for periodic and continuous monitoring applications. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid an initial amount of $10.0 million, net of cash acquired. We may also be required to make future payments of up to an additional $10.0 million, contingent on the future performance of Scientific. The results of Scientific are included within our Production & Automation Technologies segment.
On September 7, 2021, we sold certain assets associated with our chemical manufacturing plant in Corsicana, Texas (the “Corsicana Plant”), including all of the property, plant and equipment associated therewith and all other assets necessary to operate the plant. We received $68.8 million in cash and recognized a net gain of $38.0 million, which is included in our Reservoir Chemical Technologies segment. Proceeds from the sale were used to pay a portion of the $90.0 million of the Notes redeemed on September 23, 2021.
On December 8, 2021, we acquired Tomson Technologies LLC and Group 2 Technologies LLC, leaders in nano technology platforms with proven commercial applications helping energy companies lower the carbon footprint and operating expenses of their oil and gas production operations. Under the terms of the agreement, we paid an initial amount of $10.1 million, net of cash acquired and results have been included in our Production Chemical Technologies segment. We may also be required to make future payments of up to an additional $13.0 million, contingent on the future performance of the business.
Business Environment
We monitor macro-economic conditions and industry-specific drivers and key risk factors affecting our business segments as we formulate our strategic plans and make decisions related to allocating capital and human resources. Our business segments provide a broad range of technologies and products to support oil and gas production, exploration and development and the midstream sector. As a result, we are substantially dependent upon global oil production levels, as well as new investment activity levels in the oil and gas and midstream sectors. Demand for our products, technologies and services is impacted by overall global demand for oil and gas, ongoing depletion rates of existing oil and gas wells, and our customers’ willingness to invest in the exploration and development of new oil and gas resources. Our customers determine their operating and capital budgets based on current and expected future crude oil and natural gas prices, U.S. and worldwide rig count, U.S. well completions and expectation of industry cost levels, among other factors. Crude oil and natural gas prices are impacted by supply and demand, which are influenced by geopolitical, macroeconomic, and local events, and have historically been subject to substantial volatility and cyclicality. Rig count, footage drilled, and E&P investment by oil and gas operators have often been used as leading indicators for the level of drilling and development activity and future production levels in the oil and gas sector.
Market Conditions and Outlook
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly disrupted the oil and gas markets with unprecedented fluctuations in the supply and demand of crude oil and resulting rapid decline of oil prices during 2020. In response to the significant reduction in oil prices,
customer spending for E&P activity deteriorated at a rapid pace due to reduced drilling activities, lower budgeted capital spending and options to reduce operating expenditures via cost cutting initiatives.
Throughout 2021, crude oil prices increased, reaching a peak of $86 in October, the highest since 2018. This is attributed to an increase in demand as the global economy reopened from the COVID-19 lockdowns coupled with continuing OPEC+ production curtailments and reduced U.S. oil production resulting from COVID-19 impacts and public U.S. oil and gas companies focus on free cash generation and capital investment restraints. The U.S. oil and gas rig count has also grown steadily during 2021, although it remains below pre-pandemic levels and OPEC+ production curtailments are being reduced. We continue to experience positive momentum across the industry. However, as our sales volumes have increased, we are experiencing raw material and logistics cost inflation and supply chain constraints. As we look to 2022, we expect continued sales volume improvements, selling price increase realization, and cost synergy delivery to offset raw material cost inflation.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenue. Revenue for the consolidated entity increased $1.2 billion, or 62%, in 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to $975.3 million of incremental revenues associated with a full year of results within our acquired Chemical Technologies business. The increase in revenue was further supplemented by an increase in Production & Automation Technologies revenue of $146.5 million and Drilling Technologies revenue of $55.9 million year-over-year as a result of an increase in U.S. land-based rig count and associated increase in customer spending on drilling activities, which positively impacted sales volumes.
Gross profit. Gross profit increased $334.1 million, or 82%, year-over year, primarily due to $207.1 million generated by our Chemical Technologies business, supplemented by increased volumes in our Production & Automation Technologies and Drilling Technologies segments noted above as well as cost savings from restructuring actions and other cost reduction efforts in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense increased $106.6 million, or 23%, year-over-year, primarily due to $113.8 million of incremental expenses associated with our acquired Chemical Technologies business as well as the restoration of salaries from the temporary employee salary and benefit reduction instituted during 2020 to address the COVID-19 pandemic impact on commodity prices and oil and gas production. These increases were partially offset by fewer acquisition and integration related costs associated with the acquisition of the Chemical Technologies business
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net remained flat year-over-year.
Other income (expense), net. Other income (expense), net increased $30.9 million year-over-year primarily due to a $38.0 million net gain recognized on the sale of the Corsicana Plant during 2021.
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes. The effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 25.2% and 2.7%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the absence of impairment on non-taxable goodwill and a full year of
activities from our Chemical Technologies business, which increased foreign earnings and withholding taxes, as well as valuation allowances in loss jurisdictions and on foreign tax credits.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Production Chemical Technologies
Revenue. Production Chemical Technologies revenue increased $849.6 million, or 86%, compared to the prior year mainly due to incremental revenues associated with a full year of operating results. We also experienced continued sales increases in North America as customers secured additional products to mitigate the effect of supply chain constraints. Additionally, global pricing increases were implemented to mitigate raw material inflation.
Operating profit. Production Chemical Technologies operating profit increased $71.2 million in 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to the higher pricing and sales volumes noted above, partially offset by certain raw materials inflation.
Production & Automation Technologies
Revenue. Revenue increased $146.5 million, or 24%, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to an increase in customer spending, market share expansion and price increases to mitigate raw material inflation. Customer spending was driven by the strong market recovery, which led to higher volumes across our product offerings in North America. Additionally, the acquisition of Scientific on July 2, 2021 contributed $7.0 million to the increased revenue in 2021.
Operating profit. Operating profit increased $743.6 million compared to the prior year primarily due to goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges of $657.3 million recognized during 2020. Absent the impairment charges, operating profit increased due to higher sales volumes as noted above, partially offset by material cost inflation and supply chain disruptions.
Drilling Technologies
Revenue. Revenue increased $55.9 million, or 48%, compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in the North American and international land drilling activity which has positively impacted sales volumes of our diamond cutters and diamond bearings products. During 2020, there was a steep decline in U.S. land-based rig count as a result of the pandemic which resulted in a decline in customer spending on drilling activities, which negatively impacted sales volumes of our diamond cutters and diamond bearings products during 2020.
Operating profit. Operating profit increased $27.8 million compared to the prior year as a result of increased sales volumes and cost savings from restructuring actions as well as other cost reduction efforts taken during 2020.
Reservoir Chemical Technologies
Revenue. Reservoir Chemical Technologies revenue increased $79.6 million, or 129%, compared to the prior year mainly due to incremental revenues associated with a full year of operating results. Additionally, revenue increased due to growth in direct sales to E&P companies in North America.
Operating profit. Reservoir Chemical Technologies operating profit increased $36.5 million compared to the prior year primarily due to a $38.0 million net gain recognized on the sale of the Corsicana Plant.
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Overview
Our primary source of cash is from operating activities. We have historically generated, and expect to continue to generate, positive cash flow from operations. Cash generated from operations is generally allocated to working capital requirements, investments to support profitable revenue growth and maintain our facilities and systems, acquisitions that create value through add-on capabilities that broaden our existing businesses and deliver our growth strategy, as well as debt repayments to reduce our leverage.
During 2021, the Company completed the redemption of certain of the Company’s 6.375% Senior Notes (the “Senior Notes”) at 104.781% of the principal amount thereof. We repurchased $185.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes for $196.6 million in cash, including $2.7 million in accrued interest.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $251.7 million compared to $201.4 million at December 31, 2020, primarily for working capital and operational purposes. At December 31, 2021, we had total liquidity of $611.4 million, comprised of $251.7 million of cash, excluding $3.5 million of restricted cash, and $359.7 million of available capacity on our revolver.
At December 31, 2021, we had a long-term debt balance of $697.7 million, net of the current portion of long-term debt of $26.9 million, primarily consisting of our term loan due 2027 with a principal amount of $496.7 million, the Notes due in 2026 with a principal amount of $92.0 million, and our term loan due in 2025 with a principal amount of $140.0 million. We also have access to a revolving credit facility of $359.7 million which expires in May 2023, which was undrawn at December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately $116.4 million, or 46%, of our cash balances were held outside the U.S. for the primary purpose of working capital and operational support needs. All of our cash held outside the U.S. could be repatriated and could be subject to foreign withholding taxes; however, the majority of our prior year foreign earnings are permanently reinvested and therefore no deferred taxes are recorded. We have $20.2 million in deferred tax liabilities associated with foreign withholding taxes on our foreign earnings from jurisdictions which are not asserted to be permanently reinvested.
Outlook
We expect to generate cash to support liquidity and business requirements through operations and, if necessary, through our revolving credit facility. Volatility in credit, equity and commodity markets can create uncertainty for our businesses. However, the Company believes, based on our current financial condition and current expectations of future market conditions, that we will meet our short- and long-term needs with a combination of cash on hand, cash generated from operations, our revolving credit facility and access to capital markets.
Over the next year, we expect to fund our capital expenditures and reduce outstanding debt through earnings and working capital improvements. In 2022, we project capital spending to be approximately 3.5% of revenue inclusive of capital investments for our electric submersible pump leased assets.
Additionally, we have other purchase obligations as well as operating and finance leases for real estate, vehicles and equipment that include future minimum payments with initial terms of one year or more. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. See Note 9-Commitments and Contingencies and Note 10-Leases included in Part II, Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We continue to evaluate acquisitions that meet our strategic priorities, expand our technology and product portfolio, improve our cost position or productivity, or broaden our geographic reach.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $80.2 million in outstanding letters of credit, surety bonds, and guarantees which expire at various dates through 2039. These financial instruments are primarily maintained as security for insurance, warranty, and other performance obligations. Generally, we would only be liable for the amount of these letters of credit and surety bonds in the event of default in the performance of our obligations, the probability of which we believe is remote.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities in 2021 increased $18.2 million compared to 2020. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by an increase in our results of operations. The results of our Chemical Technologies business include twelve months of activity in 2021 as compared to 2020 including the period from the acquisition date of June 3, 2020 through the end of the period. Changes in working capital items used cash of $6.3 million during 2021 compared to cash generated of $157.7 million during 2020. The change in working capital items primarily related to cash outflows for inventory procurement and an increase in accounts receivable as a result of revenue growth during the period, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable.
Expenditures for assets that are placed into our lease asset program expected to be recovered through sale are reported in leased assets in the operating section of our consolidated statements of cash flows. All other capitalizable expenditures for assets that are placed into our lease asset program are classified as capital expenditures in the investing section of our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $37.4 million in 2021, and was comprised of capital expenditures of $84.5 million, acquisitions, net of cash acquired, of $20.1 million, and purchases of investments of $4.9 million. This was partially offset by $72.0 million of cash proceeds from the sale of fixed assets, primarily related to the sale of the Corsicana Plant.
Cash provided by investing activities was $22.1 million in 2020 and was primarily comprised of cash acquired in the Merger of $57.6 million and $9.7 million of cash proceeds on sale of fixed assets, partially offset by capital expenditures of $45.2 million.
Capital expenditures in the investing cash flows section of our consolidated statement of cash flows include expenditures for long-term equipment expected to be placed into our leased asset program. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, capital expenditures consisted mostly of infrastructure related capital spending and investment in assets for our leased asset program of $37.1 million and $20.8 million, respectively.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities of $234.3 million in 2021, was primarily the result of repayments totaling $223.4 million on our long-term debt, payments related to taxes withheld on stock-based compensation of $9.8 million, payments of finance lease obligations of $6.3 million, and distribution of $3.7 million to our non-controlling interests. This was partially offset by $8.8 million in cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Cash used in financing activities of $175.4 million in 2020 was primarily the result of repayments totaling $161.5 million on our long-term debt, $4.4 million in debt issuance costs related to the amendment of the credit agreement in contemplation of the Merger, $5.1 million of payments of finance lease obligations, payments related to taxes withheld on stock-based compensation of $3.1 million, and a distribution of $2.2 million to one of our non-controlling interests. Net borrowings under our revolving credit facility totaled zero in 2020 as we borrowed and fully repaid the borrowing within the same period.
Revolving Credit Facility
A summary of our revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2021 was as follows:
Additionally, we have three letters of credit outside of the revolving credit facility totaling approximately $1.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all restrictive covenants under our revolving credit facility.
See Note 8-Debt included in Part II, Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions about future events that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented and the related disclosures in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. Management reviewed these critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We believe the following critical accounting estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements address all important areas where the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change. See Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Part II, Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our significant accounting policies.
Determination of Fair Value in Business Combinations
Accounting for the acquisition of a business requires allocation of the purchase price to the various assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their respective fair values. The determination of fair value requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, and in making these determinations management uses all available information. If necessary, we have up to one year after the acquisition closing date to finalize these fair value determinations. For tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination, the determination of fair value utilizes several valuation methodologies including discounted cash flows which has assumptions with respect to the timing and amount of future revenue and expenses associated with an asset. The assumptions made in performing these valuations include, but are not limited to, discount rate, future revenues and operating costs, projections of capital costs, royalty rate, and other assumptions believed to be consistent with those used by principal market participants. Depending on the magnitude of the acquisition and the specialized nature of these calculations, we often engage third-party specialists to assist management in evaluating our assumptions as well as appropriately measuring the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory is recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We evaluate the components of inventory on a regular basis for excess and obsolescence. We record the decline in the carrying value of estimated excess or obsolete inventory as a reduction of inventory and as an expense included in cost of goods and services in the period in which it is identified. Our estimate of excess and obsolete inventory is susceptible to change from period to period and requires management to make judgments about the future demand of inventory. Factors that could materially impact our estimate include changes in crude oil prices and its effect on the oil and gas industry, which would impact the demand for our products and services, as well as changes in the pattern of demand for the products that we offer. We believe our inventory valuation reserve is adequate to properly value potential excess and obsolete inventory as of December 31, 2021. However, any significant changes to the factors mentioned above could lead our estimate to change.
Long-Lived and Intangible Assets Valuation
Long-lived assets to be held and used, including property, plant and equipment, identifiable intangible assets being amortized and capitalized software costs are reviewed for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the long-lived asset may not be recoverable. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. If it is determined that an impairment loss occurred, the loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. The determination of future cash flows as well as the estimated fair value of long-lived assets involves significant estimates on the part of management. Because there usually is a lack of quoted market prices for long-lived assets, the fair value of impaired assets is typically determined based on the present values of expected future cash flows using discount rates believed to be consistent with those used by principal market participants, or based on a multiple of operating cash flow validated with historical market transactions of similar assets, where possible. The expected future cash flows used for impairment reviews and related fair value calculations are based on judgmental assessments of future productivity of the asset, operating costs and capital decisions and all available information at the date of review. If future market conditions deteriorate from our current expectations or assumptions, impairment of long-lived assets may be identified if we conclude that the carrying amounts are no longer recoverable. Long-lived assets classified as held for sale are reported at the disposal group’s fair value, less cost to sell, beginning in the period in which the held-for-sale criteria have been met. An impairment loss is recognized in the amount in which the carrying amount of the disposal group exceeds its fair value. The fair value of a disposal group is measured based on market information when available, such as negotiated selling price. Because there usually is a lack of quoted market prices for long-lived assets, the fair value of impaired held for sale assets is typically determined based on the present values of expected future cash flows using discount rates believed to be consistent with those used by principal market participants.
Valuation of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that our carrying amount of such goodwill may exceed the fair value. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level, which is at or one level below our operating segments. Our reporting units consist of Production Chemical Technologies, Production & Automation Technologies, Drilling Technologies, and Reservoir Chemical Technologies.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The fair values calculated in these impairment tests are determined using the discounted cash flow models, which require the use of significant unobservable inputs, representative of a Level 3 fair value measurement. The assumptions include discount rate, revenue growth rates, future operating margins, future capital expenditures, changes in working capital requirements and terminal growth rates. The goodwill impairment test involves comparing management’s estimate of fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, then goodwill is impaired to the extent of the difference; however, the impairment may not exceed the balance of goodwill assigned to that reporting unit.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, and deferred tax asset and liability balances reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining our consolidated income tax expense. In determining our current income tax provision, we assess temporary differences resulting from differing treatments of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. When we maintain deferred tax assets, we must assess the likelihood that these assets will be recovered through adjustments to future taxable income. To the extent we believe recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance to reduce the asset to a value we believe will be recoverable based on our expectation of future taxable income. We believe the accounting estimate related to the valuation allowance is a critical accounting estimate because it is susceptible to change from period to period, requires management to make assumptions about our future income over the lives of the deferred tax assets, and because the impact of increasing or decreasing the valuation allowance is potentially material to our results of operations.
The calculation of our income tax expense involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in numerous jurisdictions in which we operate. We recognize tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions when, in our judgment, it is more likely than not that such positions will be sustained on examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation, based on the technical merits. We adjust our liabilities for uncertain tax positions when our judgment changes as a result of new information previously unavailable. We routinely monitor the potential impact of these situations. The company has no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2-New Accounting Standards in Part II, Item 8.-Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.