Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to CIIG Capital Partners II, Inc. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on January 6, 2021 for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from January 6, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 6, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,518,280, which consists of formation and operational costs of $1,548,562, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $30,282.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 17, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 28,750,000 units, which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,750,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $287,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 12,062,500 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor generating gross proceeds of $12,062,500.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $291,812,500 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $16,342,432 in initial public offering related costs, including $5,750,000 of underwriting fees and $529,932 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 6, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $836,504. Net loss of $1,518,280 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $30,282. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $712,058 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $291,842,782 (including approximately $30,300 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $675,364. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be converted into warrants of the post initial business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our directors and officers. Our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 205-40, “Basis of Presentation - Going Concern,” management has determined that the expected shortfall in working capital over the period of time between the date the financial statements are issued and our estimated initial business combination date raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of our initial business combination or the date we are required to liquidate. Based on the above factors, management determined there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financial statements are issued. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern. Our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Company will agree to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on September 14, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $10,062,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. This presentation contemplates an initial business combination as the most likely outcome, in which case, both classes of common stock share pro rata in our income (loss). Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective as of January 06, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
GC pending analysis and clarification
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.