ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this annual report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this annual report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company using our proprietary Precision Timed Release (PTR) drug delivery platform technology to build and advance a pipeline of next-generation pharmaceutical products designed to improve the lives of patients suffering from frequently diagnosed conditions characterized by burdensome daily dosing regimens and suboptimal treatment outcomes. We are initially focusing our efforts on the treatment of Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Our PTR platform incorporates a proprietary Erosion Barrier Layer (EBL) designed to allow for the release of drug substance at specific, pre-defined time intervals, unlocking the potential for once-daily, multi-dose tablets. We believe there remains a significant, unmet need within the current treatment paradigm for true once-daily ADHD stimulant medications with lasting duration and a superior side effect profile to better serve the needs of patients throughout their entire active-day.
Since inception in 2012, our operations have focused on developing our product candidates, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and conducting clinical trials. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue. We have funded our operations through public and private capital raised. Cumulative capital raised from these sources, was approximately $63.8 million as of December 31, 2021.
We have incurred significant losses since our inception. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Our net losses were $20.7 million and $7.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $51.7 million.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses in the near term. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● seek regulatory approval for CTx-1301;
● continue research and development activities for our existing and new product candidates, primarily for CTx-1301;
● manufacture supplies for our preclinical studies and clinical trials, primarily for CTx-1301;
● operate as a public company; and
● establish or outsource commercial infrastructure to support sales and marketing for our product candidates.
Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development, regulatory approval and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings, or other capital sources, including potential collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of our product candidates.
CTx-1301: We have updated our clinical program for CTx-1301 (dexmethylphenidate), our lead investigational asset for the treatment of ADHD, based on FDA feedback regarding our CTx-1301 initial Pediatric Study Plan (iPSP), and longstanding guidance on the accelerated approval pathway under Section 505(b)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
We plan to commence two CTx-1301 Phase 3 clinical studies in 2022: (1) a fixed-dose pediatric and adolescent safety and efficacy study, which will enroll its first patient in the second quarter of 2022, and (2) a pediatric safety and efficacy dose-optimization study to assess the onset and duration of efficacy, which is targeted to begin in the second half of 2022. Results from the fixed dose study are expected in late 2022. Assuming we receive positive clinical results from our Phase 3 trials, we plan to submit an NDA for CTx-1301 in the second half of 2023 under the Section 505(b)(2) pathway.
We believe the updated clinical program for CTx-1301 accelerates the study timeline by condensing the number and design of studies, therefore potentially reducing the time and expense to submission of the NDA for CTx-1301 to the FDA for potential approval.
CTx-1302: We plan to initiate a Phase 1/2 bioavailability study in ADHD patients for CTx-1302 (dextroamphetamine), our second investigational asset for the treatment of ADHD, in 2023 and, if the results from this study are successful, we plan to initiate pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials in all patient segments for CTx-1302 in late 2023 with results expected in late 2024.
CTx-2103: We have embarked on a program to develop CTx-2103 (buspirone), which would expand the PTR platform within the anxiety therapeutic category. We plan to initiate a clinical trial for CTx-2103 in the first half of 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $16.5 million. Based on our operating plan, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our research and development and general and administrative expenses through late 2022. In addition, in order to achieve the filing of our NDA for CTx-1301 in the second half of 2023 for potential FDA approval, we believe that we will need approximately $15 million of additional capital. We will also need additional capital to advance our other programs. We are evaluating alternatives to raise additional capital, including equity and debt financing and non-dilutive strategic collaborations in the U.S. and abroad. In addition, we continue to evaluate commercial collaborations and strategic relationships with established pharmaceutical companies, which would provide us with more immediate access to marketing, sales, market access and distribution infrastructure. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We are continuing to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the extent of which will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the extent and severity of the impact on our service providers, suppliers, contract research organizations and our preclinical and clinical trials, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
While the full impact of the pandemic continues to evolve, the financial markets have been subject to significant volatility that may adversely impact our ability to enter into, modify, and negotiate favorable terms and conditions relative to equity and debt financing initiatives. The uncertain financial markets, disruptions in supply chains, mobility restraints, and changing priorities as well as volatile asset values may also affect our ability to enter into collaborations, joint ventures, and license and royalty agreements. The outbreak and government measures taken in response to the pandemic have also had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce, as worker shortages have occurred; supply chains have been disrupted; facilities and production have been suspended; and demand for certain goods and services, such as medical services and supplies, have spiked, while demand for other goods and services, such as travel, have fallen. We may face difficulties recruiting or retaining patients in our ongoing and planned preclinical and clinical trials if patients are affected by the virus or are fearful of traveling to our clinical trial sites. We and our third-party contract manufacturers, CROs, and clinical sites may also face disruptions in procuring items that are essential to our research and development activities, including, for example, medical and laboratory supplies used in our clinical trials or preclinical studies, in each case, that are sourced from abroad or for which there are shortages because of ongoing efforts to address the outbreak.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future impact our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain. While the pandemic did not materially affect our financial results and business operations in the year ended December 31, 2021, we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 may have on our financial position and operating results in future periods due to numerous uncertainties. Management continues to actively monitor the situation and the possible effects on our financial condition, operations, suppliers, vendors, our workforce and the overall industry. For additional information about risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our business, our financial condition or our results of operations, see “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” in this annual report.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
Since inception, we have not generated any revenue and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, or if we enter into collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from collaboration of license agreements.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in the discovery and development of our product candidates, and primarily include:
● expenses incurred under third party agreements with contract research organizations (CROs), and investigative sites, that conducted or will conduct our clinical trials and a portion of our pre-clinical activities;
● costs of raw materials, as well as manufacturing cost of our materials used in clinical trials and other development testing;
● expenses, including salaries and benefits of employees engaged in research and development activities;
● costs of manufacturing equipment, depreciation and other allocated expenses; and
● fees paid for contracted regulatory services as well as fees paid to regulatory authorities including the US Food and Drug Administration for review and approval of our product candidates.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Costs for external development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Excluding the 2021 noncash expense relating to profits interest units as described below, we expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue clinical development for our product candidates. As products enter later stages of clinical development, they will generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. Historically, our research and development costs have primarily related to the development of CTx-1301. As we advance CTx-1301, CTx-1302, and CTx-2103, as well as identify any other potential product candidates, we will continue to allocate our direct external research and development costs to the products. We expect to fund our research and development expenses from our current cash and cash equivalents and any future equity or debt financings, or other capital sources, including potential collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for our employees in administrative, executive and finance functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, accounting, audit, tax and consulting services, insurance, office, and travel expenses.
Excluding the 2021 noncash expense relating to profits interest units as described below, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our general and administrative headcount to support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax compliance services; director and officer insurance; and investor and public relations costs.
Interest and other income (expense), net
Interest and other income (expense), net consists of interest earned on our short-term investments and interest expense. The primary objective of our investment policy is liquidity and capital preservation.
Interest expense to date has consisted primarily of interest expense on notes payable to related parties, interest charged by certain vendors, and credit card interest. All related party notes were paid in full in December 2021 with proceeds from our IPO.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during a reporting period. Actual results could differ from estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgements and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include all direct and indirect costs associated with the development of the Company’s product candidates. These expenses include payments to third parties for research, development and manufacturing services, personnel costs and depreciation on manufacturing equipment. At the end of the reporting period, we compare payments made to third party service providers to the estimated progress toward completion of the research or development objectives. Such estimates are subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to service providers and the progress that we estimate have been made as a result of the service provided, we may record net prepaid or accrued expense relating to these costs.
Profits Interest Units
CTx established and adopted the Cingulate Therapeutics LLC Equity Incentive Plan (the “Plan”) to provide for issuance of Class C Profits Interest Units (PIU’s) to employees, equity Members, Board members and service providers eligible to receive PIU’s as an incentive under the Plan. As defined in the CTx Operating Agreement, all PIU’s issued under the Plan entitled the holder to participate pro rata in the profits, if any, of CTx over the stated Distribution Threshold, assuming a cash distribution was generally made to all Members, subject to any preference or priorities of the other classes of Units. The Class C PIU’s also held voting rights on a one-for-one basis.
We accounted for these awards under ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, Share Based Payment Awards, as equity classified thus recording compensation expense during the period in which the future achievement of the thresholds and targets to achieve payout was deemed probable. In connection with the Reorganization Merger, 8.5 million PIUs were exchanged for 1,158,008 shares of Cingulate common stock. The exchange of PIUs for common stock created a modification of the terms, character and rights of the PIUs and achievement of performance was considered probable. This resulted in us recognizing a noncash modification charge equal to $12,738,088, which charge was calculated based on our assessment of the fair value of the shares of Cingulate common stock on the date of the modification. No compensation expense had been recognized relating to the PIUs prior to the Reorganization Merger.
Stock-Based Compensation
Under our 2021 Omnibus Equity Incentive Plan, we granted non-qualified stock options to certain employees and directors in 2021 at the time of our IPO. The options were granted with a strike price of $6.00 per share, the price that the common shares were issued to the public in connection with the IPO. The term of these options is ten years with a four-year ratable vesting period.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense of $43,835 during the year ended December 31, 2021, based on the grant-date fair value of the options granted. The fair value of each option grant was estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value is amortized as compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period.
See footntote 10 to our consolidated financial statements for the assumptions that were used to estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development (R&D) expenses were $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.3 million or 65.1% from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was related to the recording of $4.6 million to R&D expense for a one-time noncash compensation charge for the modification of PIUs which occurred in the third quarter of 2021, offset by a decrease in clinical operations expense of $1.2 million due to a decrease in clinical activity. In early 2020, we incurred significant clinical costs relating to the completion of the phase 1/2 comparative bioavailability study for CTx-1301. During 2021, clinical activity primarily consisted of study start-up costs for one Phase 3 study for CTx-1301.
General and administrative expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative (G&A) expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Total G&A expenses were $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $10.3 million or 516.2% from the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily related to the recording of $8.1 million to G&A personnel expenses of a one-time noncash compensation charge relating to the modification of PIUs which occurred in the third quarter of 2021. In addition, the increase was due to an increase in personnel costs relating to annual compensation increases and the addition of personnel in late 2021, as well as an increase in directors’ and officers’ insurance costs and professional fees related to legal, consulting, audit and investor relations, as we were preparing to operate as a public company.
Interest and other income (expense), net
The following table summarizes interest and other income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Total interest and other income (expense), net in both 2021 and 2020 primarily relates to interest incurred on outstanding notes payable. In addition, in 2020, interest was charged by certain development vendors on outstanding balances. All notes payable were paid in full in December 2021 with proceeds from our IPO.
Cash Flows
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash used in operating activities was primarily due to the use of funds in our operations to develop our product candidates resulting in a net loss of $20.7 million, prior to the effects of two significant noncash items, the one-time noncash PIU charge of $12.7 million and depreciation expense of $0.7 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities included a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1.3 million mainly due to the payment in December 2021 of all deferred payroll amounts owed to employees. There was also an increase in prepaid expense of $1.3 million primarily relating to a down payment on our annual directors and officers insurance premium which increased significantly at the completion of our IPO.
Net cash used in operating activities was $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in operating activities was primarily due to the use of funds in our operations to develop our product candidates resulting in a net loss of $7.2 million, offset by depreciation expense of $0.7 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities included a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.4 million mainly due to the timing of payments to our service providers.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was related to the purchase of equipment to support our research and development.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the issuance of 4,166,666 shares of common stock and accompanying warrants in connection with our IPO at a share price of $6.00 per share of common stock and accompanying warrant. We received gross proceeds of $25.0 million and net proceeds of $20.4 million after deducting underwriter discounts and offering expenses paid by us. We also received $7.1 million related to the issuance of 3,243,201 equity units of CTx prior to our IPO. We paid $0.5 million for the repayment of notes payable from related parties in December 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to proceeds of the issuance of 5,050,141 equity units of CTx totaling $7.5 million. In addition, we received $0.95 million in proceeds from notes payable to related parties, of which $0.4 million was converted to members’ capital, and $0.1 million was repaid during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception in 2012 through December 31, 2021, we have not generated any revenue and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flow from our operations. Based on our current operating plan, we expect our cash and cash equivalents of $16.5 million as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through late 2022. In addition, in order to achieve the filing of our NDA for CTx-1301 in the second half of 2023 for potential FDA approval, we believe that we will need approximately $15 million of additional capital. We will also need additional capital to advance our other programs. However, it is difficult to predict our spending for our product candidates prior to obtaining FDA approval. Moreover, changing circumstances may cause us to expend cash significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more cash than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control.
Our policy is to invest any cash in excess of our immediate requirements in investments designed to preserve the principal balance and provide liquidity while producing a modest return on investment. Accordingly, our cash equivalents are invested primarily in money market funds which are currently providing only a minimal return given the current interest rate environment.
We expect to continue to incur substantial additional operating losses for at least the next several years as we continue to develop our product candidates and seek marketing approval and, subject to obtaining such approval, the eventual commercialization of our product candidates. If we obtain marketing approval for our product candidates, we will incur significant sales, marketing and outsourced manufacturing expenses. In addition, we expect to incur additional expenses to add operational, financial and information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our planned product commercialization efforts. We also expect to incur significant costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls and similar requirements applicable to us as a public company.
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
● the clinical development plans we establish for each product candidate;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates that we develop or may in-license;
● the terms of any collaboration agreements we may choose to execute;
● the outcome, timing and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the FDA or other comparable foreign regulatory authorities;
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us;
● the cost and timing of the implementation of commercial scale manufacturing activities; and
● the cost of establishing, or outsourcing, sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own.
To continue to grow our business over the longer term, we plan to commit substantial resources to research and development, clinical trials of our product candidates, and other operations and potential product acquisitions and in-licensing. We have evaluated and expect to continue to evaluate a wide array of strategic transactions as part of our plan to acquire or in-license and develop additional products and product candidates to augment our internal development pipeline. Strategic transaction opportunities that we may pursue could materially affect our liquidity and capital resources and may require us to incur additional indebtedness, seek equity capital or both. In addition, we may pursue development, acquisition or in-licensing of approved or development products in new or existing therapeutic areas or continue the expansion of our existing operations. Accordingly, we expect to continue to opportunistically seek access to additional capital to license or acquire additional products, product candidates or companies to expand our operations, or for general corporate purposes. Strategic transactions may require us to raise additional capital through one or more public or private debt or equity financings or could be structured as a collaboration or partnering arrangement. We have no arrangements, agreements, or understandings in place at the present time to enter into any acquisition, in-licensing or similar strategic business transaction. In addition, we continue to evaluate commercial collaborations and strategic relationships with established pharmaceutical companies, which would provide us with more immediate access to marketing, sales, market access and distribution infrastructure.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders will experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms, such as liquidation and other preferences that are not favorable to us or our existing stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 that will affect our future liquidity. Based on our current operating plan, we plan to satisfy the obligations identified below with cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021.
We entered into a patent and know-how licensing agreement with BDD Pharma Limited in August 2018. See “Item 1. Business - Material Agreements” for a description of this agreement. The Company may be required to pay BDD Pharma certain amounts in connection with clinical trial and regulatory milestones. The first milestone payment of $250,000 will likely become due in the next twelve months based on the dosing of the first patient in the Phase 3 fixed-dose pediatric and adolescent safety and efficacy study for CTx-1301. This payment was accrued in our 2021 financial statements.
We entered into an agreement with a CRO for the Phase 3 fixed-dose pediatric and adolescent safety and efficacy study for CTx-1301, in which we plan to enroll the first patient in the second quarter of 2022. We also entered into agreements with a CMO and other third parties for manufacture of the Phase 3 clinical supply of CTx-1301. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation and in some cases, wind-down costs. The exact amount of such obligations is dependent on the timing of termination and the terms of the related agreement and are not known.
We committed to purchase a piece of manufacturing equipment to be used in development activity. Installment payments on this piece of equipment have been made over the last two years; however, there were two installment payments remaining as of December 31, 2021 in an aggregate amount equal to approximately $329,000, which amount was paid in March 2022. These payments were accrued in our 2021 consolidated financial statements.
Going Concern
Since inception we have been engaged in organizational activities, including raising capital and research and development activities. We have not generated revenues and have not yet achieved profitable operations, nor have we ever generated positive cash flow from operations. There is no assurance that profitable operations, if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. We are subject to those risks associated with any pre-clinical stage pharmaceutical company that has substantial expenditures for research and development. There can be no assurance that our research and development projects will be successful, that products developed will obtain necessary regulatory approval, or that any approved product will be commercially viable. In addition, we operate in an environment of rapid technological change and is largely dependent on the services of our employees and consultants. Further, our future operations are dependent on the success of our efforts to raise additional capital. These uncertainties raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for one year after the issuance date of our financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the possible inability of the company to continue as a going concern, which contemplates the continuation of operations, realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. We have incurred a net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and had accumulated losses of $51.8 million since inception to December 31, 2021. We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant revenue from our product candidates currently in development. Our sources of capital have included private capital raises in various classes of units of CTx prior to the Reorganization Merger and the issuance of equity securities in connection with our IPO. Additional financings will be needed by us to fund our operations, to complete development of and to commercially develop our product candidates. There is no assurance that such financing will be available when needed or on acceptable terms.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments which significantly changes the way entities recognize impairment of many financial assets by requiring immediate recognition of estimated credit losses expected to occur over their remaining life, instead of when incurred. In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, which amends Subtopic 326-20 (created by ASU 2016-13) to explicitly state that operating lease receivables are not in the scope of Subtopic 326-20. Additionally, in April 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-04, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses, Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging, and Topic 825, Financial Instruments; in May 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-05, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Targeted Transition Relief; in November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-10, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842): Effective Dates, and ASU 2019-11, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses; and in March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-03, Codification Improvements to Financial Instruments, to provide further clarifications on certain aspects of ASU 2016-13. The changes (as amended) are effective for the Company for annual and interim periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company does not expect the adoption of ASU 2016-13 to have a material effect on its consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company”. As an “emerging growth company,” we are electing to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for emerging growth companies.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.