Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
See Part 1, Item 1, “Business”, for additional detail on forward looking statements.
Restatement of Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Statements:
We have restated our previously issued consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Refer to the “Explanatory Note” preceding Item 1, Business, for background on the restatement, the fiscal periods impacted, control considerations, and other information.
In addition, we have restated certain previously reported financial information at December 31, 2020 and for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 in this Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, including but not limited to information within the Consolidated Results of Operations, Results of Operations by Segment, and Non-GAAP Financial Measures sections. We have also included certain restated quarterly information in the Supplemental Quarterly Financial Information section at the end of this item.
See Note 2, Restatement of Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Statements, in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, for additional information related to the restatement, including descriptions of the misstatements and the impacts on our consolidated financial statements.
Company Overview
CIRCOR International is one of the world’s leading providers of mission critical flow control products and services for the Industrial and Aerospace & Defense markets. The Company has a product portfolio of market-leading brands serving its customers’ most demanding applications. CIRCOR markets its solutions directly and through various sales partners to more than 14,000 customers in approximately 130 countries. The Company has a global presence with approximately 3,100 employees and is headquartered in Burlington, Massachusetts. See Part 1, Item 1, Business, for additional information regarding the description of our business.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to adversely impact our end markets, operations, and financial condition in 2021. Throughout this continued time of uncertainty, the Company's top priority remains the health and safety of our employees, customers, and suppliers. Throughout 2021, we implemented measures in an effort to ensure our employees around the world have the necessary protection and our business continues to operate with as little disruption as possible. These measures include but are not limited to:
•Additional cleaning and disinfecting procedures at all facilities;
•Encouraging vaccination and fully covering the cost of COVID-19 vaccines;
•Daily temperature checks and masks for employees, in accordance with local regulations;
•Establishing social distancing guidelines for on-site employees;
•Employees are strongly encouraged to work from home where possible; and
•Limiting non-essential travel
The situation relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential effects on our business and financial results remains dynamic, and the broader implications for our business and results of operations remain uncertain and will depend on many factors outside our control. Please see Part 1, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” for more detail.
Segment Commentary
The Company's Aerospace & Defense segment has been and continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in our Commercial Aerospace end markets. Commercial Aerospace order rates improved in 2021 compared to 2020 as demand for OEM components and aftermarket services increased with air framer production rates and aircraft utilization. However, we continue to expect that a recovery to pre-pandemic levels of demand will not occur until the end of 2023. While our Defense business has been less impacted by the pandemic, we did experience a slowdown in government spending on spare parts as well as some delays on key programs which impacted our revenues in 2021. However, we expect a return to near term and long term growth in this end market driven by our positions on key U.S. defense programs, including the Joint Strike Fighter and Columbia class submarines, strong backlog, and new product introductions in close partnership with our customers. We continue to focus on increasing our global aftermarket and deploying value-based pricing across the segment, both of which will contribute to growth and margin expansion.
The Company's Industrial reporting segment has been and continues to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, we saw a significant increase in demand across end markets and geographies as the commercial impact of COVID-19 lessened through the year. We exited 2021 with a strong backlog that positions the Industrial segment well for future revenue growth in 2022 and beyond. In the near term, we expect strong growth in our longer-cycle end markets, such as Commercial Marine and Downstream Oil & Gas, as we deliver on improved orders from 2021. Our General Industrial end market, which includes products that serve power generation, chemical processing, and other customers, is expected to experience moderate growth. We continue to focus on increasing our global aftermarket, deploying value-based pricing across the segment, and simplifying our organizational structure to drive growth and margin expansion.
In both reporting segments, the Company's results from operations were, and continue to be, adversely impacted by global supply chain constraints and rising inflation. In 2021, we faced unexpected difficulties in procuring certain raw material, castings, and components, additional labor constraints due to COVID-19 and a challenging labor market, and inflation on both material and logistics. These challenges were most acute in the second half of the year and continue to evolve in 2022. In order to mitigate the impact of these factors on our operations and financial position, we continue to implement actions across the company including, but not limited to: list price increases and surcharges, structural cost out actions, changes in suppliers from which we procure material, and manufacturing productivity through the implementation of the CIRCOR Operating System and 80/20. Finally, continuing to attract and retain diverse and talented personnel, including the enhancement of our global sales, operations, product management and engineering organizations, remains an important part of our strategy during 2022.
Finally, we continue to monitor and evaluate additional sanctions and export restrictions that may be imposed by the U.S. Government and other governments along with any responses from Russia that could directly affect our supply chain, business partners or customers. The aggregate revenue from customers in Russia and Ukraine for each of the fiscal years ended 2021 and 2020 was less than 1% of consolidated net revenues, primarily related to our Downstream Oil & Gas business in the Industrial reporting segment. However, the conflict in Russia and Ukraine is likely to adversely impact demand in that region, increase energy costs related to our operations, and negatively impact material cost and availability.
Basis of Presentation
All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. We operate and report financial information using a 52-week fiscal year ending December 31. The data periods contained within our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q reflect the results of operations for the 13-week, 26-week and 39-week periods which generally end on the Sunday nearest the calendar quarter-end date. Certain reclassifications have been made to prior period amounts to conform to the current period financial statement presentation, including the results of discontinued operations and reportable segment information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its significant estimates, including those related to contracts accounted for under the percentage of completion method, bad debts, inventories, intangible assets and goodwill, purchase accounting, delivery penalties, income taxes, and contingencies including litigation. Management believes goodwill, revenue recognition and income taxes to be the most complex and sensitive judgments because of their significance to the consolidated financial statements and which result primarily from the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, current market and economic conditions and other assumptions that management believes are reasonable. The results of these estimates form the basis for judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities where the values are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
There have been no significant changes from the methodology applied by management for critical accounting estimates previously disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
For information regarding our significant accounting policies, refer to Note 3, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Goodwill
For goodwill, we perform an impairment assessment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of our October month end or more frequently if circumstances warrant. On March 29, 2020, we reorganized our reporting units and the stock price dropped below book value, which we determined were triggering events requiring an assessment of our goodwill and indefinite-lived trade names. Based on our impairment assessment as of March 29, 2020, we concluded that our goodwill in the Industrial reporting unit was impaired and, accordingly, recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $138.1 million in the quarter ended March 29, 2020.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we identified a change in our reporting units due to economic deviations within the Industrial business segment. Refinery valves (“RV”) and Industrial were determined to be two separate reporting units within the Industrial business segment. With the change in reporting units, we performed an impairment test prior to the change, on our previous one reporting unit, and then performed an impairment test immediately after the change on the two reporting units which also coincides with our annual impairment test date of October month end. With the change, we assigned goodwill to the Industrial and RV reporting units based on their relative fair values.
For the annual goodwill assessment, we estimated the fair value of our three reporting units, Industrial, RV, and Aerospace & Defense, using an income approach based on the present value of future cash flows. We selected this method as being the most meaningful in preparing the goodwill assessments because the use of the income approach typically generates a more precise measurement of fair value than the market approach. In applying the income approach to our accounting for goodwill, we make assumptions about the amount and timing of future expected cash flows, terminal value growth rates and appropriate discount rates. The amount and timing of future cash flows within our discounted cash flow analyses is based on our most recent operational budgets, current industry and market conditions, and other estimates of future performs. The terminal value growth rate is used to calculate the value of cash flows beyond the last projected period in our discounted cash flow analyses and reflects our best estimates for stable, perpetual growth of its reporting units. We corroborated the valuations that arose from the discounted cash flow approach by performing both a market multiple valuation and by reconciling the aggregate fair value of its reporting units to its market capitalization at the time of the test. The fair value of each of the reporting units exceeded the respective carrying amount, except for the RV reporting unit for which we recorded a goodwill impairment charge in the amount of $10.5 million. The fair values utilized for our 2021 goodwill assessment exceeded the carrying amounts by more than 165% and 55% for our Aerospace & Defense and Industrial reporting units, respectively. The growth rate assumptions utilized were consistent with growth rates within the markets that we serve and considered the near to mid-term negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our end markets, operations, and cash flows. If our results significantly vary from our estimates, related projections, or business assumptions in the future due to change in industry or market conditions, we may be required to record impairment charges.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recorded based on the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to as a result of satisfying our performance obligations. Revenue on our point in time contracts are recognized when the customer obtains control of the product, which is generally at the time of shipping. Revenues and costs on certain long-term contracts are recognized over-time using an input measure (e.g., costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion, known as the “cost-to-cost” method) as we incur costs on our contracts. We use a cost-to-cost measure of progress because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as it incurs costs on its contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, revenue is recognized proportionally as costs are incurred. Contract costs include labor, materials and subcontractors’ costs, other direct costs and an allocation of overhead, as appropriate. Accounting for over-time contracts requires reliable estimates in order to estimate total contract revenue and costs. For these contracts, management reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations at least quarterly. Management estimates the profit on a contract as the difference between the total estimated revenue and estimate at completion (“EAC”) costs and recognizes the resultant profit over the life of the contract, using the cost-to-cost EAC input method to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation. A change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of the related contracts. Management recognizes adjustments in estimated profit on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance is recognized using the adjusted estimate. The impact of adjustments in contract estimates on our operating earnings can be reflected in either operating expenses or revenue.
The transaction price for our contracts represents our best estimate of the consideration we will receive and includes assumptions regarding variable consideration as applicable. Certain of our long-term contracts contain fees or other provisions that can either increase or decrease the transaction price. We include estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance, historical performance, and all other information that is reasonably available to us.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Any material changes in tax rates or changes in tax laws could cause our estimates of taxes we anticipate to pay or to recover in the future to change. Any material changes could create an increase or a decrease in our effective tax rate.
In accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, the Company initially recognizes the financial statement effect of a tax position when, based solely on its technical merits, it is more likely than not (a likelihood of greater than fifty percent) that the position will be sustained upon examination by the relevant taxing authority. Those tax positions failing to qualify for initial recognition are recognized in the first interim period in which they meet the more likely than not standard, are resolved through negotiation or litigation with the taxing authority, or upon expiration of the statute of limitations. De-recognition of a tax position that was previously recognized occurs when an entity subsequently determines that a tax position no longer meets the more likely than not threshold of being sustained. Tax laws are complex and often subject to varied interpretations. Therefore, the ultimate outcome with respect to taxes we may owe may differ from the amounts recognized.
ASC 740, Income Taxes, requires a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The weight given to the potential effect of negative and positive evidence should be commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. The more negative evidence that exists, (a) the more positive evidence is necessary and (b) the more difficult it is to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed for some portion, or all, of the deferred tax asset. Should there be
a cumulative loss in recent years it is considered a significant piece of negative evidence that is difficult to overcome in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
The Company recognized a valuation allowance for the German and the U.S. net deferred tax assets (“DTA”) in the year ended December 31, 2020. We reviewed the German and U.S. valuation allowances. In both the case of Germany and the U.S. there is a cumulative three year loss at December 31, 2021. The Company concluded that the negative evidence outweighed the positive
evidence as of December 31, 2021. Therefore, the Company has not relied on projections of future taxable income in our assessment of the realization of deferred tax assets at December 31, 2021. The Company maintained a valuation allowance related to the German deferred tax assets of $13.6 million and $17.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of taxable temporary differences to support the realizability of the German deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income. The Company maintained a valuation allowance related to the U.S. deferred tax assets of $73.6 million and $67.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of temporary differences to support the realizability of the U.S. deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income.
Results of Operations
The Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) is the function that allocates the resources of the enterprise and assesses the performance of the Company's reportable operating segments. CIRCOR has determined that the CODM is solely comprised of its Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”), as the CEO has the ultimate responsibility for CIRCOR strategic decision-making and resource allocation.
Our CODM evaluates segment operating performance using segment operating income. We define segment operating income as GAAP operating income excluding intangible amortization and amortization of fair value step-ups of inventory and fixed assets from acquisitions completed subsequent to December 31, 2011, the impact of restructuring-related inventory write-offs, impairment charges and special charges or gains. The Company also refers to this measure as adjusted operating income. The Company uses this measure because it helps management understand and evaluate the segments’ core operating results and facilitates a comparison of performance for determining incentive compensation achievement.
For information regarding our segment determination refer to Note 19, Business Segment and Geographical Information, of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
The following tables present information on net revenues and operating income of our business segments, along with a reconciliation of total segment operating income to the Company's consolidated operating income.
2021 Compared With 2020
Consolidated Operations
Net revenues in 2021 were $758.7 million, a decrease of $6.6 million from 2020 primarily driven by lower revenue as a result of lower operational results of $17.0 million and divestitures of $4.9 million, partially offset by favorable foreign exchange of $15.4 million.
Segment Results
Industrial Segment
Industrial segment orders increased $113.8 million, or 24%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 35% increase in the Valves businesses and 17% increase in the Europe and North American Pumps businesses ("Pumps businesses"). Segment orders excluding divestitures and the impact of foreign exchange increased $102.6 million, or 21%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Industrial segment revenues increased $6.9 million, or 1%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 7% increase in the Pumps businesses partially offset by a 5% reduction in the Valves businesses. In both businesses, revenues were adversely impacted by global supply chain challenges including material input delays, labor shortages, and logistics constraints. Segment revenues excluding divestitures and the impact of foreign exchange decreased $0.7 million, or less than 1%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Industrial segment operating income increased $1.9 million, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in the Pumps businesses which was largely due to a one-time charge of $5.9 million recorded in the three months ended March 29, 2020 for an allowance against a customer receivable. In both businesses, operating income was adversely impacted by global supply chain challenges as well as material and freight inflation.
Aerospace & Defense Segment
Aerospace & Defense segment orders increased $0.6 million, or less than 1%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was driven by a 32% increase in our Commercial Aerospace businesses, offset by a 16% decrease in our Defense businesses. Segment orders excluding the impact of foreign exchange decreased $2.1 million, or 1%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Aerospace & Defense segment net revenues decreased by $13.5 million, or 5% in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a 8% decrease in the Defense businesses partially offset by a 1% increase in the Commercial Aerospace businesses. In both businesses, revenues were adversely impacted by global supply chain challenges including material input delays, labor shortages, and logistics constraints. Segment revenue excluding the impact of foreign exchange decreased $16.3 million, or 6%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Segment operating income decreased $2.3 million, or 4%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was driven primarily by lower volume in the Defense business, partially offset by cost controls. In both businesses, operating income was adversely impacted by global supply chain challenges as well as material and freight inflation.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses increased $0.3 million to $30.6 million for 2021. The increase was driven largely by higher insurance premium costs which were partially offset by lower benefit and compensation costs.
Special and Restructuring Charges (Recoveries), net
During 2021, the Company recorded a total of $24.3 million in special and restructuring charges compared to $34.3 million of recoveries in 2020. The charges recorded in 2021 were related to debt refinancing, the sale of two Industrial product lines, the write off of an aged receivable, and cost saving initiatives. The increase in special and restructuring charges in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by the gain on sale related to our divested Instrumentation and Sampling business in 2020. In our consolidated statements of operations, these charges are recorded in special and restructuring charges (recoveries), net. These restructuring charges and other special charges are described in further detail in Note 6, Special and Restructuring Charges (Recoveries), net, in the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other Costs (Recoveries), net
During 2021, the Company recorded a total of $59.4 million of other costs (recoveries), net, including $10.5 million related to goodwill impairment and $0.6 million of restructuring related inventory charges, both in our Industrial business. The remaining charges represent plant, property, and equipment depreciation related to the step-up in fair value as part of our acquisition of Colfax Corporation's Fluid Handling (“FH”) business, intangible amortization in connection with acquisitions subsequent to December 31, 2011, and step-up in fair value of inventory acquired as part of our FH acquisition. These charges are recorded in either selling, general and administrative expenses or cost of revenues based upon the nature of the underlying asset.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense decreased $1.9 million to $32.4 million for 2021. The change in interest expense was primarily due to lower debt balances throughout the year.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, was $3.8 million for 2021 compared to $1.6 million in 2020. The difference of $2.2 million primarily relates to more favorable exchange rates and increased returns on pension assets.
Comprehensive (Loss) Income
Comprehensive loss decreased $205.5 million, from a comprehensive loss position of $226.8 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020 to a comprehensive loss position of $21.3 million for the year-ended December 31, 2021. This change was primarily driven by a $120.4 million decrease in net loss from our continuing operations caused by a decrease of $127.6 million impairment of goodwill, a $50.7 million decrease in our income tax provision and a $36.5 million decrease in net loss from our discontinued operations, partially offset by a $58.6 million increase in special and restructuring charges, a $52.1 million increase in pension related actuarial gains and a $8.8 million change in foreign currency translation adjustments.
As of December 31, 2021, we had a cumulative currency translation adjustment of $18.6 million in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss for our Brazil entity. If we were to cease to have a controlling financial interest in the Brazil entity or otherwise satisfy criteria for reclassification of the amount from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss to earnings, we would recognize a non-cash charge of $18.6 million based on December 31, 2021 balances, which would be included as a special charge within the consolidated statement of operations.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
The table below outlines the change in effective tax rate for 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages).
The Company recognized a valuation allowance for the German and the U.S. net DTAs in the year ended December 31, 2020. We reviewed the German and U.S. valuation allowances. In both the case of Germany and the U.S. there is a cumulative three year loss at December 31, 2021. The Company concluded that the negative evidence outweighed the positive evidence as of December 31, 2021. Therefore, the Company has not relied on projections of future taxable income in our assessment of the realization of deferred tax assets at December 31, 2021. The Company maintained a valuation allowance related to the German deferred tax assets of $13.2 million and $17.3 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of taxable temporary differences to support the realizability of the German deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income. The Company maintained a valuation allowance related to the U.S. deferred tax assets of $73.1 million and $67.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of temporary differences to support the realizability of the U.S. deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company maintained a total valuation allowance of $139.0 million and $138.7 million, respectively, which relates to foreign, federal, and state deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or increased or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as our projections for growth.
Results of Operations
2020 Compared With 2019
Consolidated Operations
Net revenues in 2020 were $765.2 million, a decrease of $192.0 million from 2019 primarily driven by lower revenue as a result of lower operational results of $107.9 million and divestitures of $87.3 million, partially offset by favorable exchange of $3.2 million.
The following table present information on net revenues and operating income of our business segments, along with a reconciliation of total segment operating income to the Company's consolidated operating income.
Industrial Segment
Industrial segment orders decreased $181.3 million, or 27%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by the impact from divestitures of $88.1 million and reductions in the Valves businesses of 45% and the Pumps businesses of 7%.
Industrial segment net revenues decreased $185.4 million, or 27%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Segment net revenues excluding divestitures and the impact of foreign exchange decreased $100.6 million due to the timing of projects in the Pumps businesses driving a decrease of 11% and reduction in the Valves businesses of 44%.
Industrial segment operating income decreased $56.0 million, or 67%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Segment operating income excluding divestitures decreased $39.5 million, or 48% to $27.0 million for 2020 compared to $66.5 million for 2019, driven by decreases in the Pumps businesses of 33% and the Valves of 84% partially offset by operational efficiencies in headquarters.
Aerospace & Defense Segment
Aerospace & Defense segment orders decreased $59.4 million, or $19% to $254.5 million in 2020 compared to $313.9 million in 2019, driven by decreases in our Defense businesses of 5% and our Aerospace businesses of 35%.
Aerospace & Defense segment net revenues decreased by $6.6 million, or 2% in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was driven by our Aerospace businesses of 28%, partially offset by increases in the Defense businesses 19%.
Segment operating income increased $6.3 million, or 12% to $58.4 million for 2020 compared to $52.0 million for 2019. The increase in operating income was driven by improved pricing and cost actions taken to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses decreased $3.4 million to $30.4 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by ongoing cost savings initiatives and lower travel expenses due to global travel restrictions related to COVID-19.
Special and Restructuring charges, net
During 2020, the Company recorded a total of $34.3 million in recovery of special and restructuring charges compared to $21.5 million of special and restructuring charges in 2019. The recovery is a result of the net gain on sale of our Instrumentation & Sampling business, offset by professional fees related to an unsolicited tender offer to acquire the Company and other restructuring costs associated with our simplification efforts, primarily in our Industrial Segment. The increase in recovery of special and restructuring charges in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by the net gain on sale of our Instrumentation & Sampling business. In our consolidated statements of operations, these recoveries are recorded in special and restructuring (recoveries) charges, net. These restructuring charges and other special charges are described in further detail in Note 6, Special and Restructuring Charges (Recoveries), net, of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other cost (Recoveries), net
During 2020, the Company recorded a total of $183.5 million of impairment and other costs, net, including Industrial reporting unit goodwill impairment in the amount of $138.1 million. Included in these charges are plant, property, and equipment depreciation related to the step-up in fair value as part of our acquisition of the FH business, intangible amortization in connection with acquisitions subsequent to December 31, 2011, and step-up in fair value of inventory acquired as part of our FH acquisition. These charges are recorded in either selling, general and administrative expenses or cost of revenues based upon the nature of the underlying asset.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense decreased $14.4 million to $34.2 million for 2020. The change in interest expense was primarily due to lower debt balances.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, was $1.6 million for 2020 compared to $0.9 million in 2019. The difference of $0.7 million primarily relates to net pension income for the retirement plans we acquired as part of the FH acquisition. Pension Income was partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency translation.
Comprehensive (Loss) Income
Comprehensive loss increased $77.8 million, from a comprehensive loss position of $149.0 million for the year-ended December 31, 2019 to a comprehensive loss position of $226.8 million for the year-ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily driven by an increase in net loss of $77.7 million in our continued operations caused by impairment of goodwill of $138.1 million and increased income taxes of $42.1 million, partially offset by net gain on the sale of the Instrumentation & Sampling business of $53.2 million and reduced losses in our discontinued operations of $74.0 million as the Distributed Valve business was divested during the year.
As of December 31, 2020, we had a cumulative currency translation adjustment of $18.2 million in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss for our Brazil entity. If we were to cease to have a controlling financial interest in the Brazil entity or otherwise satisfy criteria for reclassification of the amount from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss to earnings, we would recognize a non-cash charge of $18.2 million based on December 31, 2020 balances, which would be included as a special charge within the consolidated statements of operations.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
The table below outlines the change in effective tax rate for 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except percentages).
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate whether sufficient future taxable income will be generated to permit use of the existing deferred tax assets. On July 9, 2020, the US Department of the Treasury ("Treasury") and Internal Revenue Service released final regulations ("Final Regulations") that provide guidance on the section 250 deduction for foreign-derived intangible income ("FDII") and global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI"). In addition, on July 20, 2020, Treasury released proposed regulations ("Proposed Regulations") concerning GILTI. Based on the expected impact of these regulations, we believe less reliance should be placed on the US taxation of foreign earnings, which would adversely impact our ability to realize our US deferred tax assets. With the release of the Final Regulations during the third quarter of 2020, coupled with the negative evidence of cumulative losses in the US, the negative evidence outweighed the positive evidence as of the third quarter of 2020. As such, the Company has not relied on projections of future taxable income in our assessment of the realization of deferred tax assets at September 27, 2020, and recognized a valuation allowance of $42.2 million in income tax expense in the third quarter of 2020. In addition, the Company recorded a valuation allowance related to German deferred tax assets of $14.8 million in income tax expense in the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company relied solely on the expected reversal of taxable temporary differences to support the realizability of the German deferred tax assets and no reliance was placed on projections of future taxable income.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company maintained a total valuation allowance of $138.7 million and $47.0 million, respectively, which relates to foreign, federal, and state deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or increased or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight is given to subjective evidence such as our projections for growth.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs arise primarily from capital investment in machinery, equipment and the improvement of facilities, funding working capital requirements to support business growth initiatives, debt service costs, and acquisitions. We have historically generated cash from operations and remain in a strong financial position, with resources available for reinvestment in existing businesses and managing our capital structure on a short and long-term basis.
Cash Flow Activities for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for the year-ended indicated (in thousands):
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $10.4 million compared to $22.5 million used during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $32.9 million increase in operating cash flows was primarily driven by a decrease in our net loss from continuing operations, the non-repeat of one-time professional fees, and the non-repeat of one-time transition costs related to the exit of the upstream oil & gas business. The increase was also driven by an improvement in cash provided by accounts payable, partially offset by lower cash provided by accounts receivable and inventories.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $2.7 million compared to $144.3 million generated during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $147.0 million year over year decrease in cash provided was primarily due to cash generated from sales of businesses during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities was $11.5 million compared to $134.1 million used during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $122.6 million year over year decrease in cash used by financing activities is driven by $515.6 million of higher proceeds from long-term debt resulting from a new secured Credit Agreement partially offset by $376.6 million of higher payments of long-term debt and $12.2 million of debt issuance costs.
As of December 31, 2021, total debt (including current portion) was $513.3 million compared to $509.5 million at December 31, 2020. Total debt is net of unamortized debt discount and debt issuance costs of $13.0 million and $12.0 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Total debt as a percentage of total shareholders’ equity was 384% as of December 31, 2021 compared to 333% as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had available capacity to borrow an additional $75.3 million under our revolving credit facility.
We entered into a new secured Credit Agreement, dated as of December 20, 2021 (“New Credit Agreement”), which provides for a $100.0 million revolving line of credit with a five year maturity and a $530.0 million term loan with a seven year maturity of which the term loan was funded in full at closing. This New Credit Agreement replaced and terminated the Credit Agreement dated December 11, 2017 (“Prior Credit Agreement”) under which the Company had borrowings of $492.0 million on its term loan and $38.7 million on its revolving line of credit as of, December 20, 2021.
The New Credit Agreement contains covenants that require, among other items, maintenance of certain financial ratios and also limits our ability to: enter into secured and unsecured borrowing arrangements; issue dividends to shareholders; acquire and dispose of businesses; invest in capital equipment; transfer assets among domestic and international entities; participate in certain higher yielding long-term investment vehicles; and issue certain types of additional shares of our stock which limits our ability to borrow under the credit facility. The primary financial covenant is total net leverage, a ratio of total secured debt (less cash and cash equivalents up to a maximum of $75.0 million) to total earnings before interest expense, taxes, depreciation, and amortization based on the four fiscal quarters at the testing period.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facility, $525.0 million gross borrowings under our term loan, $1.3 million other short-term borrowings, and $32.5 million borrowings outstanding under letters of credit. We were in compliance with all financial covenants related to the New Credit Agreement at December 31, 2021 and we believe it is likely that we will continue to meet such covenants for at least the next twelve months from date of issuance of the financial statements.
The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 2.0:1 at December 31, 2021 compared to 2.2:1 at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $59.9 million and was substantially all held in foreign bank accounts. This compares to $66.9 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, with balances all substantially held in foreign bank accounts. These funds are considered indefinitely reinvested to be used to expand operations either organically or through acquisitions outside of the United States.
In 2022, we expect to generate positive cash flow from operating activities sufficient to support our capital expenditures and service our debt. Based on our expected cash flows from operations and contractually available borrowings under our credit facility, we expect to have sufficient liquidity to fund working capital needs and future growth over at least the next twelve months from date of filing the 2021 financial statements.
Cash Flow Activities for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $22.5 million in cash flow from operating activities compared to generating $14.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $37.1 million decrease in operating cash was primarily driven by lower income from continuing operations, payment of one-time professional fees, and transition costs related to the exiting the upstream oil & gas business, partially offset by higher cash flows from inventory.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated $144.3 million from investing activities compared to generating $153.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $9.3 million year over year decrease in cash provided was primarily driven by cash used in discontinued investing activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $133.4 million in cash from financing activities compared to cash used of $153.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The $19.7 million year over year decrease in cash used by financing activities resulted from lower repayment of long term debt partially offset by lower proceeds.
As of December 31, 2020, total debt (including current portion) was $509.5 million compared to $637.4 million at December 31, 2019. Total debt is net of unamortized term loan debt issuance costs of $12.1 million and $17.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total debt as a percentage of total shareholders’ equity was 333% as of December 31, 2020 compared to 171% as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had available capacity to borrow an additional $91.7 million under our revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowings of $507.9 million outstanding under our credit facility, $1.6 million in other short-term borrowings, and $39.3 million outstanding under letters of credit.
The ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 2.2:1 at December 31, 2020 compared to 2.1:1 at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $66.9 million and was substantially all held in foreign bank accounts. This compares to $75.8 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2019, with balances substantially all held in foreign bank accounts. These funds are considered indefinitely reinvested to be used to expand operations either organically or through acquisitions outside of the United States.
On February 26, 2020, the Company amended its term loan to lower the interest rate associated with the applicable margin calculation. The new terms lowered the interest rate on the Company's term loan from LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.5% to LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.25%, based on its existing corporate family rating from Moody's. The applicable margin reduces to LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.00% , with a corporate family rating from Moody's of B1 or better.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell its non-core Instrumentation and Sampling (“I&S”) business to Crane Co. for $172 million, in cash, subject to working capital adjustments. The transaction closed on January 31, 2020. The I&S business manufactures valves, fittings, regulators and sampling systems primarily serving energy end markets. The Company received net cash proceeds from sale of $169.8 and recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $54.6 million.
Significant Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments at December 31, 2021 that affect our liquidity (in thousands):
Our commercial contract commitments primarily relate to open purchase orders of $90.0 million, $10.0 million of which extend to 2023 and beyond.
In accordance with the authoritative guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, as of December 31, 2021, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $2.6 million and $0.2 million of accrued interest. The Company does not expect the unrecognized tax benefits to change over the next 12 months.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, we made cash contributions of approximately $0.8 million to our U.S. pension plans and $4.3 million to our foreign pension plans. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we made cash contributions of approximately $0.8 million to our U.S. plans and $4.1 million for our foreign plans. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, we made cash contributions of approximately $0.8 million to our U.S. plans and $4.3 million for our foreign plans.
In addition, we made $4.2 million, $0.5 million, and $3.4 million in payments to our 401(k) savings plan for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
In 2022, we expect to make defined benefit plan contributions based on the minimum required funding in accordance with statutory requirements (approximately $1.0 million in the U.S. and approximately $3.6 million for our foreign plans). The estimates for plan funding for future periods may change as a result of the uncertainties concerning the return on plan assets, the number of plan participants, and other changes in actuarial assumptions. We anticipate fulfilling these commitments through the generation of cash flow from operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through December 31, 2021, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements or material transactions with unconsolidated entities or other persons that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that is material to investors.