Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, statements relating to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations, intentions, and resources. Such forward-looking statements should be read in conjunction with our disclosures under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 results and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of Civitas' Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Executive Summary
We are an independent Denver-based exploration and production company focused on the acquisition, development, and production of oil and associated liquids-rich natural gas in the Rocky Mountain region, primarily in the Wattenberg Field of the DJ Basin of Colorado. We believe our acreage in the DJ Basin has been significantly delineated by our own drilling success and by the success of offset operators, providing confidence that our inventory is repeatable and will continue to generate economic returns. The majority of our revenues are generated through the sale of oil, natural gas, and natural gas liquids production.
The Company’s primary objective is to maximize shareholder returns by responsibly developing our oil and natural gas resources. Key aspects of our strategy include multi-well pad development across our leasehold, continuous safety improvement, strict adherence to health and safety regulations, environmental stewardship, disciplined approach to acquisitions and divestitures and capital allocation, and prudent risk management.
Financial and Operating Results
Our 2021 financial and operational results include:
•Crude oil equivalent sales volumes increased 121% for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period during 2020 primarily due to the HighPoint, Extraction, and Crestone Peak mergers;
•General and administrative expense per Boe decreased by 16% for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period during 2020;
•Lease operating expense per Boe increased by 8% per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period during 2020;
•Borrowings under our Credit Facility were reduced by $155.0 million to zero during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the $155.0 million borrowed at the closing of the HighPoint Merger to pay down the HighPoint credit facility;
•Total liquidity was $1.0 billion at December 31, 2021, consisting of cash on hand plus funds available under our Credit Facility, after giving effect to an aggregate of $21.7 million of undrawn letters of credit. Please refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional discussion;
•Cash dividends of $60.8 million, or $1.16 per share, declared and paid during the year ended December 31, 2021;
•Cash flows provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $274.6 million, as compared to cash flows provided by operating activities of $158.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Please refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional discussion;
•Proved reserves of 397.7 MMBoe as of December 31, 2021 increased by 236% when compared to proved reserves as of December 31, 2020; and
•Capital expenditures, inclusive of accruals, were $299.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which was within guidance.
Midstream Assets
The Company's midstream assets provide reliable gathering, treating, and storage for the Company’s operated production while reducing facility site footprints, leading to more cost-efficient operations and reduced emissions and surface disturbance per Boe produced. Additionally, this infrastructure helps ensure that the Company's production is not constrained by any single midstream service provider.
RMI, together with adjacent gathering assets acquired from HighPoint, serves the Company’s eastern acreage position with multiple interconnects to four different natural gas processors. Significant cost and operational synergies have been realized with the combination of RMI and HighPoint midstream assets. Additionally, in 2019, the Company installed a new oil gathering line to Riverside Terminal (on the Grand Mesa Pipeline), which resulted in a corresponding $1.25 to $1.50 per barrel reduction to our oil differentials for barrels transported on such gathering line. The Company completed an additional oil interconnect in September 2021, thus providing additional outlets that provide flow assurance and minimize differentials. The total value of reduced oil differentials during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $5.0 million and $6.2 million, respectively
As a result of the Crestone Peak Merger, the Company acquired a gas gathering system that serves the Company's southern acreage position and an oil gathering system that serves a portion of the Company's western acreage. The gas gathering system ensures reliable, low-pressure service at the wellhead. The capacity of this system is in the process of being expanded with the addition of another compressor station. The oil gathering system gathers, treats, and stores oil and water from multiple nearby producing pads and subsequently delivers each to downstream outlets.
The net book value of the Company's midstream assets was $276.1 million as of December 31, 2021.
Current Events and Outlook
The worldwide outbreak of COVID-19, the uncertainty regarding the impact of COVID-19, and various governmental actions taken to mitigate the impact of COVID-19, resulted in an unprecedented decline in demand for oil and natural gas. At the same time, the decision by Saudi Arabia in March 2020 to drastically reduce export prices and increase oil production further increased the excess supply of oil and natural gas throughout 2020. However, during 2021, expectations surrounding the demand for oil and natural gas stimulated a rise in oil and natural gas prices.
The COVID-19 outbreak and its development into a pandemic in March 2020 also required that we take precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk to our business, employees, customers, suppliers, and the communities in which we operate. Our operational employees are currently still able to work on site. However, we have taken various precautionary measures with respect to our operational employees such as requiring them to verify they have not experienced any symptoms consistent with COVID-19, or been in close contact with someone showing such symptoms, before reporting to the work site, quarantining any operational employees who have shown signs of COVID-19 (regardless of whether such employee has been confirmed to be infected), and imposing social distancing requirements on work sites, all in accordance with the guidelines released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We have not experienced any material operational disruptions (including disruptions from our suppliers and service providers) as a result of a COVID-19 outbreak.
On April 1, 2021, we completed the previously announced acquisition of HighPoint, and on November 1, 2021, we completed the previously announced mergers with Extraction and Crestone Peak. The Company has successfully integrated the operations, production and accounting databases derived from the HighPoint, Extraction, and Crestone Peak mergers. The go-forward Company will incorporate the best practices and processes from each legacy organization.
On January 31, 2022, we signed definitive agreements to acquire privately held DJ Basin operator Bison Oil & Gas II, LLC (“Bison”) for approximately $346 million of consideration, including the assumption of approximately $176 million in debt and other liabilities. On February 27, 2022, the Company and Bison entered into an amendment to the definitive agreements signed on January 31, 2022 to, among other things, increase the aggregate cash consideration paid to Bison from $45 million to $160 million and eliminate the previously contemplated share consideration. The transaction closed on March 1, 2022 and demonstrates Civitas’ disciplined approach to consolidation with a focus on value creation and accretion.
The Company's 2022 drilling and completion capital budget of $825 million to $950 million contemplates the closing of the Bison acquisition and running an average of 3.5 operated rigs and 3 operated crews that will drill 190 to 210 and complete 165 to 175 gross operated wells. Additionally, we intend to invest approximately $70 million to $90 million in land, midstream, and other capital activity that will support our acreage positions and overall infrastructure.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Comparative results of operations for the period indicated are discussed below.
The following table summarizes our product revenues, sales volumes, and average sales prices for the periods indicated:
_____________________________
(1)Crude oil sales excludes $1.0 million and $1.7 million of oil transportation revenues from third parties, which do not have associated sales volumes, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Natural gas sales excludes $3.6 million and $3.7 million of gas gathering revenues from third parties, which do not have associated sales volumes, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(3)Determined using the ratio of 6 Mcf of natural gas to 1 Bbl of crude oil.
(4)Derivatives economically hedge the price we receive for oil, natural gas, and NGL. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the derivative cash settlement loss for oil, natural gas, and NGLs was $215.1 million, $51.8 million, $9.1 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the derivative cash settlement gain for oil was $50.1 million, and the derivative cash settlement loss for natural gas was $0.7 million. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 9 - Derivatives for additional disclosures.
Product revenues increased by 335% to $926.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $212.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was largely due to a 121% increase in sales volumes and a $22.27, or 97%, increase in oil equivalent pricing, excluding the impact of derivatives. The increase in sales volumes is due to the HighPoint Merger that closed on April 1, 2021 and the Extraction and Crestone Peak mergers that closed on November 1, 2021. Additionally, we turned 70 gross wells to sales during the year ending December 31, 2021.
The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands, except per Boe amounts):
Lease operating expense. Our lease operating expense increased $30.4 million, or 139%, to $52.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $22.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and increased 8% on an equivalent basis per Boe. Lease operating expense on an aggregate basis increased as a result of the HighPoint, Extraction, and Crestone Peak mergers. Additionally, our overall lease operating expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 was at an unprecedented low due to the Company's concerted effort to reduce costs in response to the decline in commodity pricing experienced during 2020. The increase in lease operating expense outpaced the increase in sales volumes causing the per Boe to increase, which is within expectations and guidance on a per Boe basis.
Midstream operating expense. Our midstream operating expense increased $2.5 million, or 17%, to $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and decreased 48% on an equivalent basis per Boe. The aggregate increase is due to the acquisition of certain midstream assets through the HighPoint and Crestone Peak mergers. Conversely, while certain midstream operating expenses correlate to sales volumes, the majority of the costs, such as compression, are fixed and thereby result in a decrease in midstream operating expense per Boe period over period.
Gathering, transportation, and processing. Gathering, transportation, and processing expense increased $47.6 million, or 281%, to $64.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and increased 73% on an equivalent basis per Boe. Natural gas and NGL sales volumes have a direct correlation to gathering, transportation, and processing expense. Natural gas and NGL sales volumes increased 162% during the comparable periods. Additionally, our value-based percentage of proceeds sales contract, which tracks solely with natural gas and NGL pricing, is now our largest sales contract as a result of the mergers completed in 2021. Natural gas and NGL pricing increased at a faster pace than the natural gas and NGL sales volumes associated with said pricing causing gathering, transportation, and processing expense per Boe to increase.
Severance and ad valorem taxes. Our severance and ad valorem taxes increased $61.3 million, or 1,619%, to $65.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and increased 676% on an equivalent basis per Boe. Severance and ad valorem taxes primarily correlate to revenues, which increased by 335% for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020. Additionally, during 2020, we refined our tax estimate based on current mill levies, taxing districts, and Company results based on commodity prices, which resulted in a total non-recurring negative adjustment of $16.3 million. Excluding this adjustment, our severance and ad valorem taxes were $20.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which would make the year over year change 224%.
Depreciation, depletion, and amortization. Our depreciation, depletion, and amortization expense increased $135.7 million, or 149%, to $226.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $91.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and increased 12% on an equivalent basis per Boe. The increase in depreciation, depletion, and amortization expense is the result of (i) a $4.4 billion increase in the depletable property base primarily due to the HighPoint, Extraction, and Crestone Peak mergers and (ii) a 121% increase in production between the comparable periods.
Abandonment and impairment of unproved properties. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $57.3 million and $37.3 million, respectively, in abandonment and impairment of unproved properties. At year-end 2021, the Company did a full assessment of its locations and replaced non-core legacy locations with newly acquired locations. At year-end 2020, the Company did a reassessment of its estimated probable and possible reserve locations based largely upon economic viability and the expiration of non-core leases. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for additional discussion on our impairment policy and practices.
Unused commitments. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $7.7 million and zero, respectively, in unused commitments. As part of the HighPoint Merger, we assumed two firm natural gas pipeline transportation contracts to provide a guaranteed outlet for production from properties HighPoint had previously sold. Both firm transportation contracts required the pipeline to provide transportation capacity and required us to pay transportation charges regardless of the amount of pipeline capacity utilized. The agreements expired July 31, 2021.
Merger transaction costs. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $43.6 million and $6.7 million, respectively, in legal, advisor, and other costs associated with the HighPoint, Extraction, and Crestone Peak mergers.
General and administrative expense. Our general and administrative expense increased $30.2 million, or 86%, to $65.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $34.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and decreased 16% on an equivalent basis per Boe. The primary drivers of the aggregate increase relate to an increase in salaries, benefits, and stock compensation expense due to the aforementioned mergers. Additionally, certain one-time nonrecurring fees were incurred as it relates to these mergers as further discussed in Note 2 - Acquisitions & Divestitures of Item 8 of this report. General and administrative expense per Boe decreased on a higher percentage basis due to oil equivalent sales volumes being 121% higher during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020.
Derivative gain (loss). Our derivative loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $60.5 million as compared to a gain of $53.5 million for year ended December 31, 2020. Our derivative loss is due to settlements and fair market value adjustments caused by market prices being higher than our contracted hedge prices. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 9 - Derivatives for additional discussion.
Interest expense. Our interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $9.7 million and $2.0 million, respectively. Average debt outstanding for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $217.9 million and $53.2 million, respectively. The components of interest expense for the periods presented are as follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company's anticipated sources of liquidity include cash from operating activities, borrowings under the Credit Facility, potential proceeds from sales of assets, and potential proceeds from equity and/or debt capital markets transactions. Our cash flows from operating activities are subject to significant volatility due to changes in commodity prices, as well as variations in our production. The prices for these commodities are driven by a number of factors beyond our control, including global and regional product supply and demand, weather, product distribution, refining and processing capacity, regulatory constraints, and other supply chain dynamics, among other factors.
Although we cannot provide any assurance, we believe cash flows from operating activities and availability under our Credit Facility should be sufficient to meet our cash requirements inclusive of, but not limited to, normal operating needs, debt service obligations, planned capital expenditures and commitments for at least the next twelve months and, based on current expectations, for the long term.
As of December 31, 2021, our liquidity was $1.0 billion, consisting of cash on hand of $254.5 million and $778.3 million of available borrowing capacity on our Credit Facility, after giving effect to an aggregate of $21.7 million of undrawn letters of credit. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 5 - Long-term Debt for additional discussion.
We anticipate investing between $825 million and $950 million on drilling and completion capital expenditures in 2022, which assumes running an average of 3.5 operated rigs and 3 operated crews that will drill 190 to 210 and complete 165 to 175 gross operated wells. In addition, we anticipate investing between $70 million and $90 million on land, midstream, and other capital expenditures that will support our acreage positions and overall infrastructure.
The following table summarizes our cash flows and other financial measures for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash flows provided by operating activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the cash receipts and disbursements were attributable to our normal operating cycle. See Results of Operations above for more information on the factors driving these changes.
Cash flows provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by the $223.7 million of cash acquired through mergers. However, expenditures for development of oil and natural gas properties are the primary use of our capital resources, which partially offset any inflows of the aforementioned cash acquired. The Company spent $151.5 million and $60.1 million on the exploration and development of oil and gas properties during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company also spent $2.0 million less on acquisitions of oil and gas properties during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020.
Cash flows used in financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $118.4 million and $81.2 million, respectively. The change was primarily due to a $354.0 million increase in net payments on revolving credit facility balances during the year ended December 31, 2021, including the payoff of the HighPoint credit facility of $154.0 million and the Crestone Peak credit facility of $280.0 million, offset by net payments during the year ended December 31, 2020 on the Credit Facility of $80.0 million. Additionally, dividends and deferred financing costs paid totaled $60.8 million and $19.3 million, respectively. Offsetting these outflows were the proceeds from the $400.0 million issuance of 5.0% Senior Notes.
Material Commitments
We had the following material commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)The calculation on the delivery commitments is based on the firm transportation or minimum gross volume commitment schedule and applicable differential fees. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 6 - Commitments and Contingencies for additional discussion on these agreements.
(2)The Company has included the minimum future commitments for its long-term operating leases. Such leases are reflected at undiscounted values. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 3 - Leases, for additional discussion.
(3)Amounts represent our estimated future retirement obligations on a discounted basis. The discounted obligations are recorded as liabilities on our accompanying balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Because these costs typically extend many years into the future, management prepares estimates and makes judgments that are subject to future revisions based upon numerous factors. Please refer to Part II, Item 8, Note 10 - Asset Retirement Obligation, for additional discussion.
5.0% Senior Notes
On October 13, 2021, the Company issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of 5.0% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “5.0% Senior Notes”) pursuant to an indenture, dated October 13, 2021 (the “5.0% Indenture”), among Civitas Resources, the guarantors party thereto and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee. Following the closing of the Offering, the Company used the net proceeds from the Offering and cash on hand to repay all borrowings under the Credit Facility, all borrowings outstanding under the Crestone Peak credit facility, and for general corporate purposes. Interest accrues at the rate of 5.0% per annum and will be payable semiannually in arrears on April 15 and October 15, commencing on April 15, 2022.
The 5.0% Senior Notes contain covenants that limit, among other things, the Company’s ability and the ability of its subsidiaries to: (i) incur or guarantee additional indebtedness; (ii) create liens securing indebtedness; (iii) pay dividends on or redeem or repurchase stock or subordinated debt; (iv) make specified types of investments and acquisitions; (v) enter into or permit to exist contractual limits on the ability of the Company’s subsidiaries to pay dividends to Civitas Resources; (v) enter into transactions with affiliates; and (vii) sell assets or merge with other companies. These covenants are subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions. In addition, certain of these restrictive covenants will be terminated before the 5.0% Senior Notes mature if at any time no default or event of default exists under the 5.0% Indenture and the 5.0% Senior Notes receive an investment grade rating from at least two ratings agencies. The 5.0% Indenture also contains customary events of default.
At any time prior to October 15, 2023, the Company may redeem the 5.0% Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to the sum of (i) the principal amount thereof, plus (ii) the “make-whole” premium at the redemption date, plus (iii) accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the date of redemption (subject to the right of the noteholders on the relevant record date to receive interest on the relevant interest payment date). On or after October 15, 2023, the Company may redeem all or part of the 5.0% Senior Notes at redemption prices (expressed as percentages of the principal amount redeemed) equal to (i) 102.5% for the twelve-month period beginning on October 15, 2023; (ii) 101.25% for the twelve-month period beginning on October 15, 2024; and (iii) 100.0% for the twelve-month period beginning October 15, 2025 and at any time thereafter, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date (subject to the right of the noteholders on the relevant record date to receive interest on the relevant interest payment date).
The Company may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the 5.0% Senior Notes at any time prior to October 15, 2023 with an amount not to exceed the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 105.0% of the principal amount of the 5.0% Senior Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, thereon to, but not including, the redemption date, provided, however, that (i) at least 65.0% of the aggregate principal amount of the 5.0% Senior Notes originally issued on the issue date (but excluding 5.0% Senior Notes held by CIVI and its subsidiaries) remains outstanding immediately after the occurrence of such redemption (unless all such 5.0% Senior Notes are redeemed substantially concurrently) and (ii) the redemption occurs within 180 days after the date of the closing of such equity offering.
The 5.0% Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by all of Civitas' existing subsidiaries.
7.5% Senior Notes
In conjunction with the HighPoint Merger, the Company issued $100 million aggregate principal amount of 7.5% Senior Notes due 2026 pursuant to an indenture (the “7.5% Indenture”), dated April 1, 2021, by and among Civitas Resources, U.S. Bank National Association (“US Bank”), as trustee, and the subsidiary guarantors party thereto. Interest accrues at the rate of 7.5% per annum and will be payable semiannually in arrears on April 30 and October 31, commencing on October 31, 2021.
The 7.5% Indenture contains restrictive covenants that, among other things, restrict the ability of Civitas Resources, and each of its restricted subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional indebtedness and issue preferred stock; (ii) pay dividends or make other distributions in respect of the Company's common stock; (iii) make other restricted payments and investments; (iv) create liens; (v) restrict distributions or other payments from Civitas' restricted subsidiaries; (v) sell assets, including capital stock of restricted subsidiaries; (vi) merge or consolidate with other entities; and (vii) enter into transactions with affiliates. These restrictive covenants are subject to a number of important qualifications and limitations. In addition, certain of these restrictive covenants will be suspended before the 7.5% Senior Notes mature if at any time no default or event of default exists under the 7.5% Indenture and the 7.5% Senior Notes receive an investment grade rating from at least two ratings agencies. The 7.5% Indenture also contains customary events of default.
The 7.5% Senior Notes are redeemable at the Company’s option (an “Optional Redemption”), in whole or in part, prior to April 30, 2022 at a redemption price equal to 107.5% of the aggregate principal to be redeemed, plus unpaid accrued interest, if any, through the Optional Redemption date. On or after April 30, 2022, the Optional Redemption price will be equal to 100.0% of the aggregate principal amount of the 7.5% Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus unpaid accrued interest, if any, through Optional Redemption date.
The 7.5% Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by all of Civitas' existing subsidiaries.
Credit Facility
In December 2018, the Company entered into a reserve-based revolving facility, as the borrower, with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., (“JPMorgan”) as the administrative agent, and a syndicate of financial institutions, as lenders, that matured on December 7, 2023. The November 2021 redetermination as part of the Amended & Restated Credit Agreement (defined below) resulted in a borrowing base of $1.0 billion, with elected commitments set at $800 million. The next scheduled redetermination is set to occur in April 2022.
The Credit Facility contains customary representations and affirmative covenants. The Credit Facility also contains customary negative covenants, which, among other things, and subject to certain exceptions, include restrictions on (i) liens, (ii) indebtedness, guarantees and other obligations, (iii) restrictions in agreements on liens and distributions, (iv) mergers or consolidations, (v) asset sales, (vi) restricted payments, (vii) investments, (viii) affiliate transactions, (ix) change of business, (x) foreign operations or subsidiaries, (xi) name changes, (xii) use of proceeds, letters of credit, (xiii) gas imbalances, (xiv) hedging transactions, (xv) additional subsidiaries, (xvi) changes in fiscal year or fiscal quarter, (xvii) operating leases, (xviii) prepayments of certain debt and other obligations, (xix) sales or discounts of receivables, (xx) dividend payment thresholds, and (xi) cash balances. The Credit Parties are subject to certain financial covenants under the Credit Facility, as tested on the last day of each fiscal quarter, including, without limitation, (i) a maximum ratio of the Company's consolidated indebtedness (subject to certain exclusions) to earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation, depletion, and amortization, exploration expense, and other non-cash charges (“EBITDAX”) and (ii) a current ratio, as defined in the agreement, inclusive of the unused commitments then available to be borrowed, to not be less than 1.00 to 1.
Under the terms of the Credit Facility, as amended in June 2020 (the “First Amendment”), borrowings bore interest at a per annum rate equal to, at the option of the Company, either (i) a LIBOR, subject to a 0% LIBOR floor plus a margin of 2.00% to 3.00%, based on the utilization of the Credit Facility (the “Eurodollar Rate”) or (ii) a fluctuating interest rate per annum equal to the greatest of (a) the rate of interest publicly announced by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as its prime rate, (b) the rate of interest published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as the federal funds effective rate, (c) the rate of interest published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as the overnight bank funding rate, or (d) a LIBOR offered rate for a one-month interest period, subject to a 0% LIBOR floor plus a margin of 1.00% to 2.00%, based on the utilization of the Credit Facility (the “Reference Rate”). Interest on borrowings that bear interest at the Eurodollar Rate shall be payable on the last day of the applicable interest period selected by the Company, which shall be one, two, three, or six months, and interest on borrowings that bear interest at the Reference Rate shall be payable quarterly in arrears.
On April 1, 2021, in conjunction with the HighPoint Merger, the Company, together with certain of its subsidiaries, entered into the Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the Credit Facility (as amended, restated, supplemented or otherwise modified) to, among other things: (i) increase the aggregate maximum commitment amount from $750.0 million to $1.0 billion; (ii) increase the available borrowing base from $260.0 million to $500.0 million; (iii) increase the Eurodollar Rate margin to 3.00% to 4.00%; (iv) increase the Reference Rate margin to 2.00% to 3.00%; (v) increase (A) the LIBOR floor from 0% to .50% and (B) the alternate base rate floor from 0% to 1.50%; (vi) decrease for any fiscal quarter ending on or after April 1, 2021, the maximum permitted net leverage ratio from 3.50 to 3.0; and (viii) amend certain other covenants and provisions.
On November 1, 2021, in conjunction with the Transactions, the Company, as borrower, JPMorgan, as the administrative agent, and a syndicate of financial institutions, as lenders, entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of November 1, 2021 having an Aggregate Maximum Credit Amount (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) of $2.0 billion. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, among other things: (i) increases the aggregate elected commitments to from $400.0 million to $800.0 million, (ii) increases the available borrowing base from $500.0 million to $1.0 billion, (iii) extends the maturity date of the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement to November 1, 2025 and (iv) amends the borrowing base adjustment provisions such that, between borrowing base determinations, downward adjustments related to the incurrence of certain permitted indebtedness will only occur (x) until the occurrence of the April 2022 borrowing base determination, if such indebtedness exceeds $500.0 million and, (y) thereafter, if either (A) such indebtedness exceeds $500.0 million and the Company’s pro-forma leverage ratio is less than or equal to 1.50 to 1, or (B) the Company’s pro-forma leverage ratio is greater than 1.50 to 1. Under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company’s Credit Facility will be guaranteed by all restricted domestic subsidiaries of the Company including by the Extraction Surviving Corporation, the Crestone Surviving Entity, and all their respective subsidiaries, and will be secured by first priority security interests on substantially all assets, including a mortgage on at least 90% of the total value of the proved oil and gas properties evaluated in the most recently delivered reserve reports prior to the amendment effective date, including any engineering reports relating to the oil and gas properties of the Extraction Surviving Corporation, the Crestone Surviving Entity, their respective subsidiaries, of each of the Company, all restricted domestic subsidiaries of the Company, the Extraction Surviving Corporation and the Crestone Surviving Entity, in each case, subject to customary exceptions.
The Company was in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2021 and through the filing date of this report.
Our weighted-average interest rates on borrowings from the Credit Facility were 3.6% and 3.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and as of the date of filing, we had a zero balance on our Credit Facility.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDAX represents earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation, depletion, and amortization, exploration expense, and other non-cash and non-recurring charges. Adjusted EBITDAX excludes certain items that we believe affect the comparability of operating results and can exclude items that are generally non-recurring in nature or whose timing and/or amount cannot be reasonably estimated. Adjusted EBITDAX is a non-GAAP measure that we present because we believe it provides useful additional information to investors and analysts, as a performance measure, for analysis of our ability to internally generate funds for exploration, development, acquisitions, and to service debt. We are also subject to financial covenants under our Credit Facility based on adjusted EBITDAX ratios as further described above in Liquidity and Capital Resources. In addition, adjusted EBITDAX is widely used by professional research analysts and others in the valuation, comparison, and investment recommendations of companies in the oil and gas exploration and production industry. Adjusted EBITDAX should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income, net cash provided by operating activities, or other profitability or liquidity measures prepared under GAAP. Because adjusted EBITDAX excludes some, but not all items that affect net income and may vary among companies, the adjusted EBITDAX amounts presented may not be comparable to similar metrics of other companies.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the GAAP financial measure of net income to the non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDAX (in thousands):
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"). The preparation of these statements requires us to make certain assumptions, judgments, and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and commitments as of the date of our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We analyze and base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in facts and circumstances or additional information may result in revised estimates, and actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe the following discussions of critical accounting estimates address all important accounting areas where the nature of accounting estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to
change. Our significant accounting policies are described in Part II, Item 8, Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
Property and Equipment
Proved Properties. The Company accounts for its oil and gas properties under the successful efforts method of accounting. Under this method, the costs of development wells are capitalized to proved properties whether those wells are successful or unsuccessful. Capitalized drilling and completion costs, including lease and well equipment, intangible development costs, and operational support facilities are depleted using the units-of-production method based on estimated proved developed reserves. Proved leasehold costs are also depleted; however, the units-of-production method is based on estimated total proved reserves. The computation of depletion expense takes into consideration restoration, dismantlement, and abandonment costs as well as the anticipated proceeds from salvaging equipment. Because all of our proved properties are currently located in a single field, we apply depletion on a single field basis.
The Company assesses proved properties for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. If carrying values exceed undiscounted future net cash flows, impairment is measured and recorded at fair value. Because there usually is a lack of quoted market prices for proved properties, the Company estimates the fair value using valuation techniques that convert estimated future net cash flows to a single discounted amount. Significant inputs and assumptions to this estimation include, but are not limited to, reserves volumes, future operating and development costs, future commodity prices, inclusive of applicable differentials, and a market-based weighted average cost of capital rate. The expected future cash flows used for impairment reviews include future production volumes associated with proved developed producing reserves and risk-adjusted proved undeveloped reserves, and when needed, probable and possible reserves.
Unproved Properties. Unproved properties consist of the costs to acquire undeveloped leases and are not subject to depletion until they are transferred to proved properties. Leasehold costs are transferred to proved properties on an ongoing basis as the properties to which they relate are evaluated and proved reserves established. Unproved properties are routinely evaluated for continued capitalization or impairment. On a quarterly basis, management assesses undeveloped leasehold costs for impairment by considering, among other things, remaining lease terms, future drilling plans and capital availability to execute such plans, commodity price outlooks, recent operational results, reservoir performance and geology, and estimated acreage value based on prices received for similar, recent acreage transactions by the Company or other market participants. Changes in our assumptions of the estimated nonproductive portion of our undeveloped leases could result in additional impairment expense.
Oil and Natural Gas Reserves. The successful efforts method of accounting outlined above inherently relies on the estimation of proved oil and natural gas reserves. Reserve quantities and the related estimates of future net cash flows are critical inputs in our calculation of units-of-production depletion and our evaluation of proved and unproved properties for impairment. The process of estimating and evaluating crude oil and natural gas reserves is complex, requiring the evaluation of available geological, geophysical, engineering and economic data to estimate underground accumulations of oil and natural gas that cannot be precisely measured. Consequently, the Company engages a third-party petroleum consultant to prepare our estimates of oil and natural gas reserves. Significant inputs and engineering assumptions used in developing the estimates of proved oil and natural gas reserves include reserves volumes, future operating and development costs, historical commodity prices, and the Company’s ability to convert proved undeveloped reserves to producing properties within five years of their initial proved booking.
The data for a given property may also change substantially over time as a result of numerous factors, including additional development activity, evolving production history and a continual reassessment of the viability of production under changing economic conditions. As a result, revisions in existing reserve estimates occur. We cannot predict the amounts or timing of such future revisions. If such revisions are significant, they could significantly affect future amortization of capitalized costs and result in impairment of proved property.
Business Combinations
As part of our business strategy, we regularly pursue the acquisition of oil and natural gas properties. We utilize the acquisition method to account for acquisitions of businesses. Pursuant to this method, we allocate the cost of the acquisition, or purchase price, to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on fair values as of the acquisition date.
In estimating the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make various assumptions. The most significant of these assumptions relate to the estimated fair values assigned to proved and unproved properties. Since sufficient market data was not available regarding the fair values of our acquired proved and unproved oil and gas properties, we engaged a third-party valuation expert to assist in preparing fair value estimates. We utilized a discounted cash flow approach, based on market participant assumptions. Significant judgments and assumptions are inherent in these estimates and include, among other things, reserve quantities and classification, pace of drilling plans, future commodity prices, future development and lease operating costs, and discount rates using a market-based weighted average cost of capital determined at the time of the acquisition. When estimating the fair value of unproved properties, additional risk-weighting adjustments are applied to probable and possible reserves.
Estimated fair values ascribed to assets acquired can have a significant impact on future results of operations presented in the Company's financial statements. For example, a higher fair value ascribed to a proved properties results in higher DD&A expense, which results in lower net income. As discussed above, estimated fair values assigned to proved and unproved properties are dependent on estimates of reserve quantities, future commodity prices, as well as development and operating costs. In the event that reserve quantities or future commodity prices are lower than those used as inputs to determine estimates of acquisition-date fair values, the likelihood increases that certain costs may be determined to not be recoverable.
In addition, we record deferred taxes for any differences between the assigned fair values and tax basis of assets and liabilities. Estimated deferred taxes are based on available information concerning the tax basis of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and loss carryforwards at the acquisition date, although such estimates may change in the future as additional information becomes known.
Effects of Inflation and Pricing
Inflation in the United States averaged 4.7% in 2021, 1.2% in 2020, and 1.8% in 2019. Although inflation increased steadily and significantly in 2021 and was at near 40-year high at 7.0% as of December 31, 2021, inflation did not have a material impact on our results of operations for the period ended December 31, 2021, or for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company tends to experience inflationary pressure on the cost of oilfield services and equipment as increasing oil and gas prices increase drilling activity in our areas of operations. Material changes in prices also impact the current revenue stream, estimates of future reserves, borrowing base calculations, depletion expense, impairment assessments of oil and gas properties, ARO, and values of properties in purchase and sale transactions. Material changes in prices can impact the value of oil and gas companies and the rate of return associated with the wells they develop and can hinder their ability to raise capital, borrow money, and retain personnel. With the current increase in commodity prices and drilling activity, we expect that there will be increased costs associated with parts, materials, labor and other necessary drilling and completions related resources, including contracts for drilling and workover rigs and oilfield service companies.