Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
Statements in the following discussion and throughout this report that are not historical in nature are “forward-looking statements.” You can identify forward-looking statements by the use of words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “intend,” “believe,” and similar expressions. Although we believe the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, such statements are inherently subject to risk and we can give no assurances that our expectations will prove to be correct. Actual results could differ from those described in this report because of numerous factors, many of which are beyond our control. These factors include, without limitation, those described under Item 1A “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes. Please see “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Form 10-K.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements in the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect actual outcomes.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage immunotherapy and targeted oncology company focused on the acquisition, development and commercialization of novel treatments for patients with solid tumor cancers. We are evaluating our lead antibody product candidate, cosibelimab, an anti-PD-L1 antibody licensed from the Dana-Farber, in an ongoing global, open-label, multicohort Phase 1 clinical trial in checkpoint therapy-naïve patients with selected recurrent or metastatic cancers, including ongoing cohorts in locally advanced and metastatic cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma intended to support one or more applications for marketing approval. In addition, we are evaluating our lead small-molecule, targeted anti-cancer agent, olafertinib, a third-generation EGFR inhibitor, as a potential new treatment for patients with EGFR mutation-positive NSCLC.
In January 2022, we announced topline results from a cohort of the registration-enabling Phase 1 clinical trial of cosibelimab administered as a fixed dose of 800 mg every two weeks in patients with metastatic CSCC. The cohort met its primary endpoint, with cosibelimab demonstrating a confirmed ORR of 47.4% (95% CI: 36.0, 59.1) based on independent central review of 78 patients enrolled in the metastatic CSCC cohort using RECIST 1.1.
In December 2021, we announced the initiation of our CONTERNO study, a global, open-label, multi-center, randomized Phase 3 trial of cosibelimab in combination with pemetrexed and platinum chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of patients with NSCLC. The primary endpoint for the CONTERNO Phase 3 trial is OS, and key secondary endpoints include PFS, ORR and safety.
We have also entered into various collaboration agreements with TGTX, a related party, to develop and commercialize certain assets in connection with our licenses in the field of hematological malignancies, while we retain the right to develop and commercialize these assets in solid tumors.
To date, we have not received approval for the sale of any product candidate in any market and, therefore, have not generated any product sales from any product candidates. In addition, we have incurred substantial operating losses since our inception, and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As of December 31, 2021, we have an accumulated deficit of $199.9 million.
We are a majority-controlled subsidiary of Fortress.
Checkpoint Therapeutics, Inc. was incorporated in Delaware on November 10, 2014 and commenced principal operations in March 2015. Our executive offices are located at 95 Sawyer Road, Suite 110, Waltham, MA 02453. Our telephone number is (781) 652-4500 and our email address is ir@checkpointtx.com.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including, but not limited to, those related to research and development expenses, accrued research and development expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management's judgments and estimates.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made. Upfront and milestone payments due to third parties that perform research and development services on the Company's behalf will be expensed as services are rendered or when the milestone is achieved.
Research and development costs primarily consist of personnel related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and other related expenses, stock-based compensation, payments made to third parties for license and milestone costs related to in-licensed products and technology, payments made to third party contract research organizations for preclinical and clinical studies, investigative sites for clinical trials, consultants, the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials, and costs associated with regulatory filings, laboratory costs and other supplies.
In accordance with ASC 730 10 25 1, Research and Development, costs incurred in obtaining technology licenses are charged to research and development expense if the technology licensed has not reached commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use. In each case, we evaluate if the license agreement results in the acquisition of an asset or a business. Such licenses purchased by the Company require substantial completion of research and development, regulatory and marketing approval efforts in order to reach commercial feasibility and has no alternative future use. Accordingly, the total purchase price for the licenses acquired during the period is reflected as research and development on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expense
We record accruals for estimated costs of research, preclinical, clinical and manufacturing development within accrued expenses which are significant components of research and development expenses. A substantial portion of our ongoing research and development activities is conducted by third-party service providers such as contract research organizations in connection with our clinical studies, contract manufacturing organizations, trial sites in connection with our clinical studies and vendors associated with licenses/milestones. We accrue the costs incurred under agreements with these third parties based on estimates of actual work completed in accordance with the respective agreements. We determine the estimated costs through the reviewing of open contracts, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly for services performed or when contractual milestones are met.. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust accrued expenses or prepaid expenses accordingly, which impact research and development expenses. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company expenses stock-based compensation to employees and non-employees over the requisite service period based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards and forfeitures, which are recorded upon occurrence. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management's best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility, expected terms and interest rates utilized for our stock-based compensation expense calculations on a prospective basis. The assumptions underlying these valuations represent our management's best estimate, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different. We expect to continue to grant options and other stock-based awards in the future, and to the extent that we do, our stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue was approximately $0.3 million compared to approximately $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $0.8 million. Revenue for the current period primarily consisted of $0.2 million from TGTX related to the collaboration agreement. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $1.0 million from TGTX related to the collaboration agreement, including a milestone of $925,000 upon the 12th patient dosed in a phase 1 clinical trial for cosibelimab during March 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and other related expenses, stock-based compensation, payments made to third parties for license and milestone costs related to in-licensed products and technology, payments made to third party CROs for preclinical and clinical studies, investigative sites for clinical trials, consultants, the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials, costs associated with regulatory filings and patents, laboratory costs and other supplies.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development expenses were approximately $48.5 million, compared to approximately $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $32.1 million. The current period research and development expenses primarily consisted of $17.0 million related to the manufacturing costs of our product candidates, $14.3 million related to clinical costs for our product candidates, $6.6 million related to the non-cash annual equity fee in connection with the Founders’ Agreement, $6.4 million related to a non-refundable milestone payment upon the first patient dosed in a Phase 3 clinical study of cosibelimab, $1.5 million related to salary expenses and $0.7 million related to stock compensation expense. For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses primarily consisted of $8.0 million related to clinical costs for our product candidates, $1.7 million related to manufacturing and related costs of our product candidates, $4.6 million related to the non-cash annual equity fee in connection with the Founders’ Agreement, $0.6 million related to salary expenses and $0.6 million related to stock compensation expense.
We anticipate research and development expenses in 2022 to increase modestly as compared to 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses, including stock-based compensation, for executives and other administrative personnel, recruitment expenses, professional fees and other corporate expenses, including investor relations, legal activities, and facilities-related expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses were approximately $8.5 million, compared to approximately $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.6 million. The current period general and administrative expenses primarily consisted of stock compensation expense of $2.5 million, $1.4 million related to salary expenses, $1.0 million related to our issuance of shares to Fortress pursuant to the Founders Agreement in connection with the sale of shares of our common stock, $1.0 million related to legal and accounting fees and $0.4 million related to investor relation fees. The prior period general and administrative expenses primarily consisted of stock compensation expense of $2.2 million, $1.2 million related to salary expenses, $0.9 million related to legal and accounting fees, $0.9 million related to our issuance of shares to Fortress pursuant to the Founders Agreement in connection with the sale of shares of our common stock under an At-the-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “ATM”) and $0.9 million related to investor relation fees.
We anticipate general and administrative expenses in 2022 to modestly increase as compared to 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred substantial operating losses since our inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $199.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold a total of 11,899,983 shares of common stock under the ATM for aggregate total gross proceeds of approximately $41.3 million at an average selling price of $3.47 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $40.3 million after deducting commissions and other transaction costs.
In September 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 7,321,429 shares of our common stock at a price of $2.80 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $20.5 million. Total net proceeds from the offering were approximately $18.9 million, net of underwriting discounts and offering expenses of approximately $1.6 million. The shares were sold under a Registration Statement (No. 333-221493) on Form S-3 (the “2017 S-3”), filed with the SEC.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold a total of 5,104,234 shares of common stock under the ATM for aggregate total gross proceeds of approximately $12.8 million at an average selling price of $2.50 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $12.4 million after deducting commissions and other transaction costs.
Our major sources of cash have been proceeds from the sale of equity securities. We expect to use these proceeds primarily for general corporate purposes, which may include financing our growth, developing new or existing product candidates, and funding capital expenditures, acquisitions and investments. We currently believe that our cash and cash equivalents balances are sufficient to fund our anticipated operating cash requirements for at least one year from the date of issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We will be required to expend significant funds in order to advance the development of our product candidates. Our estimate as to how long we expect our existing cash to be able to continue to fund our operations is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Further, changing circumstances, some of which may be beyond our control, could cause us to consume capital faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned. Accordingly, we will be required to obtain further funding through equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other sources. Further financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy and we may be forced to curtail or cease operations.
In addition to the foregoing, based on the Company’s current assessment, the Company does not expect any material impact on its long-term development timeline and its liquidity due to the worldwide spread of COVID-19. However, the Company is continuing to assess the effect on its operations by monitoring the spread of COVID-19, as well as the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s clients, vendors, and business partners, and the actions implemented to combat the virus throughout the world.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not party to any off-balance sheet transactions. We have no guarantees or obligations other than those which arise out of normal business operations.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was due primarily to an increase in manufacturing of cosibelimab and clinical trial expenses in the current period.
Investing Activities
There were no investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $40.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which related to net proceeds from the issuance of common stock as part of our ATM offerings. Net cash provided by financing activities was $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which related to net proceeds of $18.9 million from the issuance of common stock as part of our underwritten public offering in September 2020 and net proceeds of $12.4 million from the issuance of common stock as part of our ATM offerings.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our Financial Statements.