ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “Colonnade Acquisition Corp. II,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Colonnade Acquisition Corp. II. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K includes forward-looking
statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on November 24, 2020 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. While we may pursue a business combination target in any business or industry, we intend to focus our search for a business combination on businesses with favorable growth prospects, that provide attractive risk-adjusted returns on invested capital, and offer compelling valuations relative to its peers. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from November 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and after the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s search for a target business with which to complete a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, and will recognize other income or expense related to the change in fair value of warrant liabilities.
We generate non-operating income in
the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $3,729,394. We incurred $4,274,797 of formation and operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses and search for a target
business with which to complete a business combination. We had investment income of $82,791 on our amounts held in the Trust Account, unrealized gain from change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $8,396,453, and offering expenses related to warrant issuance of $475,053.
For the period from November 24, 2020 (Inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $3,186 consisting of formation and operating costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of ordinary shares by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On March 12, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 33,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $330,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,733,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $8,600,000. Following the Initial Public Offering, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $330,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $17,212,069 in transaction costs, including $6,090,000 of underwriting fees, $10,657,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $464,569 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,767,408, which consisted of our net income of $3,729,394, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $82,791, changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $8,396,453, offering costs allocated to warrants of $475,053 and changes in current assets and current liabilities, which used $2,507,389 of cash.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $330,082,791. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes, if any. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any amounts to pay for our tax obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to complete our business combination. To the extent that our share capital is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the trust account of $299,837 available for working capital needs. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount in the Trust Account was withdrawn as described above.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. On April 11, 2022, we entered into a convertible promissory note (the “2022 Note”) with our Sponsor, a related party of the Company. Pursuant to the 2022 Note we may borrow from the Sponsor, from time to time, up to an aggregate of $1,500,000. Borrowings under the 2022 Note will not bear interest. The 2022 Note will mature on the earlier to occur of (i) March 12, 2023 or (ii) the effective date of our initial business combination. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be converted into warrants of the post-business combination entity, which shall have terms identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the Sponsor. The 2022 Note contains customary events of default, including those relating to our failure to repay the principal amount due upon maturity of the 2022 Note and certain bankruptcy events. $250,000 has been drawn and is outstanding under the 2022 Note as of the date of this Form 10-K.
Until the consummation of a business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination. We may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, shareholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Except for amounts that are already committed, the Sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan to us funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that we will have only 24 months (until March 12, 2023) from the closing of the Initial Public Offering to complete a business combination. There is no guarantee that we will be able to complete a business combination within the Combination Period. The Company has incurred and expects to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of its acquisition plans. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the business combination or the date we are is required to liquidate. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary in case we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On December 31, 2020, the Company issued 7,187,500 Class B Ordinary Shares to the Sponsor for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000. On February 24, 2021, the Company effected a share capitalization of 1,437,500 shares, resulting in 8,625,000 Class B Ordinary Shares being issued and outstanding. The share capitalization was retroactively applied in the Company’s financial statements. Up to 1,125,000 Founder Shares were subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor depending on the extent to which the underwriters’ over-allotment option was exercised. On March 12, 2021, the underwriter partially exercised the over-allotment option and therefore 375,000 Founder Shares were forfeited, and 750,000 Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture, resulting in 8,250,000 Founder Shares outstanding at December 31, 2021. The underwriters forfeited their remaining over-allotment option on the date of the Initial Public Offering.
The initial shareholders have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares and any Class A Ordinary Shares issuable upon conversion thereof until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of the initial business combination, or (ii) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction after the initial business combination that results in all of the Company’s shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A Ordinary Shares for cash, securities or other property; except to certain permitted transferees and under certain circumstances (the “lock-up”).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if (1) the closing price of Class A Ordinary Shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations,
recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing
at least 150 days after the initial business combination or (2) if the Company consummates a transaction after the initial business combination which results in the Company’s shareholders having the right to exchange their shares for cash, securities or other property, the Founder Shares will be released from the lock-up.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 5,733,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant ($8,600,000 in the
aggregate), each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A Ordinary Share at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the purchase price of the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the Trust Account.
The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering except that the Private Placement Warrants, so long as they are held by the Sponsor or its permitted transferees, (i) will not be redeemable by the Company, (ii) may not (including the Class A Ordinary Shares issuable upon exercise of these Private Placement Warrants), subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by the holders until 30 days after the completion of the Company’s initial business combination, (iii) may be exercised by the holders on a cashless basis and (iv) will be entitled to certain registration rights.
If the Private Placement Warrants are held by holders other than the Sponsor or its permitted transferees, the Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by the holders on the same basis as the Warrants included in the Units being sold in the Initial Public Offering.
The Sponsor has agreed to (i) waive its redemption rights with respect to its Founder Shares and Public Shares in connection with the completion of the initial business combination, (ii) waive its redemption rights with respect to its Founder Shares and Public Shares in connection with a shareholder vote to approve an amendment to the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association (A) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to allow redemption in connection with the initial business combination or to redeem 100% of the Company’s Public Shares if the Company has not consummated an initial business combination within the Combination Period or (B) with respect to any other material provisions relating to shareholders’ rights or pre-initial
business combination activity, (iii) waive its rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to its Founder Shares if the Company fails to complete the initial business combination within the Combination Period, and (iv) vote any Founder Shares held by the Sponsor and any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering (including in open market and privately-negotiated transactions) in favor of the initial business combination.
Promissory Note
-
Related Party
On December 17, 2020, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the Initial Public Offering. These loans are non-interest bearing, unsecured and
are due at the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The loan was repaid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering out of the offering proceeds that were allocated to the payment of offering expenses. At December 2020, the Company drew $30,000 which remains outstanding as of December 31, 2021. During 2021, the Company drew an additional $145,824 and repaid a total amount of $145,824. As of December 31, 2021, there was no outstanding balance under the Note.
Working Capital Loans
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the initial shareholders or an affiliate of the initial shareholders or certain of the Company’s directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a business combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a business combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. On April 11, 2022, we entered into the 2022 Note with our Sponsor, a related party of the Company. Pursuant to the 2022 Note we may borrow from the Sponsor, from time to time, up to an aggregate of $1,500,000. Borrowings under the 2022 Note will not bear interest. The 2022 Note will mature on the earlier to occur of (i) March 12, 2023 or (ii) the effective date of
our initial business combination. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be converted into warrants of the post-business combination entity, which shall have terms identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the Sponsor. The 2022 Note contains customary events of default, including those relating to our failure to repay the principal amount due upon maturity of the 2022 Note and certain bankruptcy events. $250,000 has been drawn and is outstanding under the 2022 Note as of the date of this Form 10-K.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date of the Initial Public Offering, the Company has agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $30,000 per month for rent of office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the Company’s management team. Upon completion of the initial business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has incurred $291,290 in expense pursuant to this agreement. All outstanding fees owed are paid and thus nothing is accrued as of December 31, 2021.
Other Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the (i) Founder Shares, which were issued in a Private Placement prior to the closing of the Initial Public Offering, (ii) Private Placement Warrants which were issued in a Private Placement simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Class A Ordinary Shares underlying such Private Placement Warrants and (iii) Private Placement Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the Company’s completion of the initial business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option on March 12, 2021 and forfeited the remaining over-allotment option.
On March 12, 2021, the Company paid a fixed underwriting discount of $6,090,000. Additionally, a deferred underwriting discount of $10,657,500 will be payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) Class A Ordinary Shares subject to
mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A Ordinary Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 33,000,000 Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
As of December 31, 2021, the ordinary shares reflected on the balance sheets are reconciled in the following table:
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption results in a redemption amount that approximates fair value. Remeasurement for Class A Ordinary Shares subject to redemption is not included in the determination of income or loss allocable to Class A Ordinary Shares subject to redemption, as redemption value approximates fair value. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the Class A Ordinary Shares and the Class B Ordinary Shares by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering since the exercise of the Warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such Warrants would be anti-dilutive.
The table below presents a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator used to compute basic and diluted net income per share for each class of ordinary shares:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued share purchase Warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. Pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815, we concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers and the holder of the Warrants precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants should be recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair value at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
We account for our 12,333,333 Warrants, including 6,600,000 Warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering and 5,733,333 Warrants issued as part of the Private Placement, as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised or modified, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of Warrants issued by us in connection with the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement has been estimated initially at Monte-Carlo simulations. Subsequently, at December 31, 2021, Public and Private Placement Warrants were valued using observable market quotes in an active market, and Monte-Carlo simulations, respectively.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of the independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.