Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on February 12, 2021 for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering of 17,250,000 units (the “Units,” which included the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 2,250,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit), the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt, or a combination of cash, stock, and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from February 12, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and after that identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 12, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $3,732,702, which consists of interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $6,512 and the change in fair value of warrant liability of $4,907,984, offset by formation and operational costs of $852,175 and transaction costs allocated to warrants associated with the Initial Public Offering of $329,619.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 11, 2021, we completed the Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of 5,250,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $5,250,000.
On July 1, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we consummated the sale of an additional 2,250,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $22,500,000. In addition, we also consummated the sale of an additional 450,000 Private Placement Warrants at $1.00 per warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $450,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $172,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $9,947,799 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees, $6,037,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $460,299 of other costs.
For the period from February 12, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $973,475. Net income of $3,732,702 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $6,512, a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,907,984, and Initial Public Offering transaction costs allocable to warrants of $329,619. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $121,300 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $172,506,512 (including $6,512 of interest income) consisting of money market funds, which are invested primarily in U.S. Treasury Securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay franchise taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have withdrawn $1,240,000 from the Trust Account for working capital purposes which was the result of an overfunding of the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $0.84 million and working capital of $0.79 million. (after adding back approximately $6,000 in franchise tax payable as that liability, which is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying balance sheet, is allowed to be settled using the trust account).
The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 were satisfied through the proceeds of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares (Note 5), a loan of $46,975 under an unsecured and noninterest bearing promissory note - related party (Note 5), and from the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the trust account.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable and accrued liabilities,
identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. The Company does not believe it will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating the business. However, if the Company’s estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate the business prior to the initial Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete the initial Business Combination or to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the initial Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor has committed to loan the Company up to an aggregate of $100,000, to be provided in the event that funds held outside of the Trust Account are insufficient to fund the Company’s expenses relating to investigating and selecting a target business and other working capital requirements prior to a Business Combination.
There is no assurance that the Company’s plans to consummate an initial Business Combination will be successful. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets, or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships (often referred to as variable interest entities) which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on June 8, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation. For the period from February 12, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company incurred $70,000 in fees for these services, of which such amount is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying balance sheet.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $6,037,500. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for the Public Warrants (as defined in Note 3) and the Private Placement Warrants (collectively, with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations. The Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial/lattice model. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price will be used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the re-measurement from initial book value to redemption amount, which approximates fair value. The change in the carrying value of the redeemable Class A common stock subject to possible redemption resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit and Class A common stock.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income per Common Share
Net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Re-measurement associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 11,450,000 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted income per common share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net income per common stock is the same as basic net income per common share for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on February 12, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Recent Developments
Not applicable