Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 2, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We classify the warrants issued in connection with our IPO and concurrent private placement as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrant liability to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from December 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for and consummate the IPO and identify a target company for a business combination, as described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $3,549,468, which consists of operating costs of $2,416,611, transaction costs related to warrant issuance of $622,106, offset by a non-cash change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $6,576,682, interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $11,431 and interest income from bank of $72.
For the period from December 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $999, which consists of operating costs of $999.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 29, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 24,150,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,150,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $241.5 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 4,553,333 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $6.83 million.
Following the IPO, the full exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $241.5 million was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $13.6 million in transaction costs, including $4.4 million of underwriting fees, $8.45 million of deferred underwriting fees and $0.8 million of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,586,946. Net income of $3,549,468 was affected by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,576,682, transaction costs related to warrant liability of $622,106, interest earned on investment held in Trust Account of $11,431, and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $829,593.
For the period from December 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $1. Net loss of $999 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $241.5 million. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.1 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
The Sponsor, or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, extend us working capital loans as may be required in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $2.0 million of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the consummate of our initial business combination. If we are unable to consummate our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until January 29, 2023 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur and an extension is not requested by the Sponsor, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after January 29, 2023.
Related Party Transactions
Payments to an Affiliate
Commencing as of February 2021, we have been and will continue to make payments of approximately $65,000 per month, or $780,000 on an annualized basis to CRIS Services LLC, an entity owned by Mr. Cavalier, our Chief Financial Officer, and Mr. Crane, our Chief Executive Officer, and managed by Ms. Frank-Shapiro, our Chief Operating Officer, for consulting services rendered to us. Messrs. Cavalier and Crane also receive health insurance benefits from CRIS Services LLC. Upon completion of an initial business combination, it is expected that we would cease to make any further payments.
Promissory Note
On December 11, 2020, we issued the promissory note to the Sponsor, pursuant to which we borrowed $250,000 from the Sponsor in order to pay certain transaction expenses associated with our IPO. The promissory note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of June 30, 2021 or the consummation of our IPO. Upon completion of the IPO on January 29, 2021, we repaid the promissory note in full. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the outstanding balance under the promissory note was $0.
Advance from related party
On October 20,2021, The Sponsor provided notice of a capital call to the PIMCO private funds and Climate Real Impact Solutions II Consortium, LLC for the follow-on additional capital in the amount of $1 million per schedule A of the Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of the Sponsor dated January 8, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, Climate Real Impact Solutions II Consortium, LLC and PIMCO private funds had advanced the Company $333,300 and $666,700, respectively for working capital purposes. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance under the advance amounted to $1,000,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as “variable interest entities,” which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.45 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we consummate an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
We entered into various consulting arrangements with several service providers for administrative services and potential target financial analysis and due diligence services to us. These arrangements provide for aggregate monthly fees of approximately $70,000.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption, if any, in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D and 7F under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the warrants issued in the IPO has been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation methodology as of the date of the IPO and such warrants’ quoted market price as of December 31, 2021. The private placement warrants were valued using a Modified Black Scholes Option Pricing Model.
Net Income (Loss) per share of Common Stock
Net income (loss) per share of common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating net income (loss) per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.