Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We have built (1) a free-to-play synchronized mobile app and digital gaming platform. The platform is designed to enable WinQuik™ users to have fun, interact and compete in order to win real money and prizes and (2) a language learning app that focuses on “language exchanging” between users around the world. As opposed to quizzes, flash cards and other traditional language studying tools, HeyPal™’s approach to helping its users learn a new language is by matching them together with native speakers of their target language. The platforms support iOS and Android platforms and web and built dynamically so it can expand quickly. (3) Nifter™ is a marketplace for non-fungible tokens on the Ethereum Blockchain. (4) Joey’s Animal Kingdom™ is a children’s entertainment and education app.
Results of Operations-Comparison of the Years Ended September 30, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
During the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $692,000 and $302,000 million of research and development expenses, respectively. An increase of $390,000. This increase is mainly due to the research and development expenses incurred for the HeyPal™ app and Nifter™ music NFT. In December 2020, the Company acquired Nebula Software Corp. owner of HeyPal™. In March 2021, and the Company acquired Rebel Blockchain, Inc. the owner Nifter™ Music NFT Marketplace. Nebula incurred $518,000 during 2021 and Rebel Blockchain incurred $119,000 during 2021. This increase of $637,000 was offset by a reduction in Clickstream Corp of $247,000 which incurred $55,000 during 2021 as compared to $302,000 during 2020 as the WinQuick app went live.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
During the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $6,527,000 and $1,697,000 million of selling, general and administrative expenses, respectively. An increase of $4,830,000. Stock based compensation and stock based contingent consideration for 2021 was $2,591,398 as compared to $777,000 for 2020. Additional selling, general, and administrative expenses in 2021 were due to increased spending on investor relations campaigns to broaden awareness of the Company, additional spending on sales and marketing, additional spending on consulting costs and increased legal costs primarily associated with regulatory and financing efforts as well as expenses from the acquisition of Nebula Software Corp. and Rebel Blockchain, Inc.
Loss on impairment
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company recorded an impairment loss of $128,000 related to the Nebula Software acquired intangible asset. There was no such impairment loss in the year ended September 30, 2020.
Amortization of debt discount
Amortization of debt discount was $375,000 and $165,000 for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is due to an increase in non-cash amortization of debt issuance costs associated with convertible debentures the year ended September 30, 2021.
Interest Income
During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company recorded interest income receivable of $41,000 from the notes receivable - Winners, Inc. There was no such interest income accrued in the year ended September 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2021, we had cash of $422,000. The Company’s current operations have focused on business planning, raising capital, continued research and development and sales and marketing. The Company has not generated any revenue from product sales. The Company has sustained operating losses since inception and expects such losses to continue over the foreseeable future. During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company raised $1.5 million net of $375,000 original issue discounts through a series of issuances of convertible debentures. During 2021 $125,000 was repaid and $1,750,000 was converted to common stock in our Regulation A offering. We anticipate that cash utilized for selling, general, and administrative expenses will range between $1 and $2 million in the coming quarters, while research and development expenses will continue. The Company is pursuing several alternatives to address this situation, including the raising of additional funding through equity or debt financings. In order to finance existing operations and pay current liabilities over the next twelve months, the Company will need to raise an additional $5 million of capital in 2022.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that our critical accounting policies are as follows:
● Research and Development Costs;
● Stock Based Compensation;
● Fair Value of Financial Instruments
● Equity Method Investments
● Asset Acquisitions
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs consist of expenditures for the research and development of new products and technology. These costs are primarily expenses to vendors contracted to perform research projects and develop technology for the Company’s mobile gaming applications. Costs incurred for research and development are expensed as incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for our stock-based compensation to employees and non-employees under ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation” using the fair value-based method. Under this method, compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized over the requisite service period, which is usually the vesting period. This guidance establishes standards for the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges it equity instruments for goods or services. It also addresses transactions in which an entity incurs liabilities in exchange for goods or services that are based on the fair value of the entity’s equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of those equity instruments.
Fair Value Measurements
We use fair value measurements to record fair value adjustments to certain assets and liabilities and to determine fair value disclosures. We base our fair values on the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Additionally, from time to time, we may be required to record certain assets at fair value on a non-recurring basis, such as certain impaired loans held for investment and securities held to maturity that are other-than-temporarily impaired or goodwill. These non-recurring fair value adjustments typically involve write-downs of individual assets due to application of lower-of-cost or market accounting or other accounting standards.
We have established and documented a process for determining fair value. We maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when developing fair value measurements. Whenever there is no readily available market data, management uses its best estimate and assumptions in determining fair value, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if other assumptions had been used, our recorded earnings or disclosures could have been materially different from those reflected in these financial statements. For detailed information on our use of fair value measurements and our related valuation methodologies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.
Equity Method Investment
The equity method is applied to investments in affiliated companies and joint ventures. An affiliated company is an entity which is not controlled by the Company but for which the Company is able to exert significant influence over the decisions on financial and operating business policies. If the Company has 20% or more but not more than 50% of the voting rights of another entity, the Company is presumed to have significant influence over that entity however, if a company has less than 20% of the voting rights and is able to exert significant influence the equity method should be applied. Under the equity method, the investment in an affiliated company or joint venture is initially recognized at cost and the carrying amount is increased or decreased to recognize the Company’s share of the net income or loss of the affiliated company or joint venture. When the Company’s share of losses of an affiliated company equals or exceeds it interest in the affiliated company or joint venture, the Company discontinues recognizing its share of further losses. All intercompany profits have been eliminated in proportion to interests in affiliated companies or joint ventures.
Asset Acquisitions
The Company accounts for acquisitions of legal entities that do not meet the definition of a business under ASC 805 as asset acquisitions. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their relative fair value and no goodwill is recorded. Contingent consideration for assets acquired is measured and is recognized as an expense on the date the contingency occurs.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See discussion in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.