Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (this discussion, as well as discussions under the same heading in our other periodic reports, are referred to as the “MD&A”) should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report, and all cross references to notes included in this MD&A refer to the identified note in such consolidated financial statements. This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2021 to 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 9, 2021.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements. See the discussion about these statements under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report.
Overview
We are North America’s leading provider of the cleanest fuel for the transportation market, based on the number of stations operated and the amount of gasoline gallon equivalents (“GGEs”) of renewable natural gas (“RNG”) and conventional natural gas delivered. Through our sales of RNG, which is derived from biogenic methane produced by the
breakdown of organic waste, we help thousands of vehicles, from airport shuttles to city buses to waste and heavy-duty trucks, reduce their amount of climate-harming greenhouse gas from 60% to over 400% based on determinations by the California Air Resources Board (“CARB”), depending on the source of the RNG, while also reducing criteria pollutants such as Oxides of Nitrogen, or NOx. RNG is delivered as compressed natural gas (“CNG”) and liquefied natural gas (“LNG”).
As a clean energy solutions provider, we supply RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, for medium and heavy-duty vehicles; design and build, as well as operate and maintain (“O&M”), public and private fueling stations in the United States and Canada; develop and own dairy ADG RNG production facilities; sell and service compressors and other equipment used in RNG production and at fueling stations; transport and sell RNG and conventional natural gas via “virtual” natural gas pipelines and interconnects; sell U.S. federal, state and local government credits (collectively, “Environmental Credits”) we generate by selling RNG as a vehicle fuel, including Renewable Identification Numbers (“RIN Credits” or “RINs”) under the federal Renewable Fuel Standard Phase 2 and credits under the California and the Oregon Low Carbon Fuel Standards (collectively, “LCFS Credits”); and obtain federal, state and local tax credits, grants and incentives.
At present, we see the best use of RNG as a replacement for fossil-based fuel in the transportation sector. We believe the most attractive market for RNG is U.S. heavy-duty Class 8 trucking; based on information from the American Trucking Association and our own internal estimates, we believe there are approximately 3.9 million Class 8 heavy-duty trucks operating in the U.S. that use over 40 billion gallons of diesel fuel per year. As of December 31, 2021, we deliver RNG to the transportation market through 548 fueling stations we own, operate or supply in 42 states and the District of Columbia in the U.S., including over 200 stations in California. We also own, operate, or supply 25 fueling stations in Canada.
Critically, to generate valuable Environmental Credits, RNG must be placed in vehicle fuel tanks. We believe our stations and customer relationships allow us to deliver substantially more RNG to vehicle operators than any other participant in the market - we calculate that we have access to more fueling stations and vehicle fleets than all our competitors combined. As of December 31, 2021, we served over 1,000 fleet customers operating over 48,000 vehicles on our fuels.
Longer term, we plan to provide hydrogen fuel to vehicle fleets. As operators deploy more hydrogen powered vehicles, we can modify our fueling stations to reform our RNG and deliver clean hydrogen to customers. We also believe our RNG can be used to generate clean electricity to power electric vehicles, and we have the capability to add electric vehicle charging at our station sites, although the cost of adding electric vehicle charging capacity may be significant.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse impact on the volume of our sales, which we saw bottom in the second quarter of 2020. We have since seen improvement in volumes, with volumes delivered for the fourth quarter of 2021 9% higher compared to the fourth quarter of 2020, and 1% higher compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. We saw significant improvement in our volumes delivered in the public transit customer markets and airports (fleet services), which increased by 12% and 34%, respectively, during the three months ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year period. Our volume of GGEs delivered for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 5% compared to the prior year. The increase in volumes delivered in the fourth quarter of 2021 and in fiscal year 2021 was primarily due to COVID-19 restrictions being lifted and an increase in travel generally.
Although we are experiencing gradual improvements since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is no guarantee this will continue due to uncertainties regarding the continuance of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is possible that the prolonged effect of the COVID-19 pandemic could negatively affect our volumes. Lower volumes since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in and could again result in lower gross margin dollars and likely a lower gross margin per GGE due to lower output on fixed operating costs and the effect of less revenue from Environmental Credits. Lower volumes have affected and may again affect our federal alternative fuel excise tax credit (“AFTC”) revenue as this leads to lower AFTC-eligible volumes. Given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, significant uncertainty exists concerning the duration of business disruption and the full extent of the effect of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Additionally, the effects of COVID-19, commodity prices and the adoption of
government policies and programs, or increased popular sentiment, in favor of other vehicle technologies or fuels may delay adoption of natural gas vehicles, particularly heavy-duty natural gas trucks, by new or existing customers. For more information, see “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to support business operations through this volatile period, including total cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $229.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and $13.7 million of current debt. We expect to collect receivables relating to AFTC credits generated from fuel sales during 2021 in the first half of 2022. We also expect AFTC to be reinstated during 2022 and apply retroactively to vehicle fuel sales made beginning January 1, 2022 and we anticipate AFTC revenue to be approximately $21.2 million for 2022 after giving consideration to the effect of COVID-19 described above.
Performance Overview
This performance overview discusses matters on which our management focuses in evaluating our financial condition and our operating results.
Sources of Revenue
The following tables represent our sources of revenue:
(1) Our volume-related revenue primarily consists of sales of RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, performance of O&M services, and sales of RINs and LCFS Credits in addition to changes in fair value of our derivative instruments. More information about our volume of fuel and O&M services delivered in the periods is included below under “Key Operating Data,” and more information about our derivative instruments, which consist of commodity swap and customer fueling contracts, is included in Note 7. Additionally, a discussion of volume-related revenue is included below under “Results of Operations.” The following table summarizes our volume-related revenue in the periods:
a. The change in fair value of derivative instruments is related to the Company’s commodity swap and customer fueling contracts. The amounts are classified as revenue because the Company’s commodity swap contracts are used to economically offset the risk associated with the diesel-to-natural gas price spread resulting from customer fueling contracts under the Company’s Zero Now truck financing program.
(2) Includes $83.6 million of non-cash stock-based sales incentive contra-revenue charges related to the Amazon Warrant (as defined below) for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(3) Represents the federal alternative fuel tax credit, that we refer to as AFTC. AFTC was available for vehicle fuel sales made through December 31, 2021. AFTC may not be reinstated for vehicle fuel sales made after December 31, 2021.
Key Operating Data
In evaluating our operating performance, we focus primarily on: (1) the amount of RNG, CNG and LNG GGEs delivered (which we define as (i) the volume of GGEs we sell to our customers as fuel, plus (ii) the volume of GGEs
dispensed at facilities we do not own but where we provide O&M services on a per-gallon or fixed fee basis, plus (iii) our proportionate share of the GGEs sold as CNG by our joint venture with Mansfield Ventures, LLC and Mansfield Clean Energy Partners, LLC (“MCEP”), (2) our station construction cost of sales, (3) our gross margin (which we define as revenue minus cost of sales), and (4) net income (loss) attributable to us. The following tables present our key operating data for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021:
RNG sold as vehicle fuel is included in the CNG or LNG amounts in the table above as applicable based on the form in which it was sold. GGEs of RNG sold as vehicle fuel for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, were as follows:
RNG sold as vehicle fuel is included in the table above as applicable based on the services provided. GGEs of RNG sold as vehicle fuel for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, were as follows:
(1) As noted above, amounts include our proportionate share of the GGEs sold as CNG by our joint venture with MCEP. GGEs sold by this joint venture were 0.4 million, 0.3 million, and 0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
(2) Represents GGEs at stations where we provide both fuel and O&M services.
(3) Includes $47.1 million, $19.8 million, and $20.7 million of AFTC revenue for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively.
(4) Gross margin includes an unrealized gain (loss) from the change in fair value of commodity swap and customer fueling contracts of $(6.6) million, $2.1 million, and $(3.5) million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively. See Note 7 for more information regarding the commodity swap and customer contracts.
(5) Includes $0.0 million, $0.0 million, and $83.6 million of non-cash stock-based sales incentive contra-revenue charges related to the Amazon Warrant (as defined below) for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, respectively.
2019 -2021 Developments
TotalEnergies Joint Venture. On December 21, 2020, we announced a memorandum of understanding with TotalEnergies S.E. (“TotalEnergies”) to create a joint venture to develop carbon negative RNG production facilities in the United States, as well as credit support to build additional downstream RNG infrastructure. TotalEnergies will provide $50.0 million, and we will provide $30.0 million for the proposed joint venture. TotalEnergies will also be providing credit support of $65.0 million to support our development in the RNG value chain, including $45.0 million for contracted RNG fueling infrastructure.
On March 3, 2021, we entered an agreement (“TotalEnergies JV Agreement”) with TotalEnergies that created a 50/50 joint venture (“TotalEnergies JV”) to develop anaerobic digester gas (“ADG”) RNG production facilities in the United States. Each ADG RNG production facility project under the TotalEnergies JV will be formed as a separate limited liability company (“LLC”) that is owned 50/50 by us and TotalEnergies, and contributions to such LLCs count toward the TotalEnergies JV Equity Obligations (as defined below). The TotalEnergies JV Agreement contemplates that the TotalEnergies JV will invest up to $400.0 million of equity in production projects, and TotalEnergies and the Company each committed to initially provide $50.0 million for the TotalEnergies JV (the “TotalEnergies JV Equity Obligations”). To fund our TotalEnergies JV Equity Obligations, we had the option to borrow $20.0 million from Société Générale, a company incorporated as a société anonyme under the laws of France (“SG”), pursuant to the SG Credit Agreement (as defined below). See Note 12 for additional information.
On October 12, 2021, we entered into an LLC agreement (the “DR Development Agreement”) with TotalEnergies to develop a dairy ADG RNG production facility project (the “DR JV”). Under the DR Development Agreement, we and TotalEnergies have each committed to contribute $7.0 million to the DR JV. On November 1, 2021, we and TotalEnergies have each contributed an initial $4.8 million capital contribution to the DR JV.
SG Credit Agreement. On March 12, 2021, we amended the credit agreement (as amended, the “SG Credit Agreement”) with SG, to permit us to use up to $45.0 million of loan proceeds to fund certain station build costs and up to $20.0 million to fund TotalEnergies JV Equity Obligations. Our ability to draw under the SG Credit Agreement ended on January 2, 2022.
bp Joint Venture. On December 18, 2020, we entered a memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) with bp Products North America Inc. (“bp”). Pursuant to the MOU, we and bp intend to create a joint venture to develop, own, and operate RNG production facilities at dairies. Contemporaneous with the execution of the MOU, we and bp executed a loan agreement whereby bp advanced $50.0 million (in the form of a loan) to fund capital costs and expenses incurred prior to formation of the joint venture. We expect that all unpaid principal and accrued interest outstanding under the loan agreement will be contributed to the joint venture, provided that if the joint venture is not formed by April 30, 2022, we are obligated to repay the outstanding principal and accrued interest within five days of April 30, 2022.
On April 13, 2021, we entered an agreement (“bp JV Agreement”) with bp that created a 50/50 joint venture (“bpJV”) to develop, own and operate new ADG RNG production facilities in the United States. Pursuant to the bp JV Agreement, we and bp have each committed to provide $30.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively, with bp and us each receiving 30.0 million of Class A Units in the bpJV and bp also receiving 20.0 million of Class B Units in the bpJV. bp’s initial $50.0 million contribution was made on April 13, 2021 and consisted of all unpaid principal outstanding under the loan agreement dated December 18, 2020 (see Note 12), pursuant to which bp advanced us $50.0 million to fund capital costs and expenses incurred prior to formation of the bpJV, including capital costs and expenses for permitting, engineering, equipment, leases and feed stock rights. 100% of the RNG produced from the projects developed and owned by the bpJV will be provided to the vehicle fuels market pursuant to our existing marketing agreement with bp.
Pursuant to the bp JV Agreement, we had the option, exercisable prior to August 31, 2021 (the “bp Option”), to commit an additional $20.0 million to the bpJV upon which bp’s Class B Units would convert into Class A Units. On June 21, 2021, we contributed $50.2 million consisting of our initial contribution commitment of $30.0 million, the $20.0 million additional contribution to exercise our bp Option, plus $0.2 million of interest in accordance with the bp JV Agreement to effect the conversion of bp’s Class B Units into Class A Units. In December 2021, the bpJV authorized a capital call (the “bpJV Capital Call”) for additional funding of $143.2 million to construct ADG RNG projects under the bpJV. Pursuant to the bpJV Capital Call, we and bp are each required to contribute $71.6 million to the bpJV. As of December 31, 2021, we and bp have contributed $20.0 million and $71.6 million, respectively, to the bpJV in connection with the bpJV Capital Call. The remaining contribution balance of $51.6 million due from us will be paid on or prior to June 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we and bp each own 50% of the bpJV.
Amazon. On April 16, 2021, we entered into a Project Addendum to Fuel Pricing Agreement (“Fuel Agreement”) with Amazon Logistics, Inc., a subsidiary of Amazon.com, Inc. (“Amazon”), and a Transaction Agreement with Amazon (the “Transaction Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, we issued to Amazon.com NV Investment Holdings LLC, a subsidiary of Amazon (“Amazon Holdings”), a warrant to purchase up to an aggregate of 53,141,755 shares (the “Warrant Shares”) of our common stock at an exercise price of $13.49 per share, which was a 21.3% premium to the $11.12 closing price of our common stock on April 15, 2021.
The Warrant Shares vest in multiple tranches, the first of which for 13,283,445 Warrant Shares vested upon execution of the Fuel Agreement. Subsequent tranches will vest over time based on fuel purchases by Amazon and its affiliates, up to a total of $500 million in fuel purchases, excluding any payments attributable to “Pass Through Costs,” which consist of all costs associated with the delivered cost of gas and applicable taxes determined by reference to the selling price, gallons or gas sold. Importantly, in order for all the vesting conditions of the warrant to be satisfied, Amazon would have to purchase hundreds of millions of GGEs of RNG from us.
Under the Transaction Agreement, we were required to use commercially reasonable efforts to obtain the approval of our stockholders with respect to the issuance of Warrant Shares in excess of 50,595,531 shares of our common stock, pursuant to The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC’s Listing Rule 5635(b) (the “Stockholder Approval”). On June 14, 2021, we obtained the Stockholder Approval at our 2021 annual meeting of stockholders.
In accordance with the terms of the warrant, as a result of the issuance of shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM Programs (as defined below), on June 14, 2021, the number of shares of our common stock that may be purchased pursuant to the warrant, at an exercise price of $13.49 per share, increased by an aggregate of 5,625,959 shares (the “Additional Warrant Shares”). The Additional Warrant Shares vest in multiple tranches, the first of which for 1,406,490 Additional Warrant Shares vested on June 14, 2021. Subsequent tranches of the Additional Warrant Shares will vest over time based on fuel purchases by Amazon and its affiliates, consistent with the vesting schedule for the Warrant Shares as described above. The right to exercise the warrants and receive the Warrant Shares and Additional Warrant Shares (the “Amazon Warrant”) that have vested expires April 16, 2031.
We believe our commercial partnership with Amazon will enhance our strategies, initiatives and efforts to achieve our goals to grow fleet and other consumer support for the use of RNG as a vehicle fuel for our target customers and geographies. We also believe the proceeds from the issuance of our common stock to Amazon in the event Amazon were to vest and then exercise the Amazon Warrant in part or as a whole for cash would enhance our liquidity in support of our operations, as well as our ability to execute our business plans and pursue opportunities for further growth. Accordingly, we believe securing this commercial partnership and incentiving Amazon to purchase the maximum amount of fuel under the Fuel Agreement is important for our business trajectory.
As a result of the immediate vesting of a portion of the Warrant Shares and Additional Warrant Shares, we recognized non-cash stock-based sales incentive contra-revenue charges (“Amazon Warrant Charges”) in the second quarter of 2021 of $76.6 million and a customer incentive asset of $38.4 million representing Amazon Warrant Charges associated with future contractually required minimum fuel purchases which will be recognized as the fuel is purchased.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Amazon Warrant Charges were $83.6 million, which included $76.6 million from the immediate vesting of a portion of the Warrant Shares and Additional Warrant Shares and $7.0 million associated
with fuel purchases. As of December 31, 2021, we had a customer incentive asset of $12.4 million and $22.1 million, classified in “Prepaid expenses and other current assets” and “Notes receivable and other long-term assets, net,” respectively, in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
At-The-Market Offerings. On May 10, 2021, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, as sales agent, to sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million in an at-the-market offering program (the “May ATM Program”). As of June 3, 2021, we sold 12,362,237 shares of our common stock under the May ATM Program, which exhausted the May ATM Program. On June 7, 2021, we entered into a new equity distribution agreement with Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, as sales agent, to sell additional shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million in a new at-the-market offering program (the “June ATM Program” and, together with the May ATM Program, the “ATM Programs”). On June 8, 2021, we sold 10,473,946 shares of our common stock under the June ATM Program, which exhausted the June ATM Program.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 22,836,183 shares of our common stock under the ATM Programs for gross proceeds of $200.0 million, and incurred transaction costs of $6.5 million, including $6.0 million in commissions paid to Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC.
Share Repurchase Program. On March 12, 2020, our Board of Directors approved the Repurchase Program for up to $30.0 million (exclusive of fees and commissions) of our outstanding common stock. On December 7, 2021, our Board of Directors approved an increase in the aggregate purchase amount under the Repurchase Program from $30.0 million to $50.0 million (exclusive of fees and commissions). The Repurchase Program does not have an expiration date, does not obligate us to acquire any specific number of shares, and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. As of December 31, 2021, we had utilized $17.4 million under the Repurchase Program to purchase 8,197,086 shares of our common stock for a total cost of $17.6 million.
Plains Credit Facility. On May 1, 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Plains LSA”) with PlainsCapital Bank (“Plains”) which provides us a $20.0 million revolving line of credit through May 1, 2022. The interest rate on amounts outstanding under the Plains LSA is the greater of the Prime Rate or 3.25%. As of December 31, 2021, no amounts were outstanding under the Plains LSA. On September 16, 2021, Plains issued an irrevocable standby letter of credit on behalf of the Company to the Chevron Products Company, a division of Chevron U.S.A. Inc. (“Chevron”), for $2.0 million relating to the Company’s Adopt-A-Port program with Chevron. The standby letter of credit is valid until cancelled and is collateralized by the Company’s revolving line of credit with Plains, reducing the amount available under the line of credit from $20.0 million to $18.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, no amounts have been drawn under the standby letter of credit.
Chevron Adopt-a-Port. In June 2020, we entered into an agreement with Chevron Corp. (“Chevron”) to provide truck operators serving the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach with cleaner, carbon negative RNG to reduce emissions. Under the agreement, Chevron will provide funding to allow truck operators to subsidize the cost of buying new RNG-powered trucks and will supply RNG to our stations near the ports.
AFTC. On December 20, 2019, the AFTC was retroactively extended beginning January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2020. As a result, AFTC revenue for vehicle fuel we sold in 2018 and 2019, which totaled $47.1 million, was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019. AFTC revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $19.8 million. The AFTC credit for 2018, 2019 and 2020 was equal to $0.50 per GGE of CNG that we sold as vehicle fuel, and $0.50 per diesel gallon of LNG that we sold as vehicle fuel. In December 2020 AFTC was extended for vehicle fuel sales made through December 31, 2021. We expect AFTC to be reinstated during 2022 and apply retroactively to vehicle fuel sales made beginning January 1, 2022.
Zero Now Truck Financing Program. We launched the Zero Now truck financing program, which is intended to facilitate and increase the deployment of commercially available RNG heavy-duty trucks in the United States and encourage these operators to fuel their trucks at our stations. The Zero Now program is unique and complex, and has involved our entry into various arrangements in order to launch the program, including a term credit agreement for delayed draw loans of up to $100.0 million, which we could draw through January 2, 2022; a credit support agreement with THUSA, a wholly owned subsidiary of TotalEnergies, under which THUSA has guaranteed our obligations under the term
credit agreement in exchange for a quarterly fee; and commodity swap arrangements with an affiliate of THUSA and TotalEnergies covering five million diesel gallons of natural gas fuel volume annually from April 2019 through June 2024, which are intended to manage diesel price fluctuation risks related to the natural gas fuel supply commitments we expect to make in our anticipated fueling agreements with fleet operators that participate in the Zero Now program. See the disclosure under “Key Customer Markets-Zero Now” in Item 1. “Business” of this report for information about these agreements and the structure of the program.
Debt Repurchase and Repayment. In May 2020, we repaid the remaining $50.0 million of 7.5% Notes and related accrued and unpaid interest thereon. Upon such payment, the 7.5% Notes were paid in full. See Note 12 for more information about our outstanding debt.
NG Advantage. In February 2020, we converted the principal and accrued interest under the November 2019 Convertible Note (as defined in Note 4) into common units of NG Advantage, LLC (“NG Advantage”) and received common units pursuant to the guaranty agreement entered in February 2018, resulting in an increase in our controlling interest in NG Advantage to 93.3%.
Debt Level and Debt Compliance
As of December 31, 2021, we had total indebtedness, excluding finance lease obligations, of $36.1 million in principal amount, of which $12.9 million is expected to become due in 2022. Certain of the agreements governing our outstanding debt, which are discussed in Note 12, have certain financial and non-financial covenants with which we must comply. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all of these covenants.
Key Trends
Market for RNG, CNG and LNG as a Vehicle Fuel
According to CARB, RNG and conventional natural gas are cleaner than gasoline and diesel fuel based on the greenhouse gas emissions produced by vehicles operated by these fuels. Additionally, RNG and conventional natural gas are generally less expensive for vehicle operators than gasoline and diesel on an energy equivalent basis. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, demand for renewable and conventional natural gas fuels in the United States has increased in recent years and is expected to continue to increase. We expect our sales of RNG and conventional natural gas to grow as more companies look to operate in an increasingly sustainable way. In addition to pressure from politicians, regulators and non-governmental organizations, the investment community has dramatically increased demands on companies to diminish their contributions to climate change. We believe that RNG is the best tool available today to reduce climate-harming greenhouse gas and meet sustainability objectives.
The market for our vehicle fuels, however, is a relatively new and developing market. As a result, it is difficult to accurately predict demand for our vehicle fuels, in general and in any specific geographic and customer markets, and consequently our timing and level of investment in particular markets may not be consistent with any growth in demand in these markets. Further, the new and developing nature of the market for our vehicle fuels has led to slow, volatile or unpredictable growth in many sectors. For example, to date, adoption and deployment of natural gas vehicles, both in general and in certain of our key customer markets, including heavy-duty trucking, have been slower than we anticipated.
We believe challenging market conditions are caused by a number of factors, including the following:
● Volatile prices for oil, diesel and gasoline, which decreases the price advantage of our fuels. In addition, these pricing conditions have led us to reduce the prices we charge some customers for our fuels, which has reduced our profit margins.
● There has been increased focus by some parties, including lawmakers, regulators, policymakers, environmental and advocacy organizations and other powerful groups, on electric or other alternative vehicles or vehicle fuels. For example, the 2021 Executive Order directs the federal government to achieve certain goals, including achieving 100% zero-emission vehicle acquisitions by 2035. In addition, California lawmakers and regulators
have implemented various measures designed to increase the use of electric, hydrogen and other zero-emission vehicles, including establishing firm goals for the number of these vehicles operating on state roads by specified dates and enacting various laws and other programs in support of these goals. Among other things, we believe many California lawmakers and regulators desire to limit and ultimately discontinue the production and use of internal combustion engines because such engines have “tailpipe” emissions.
● We believe the lack of substantial growth in the heavy-duty trucking market has been driven in part by the experience of operators with, or perceptions of, unsatisfactory performance by prior models of heavy-duty natural gas truck engines, actual or perceived insufficiencies in the financial incentives to convert, and improvements in diesel engine technology. If these conditions continue, then the growth levels in this market will continue to be low. We believe the newest models of heavy-duty natural gas truck engines have substantially addressed concerns with prior models. Further, we have launched our Zero Now truck financing program and the Chevron Adopt-a-Port program to combat operator concerns, but these programs may not ultimately be successful.
To the extent these or other factors have contributed to curtailed demand or slowing growth in the market for our vehicle fuels, we believe they have also contributed to decreases in station construction activity in certain periods, as the success of this activity is dependent on the success of the market for our vehicle fuels generally. Moreover, we believe these factors have materially contributed to the volatility and declines in our stock price and market capitalization in recent years, which has and could in the future lead to decreased cash flows and indications of asset or goodwill impairment. If these adverse macroeconomic conditions and other uncertainties in our industry persist, our financial results and stock price may continue to be adversely affected.
In spite of these market conditions, we believe our key customer markets, including heavy-duty trucking, airports, refuse, and public transit, are well-suited for the adoption of our vehicle fuels because they consume relatively high volumes of fuel, refuel at centralized locations or along well-defined routes and/or are facing increasingly stringent emissions or other environmental requirements. We also expect the lower greenhouse gas emissions associated with our RNG vehicle fuel will result in increased demand for this fuel, resulting in our continued delivery of increasing volumes of RNG to our vehicle fleet customers. Additionally, we anticipate that, over time, cities and communities in the United States and Canada will follow large cities in Europe in banning diesel vehicles. If these projections materialize, we believe there will be growth in the consumption of our vehicle fuels in our key customer and geographic markets, and our goal is to capitalize on this growth if and when it materializes. In that event, we expect our operating costs and capital expenditures would increase in connection with any growth of our business in the future.
Our Performance
Overview. Our gross revenue mostly consists of volume-related revenue, station construction sales, and AFTC revenue. Our revenue can vary between periods due to a variety of factors, including, among others, the amount and timing of vehicle fuel sales, natural gas commodity prices, station construction sales, sales of Environmental Credits, and recognition of government credits, grants and incentives, such as AFTC. In addition, our volume-related revenue has been and may continue to be subject to fluctuations as a result of our entry into certain commodity swap arrangements in October 2018, because the changes in fair value of these and certain other derivative instruments, including existing and anticipated fueling contracts under our Zero Now truck financing program, are included in volume-related revenue. Furthermore, our volume-related revenue has been affected by the Amazon Warrant Charges resulting from immediate vesting of a portion of the Warrant Shares and Additional Warrant Shares and subsequent vesting associated with fuel purchases made by Amazon and its affiliates.
Our cost of sales can also vary between periods due to a variety of factors, including fluctuations in natural gas commodity prices, station construction and labor costs, as well as the other factors that impact our revenue levels described above.
In addition, our performance in certain periods has been affected by transactions or events that have resulted in significant cash or non-cash gains or losses. Such gains or losses may not recur regularly, in the same amounts or at all in future periods and, with respect to non-cash gains and losses, do not impact our liquidity.
These significant fluctuations in our operating results may render period-to-period comparisons less meaningful, especially given the current uncertainties related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and investors in our securities should not rely on the results of one period as an indicator of performance in any other period. Additionally, these fluctuations in our operating results could cause our performance in any period to fall below the financial guidance we may have provided to the public or the estimates and projections of the investment community, which could negatively affect the price of our common stock.
See “Results of Operations” below for more information about our performance in 2020 and 2021.
Volume. The amount of RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, that we delivered increased by 5.3% from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to the effect of COVID-19 restrictions being lifted and increase in travel generally.
The amount of RNG we sell as vehicle fuel, which is delivered in the form of CNG or LNG, has continued to experience robust growth, and increased by 8.9% from 2020 to 2021. We believe the increased demand for RNG is attributable to the dramatic reduction in the amount of climate-harming greenhouse gas that can be achieved through the use of RNG and pressure from politicians, regulators, non-governmental organizations and the investment community directed at companies to reduce their contributions to climate change. To the extent demand for RNG continues to increase, we expect our TotalEnergies JV and our expanded supply agreement and bpJV could increase our volume-related revenue due to increased volumes of RNG vehicle fuel sold and increased generation of RINs and LCFS Credits. In addition, such an increase in RNG demand could also result in more robust competition for supplies of RNG, including from other vehicle fuel providers, gas utilities (which may have distinct advantages in accessing RNG supply, including potential use of ratepayer funds to fund RNG purchases if approved by a utility’s regulatory commission) and other users and providers. We expect to invest in production projects to help ensure that we have adequate supply of RNG, and we are pursuing development and ownership of livestock waste ADG projects on our own and with partners including TotalEnergies and bp.
Environmental Credits. When we sell RNG and conventional natural gas for use as a vehicle fuel, we are eligible to generate RINs and LCFS Credits, which we then seek to sell to third parties.
The markets for RINs and LCFS Credits have been volatile and unpredictable in recent periods, and the prices for these credits have been subject to significant fluctuations. For example, in 2021, market prices for RINs have been as high as $3.81 and as low as $1.95. Additionally, the value of RINs and LCFS Credits, and consequently the revenue levels we may receive from our sale of these credits, may be adversely affected by changes to the federal and state programs under which these credits are generated and sold, prices for and use of oil, diesel or gasoline, the inclusion of additional qualifying fuels in the programs, increased production levels of other fuels in the programs, or other conditions. Further, our ability to generate revenue from sales of these credits depends on our strict compliance with these federal and state programs, which are complex and can involve a significant degree of judgment. If the agencies that administer and enforce these programs disagree with our judgments, otherwise determine we are not in compliance, conduct reviews of our activities or make changes to the programs, then our ability to generate or sell these credits could be temporarily restricted pending completion of reviews or as a penalty, permanently limited or lost entirely, and we could be subject to fines or other sanctions. Any of these outcomes could force us to purchase credits in the open market to cover any credits we have contracted to sell, retire credits we may have generated but not yet sold, reduce or eliminate a significant revenue stream or incur substantial additional and unplanned expenses.
Risk Management Activities
From time to time, we enter into fuel sales contracts that require us to sell CNG or LNG to our customers at a fixed price. These contracts expose us to the risk that the price of natural gas commodity may increase above the natural gas commodity cost component included in the price at which we are committed to sell the natural gas to our customers.
In an effort to mitigate the volatility of our earnings related to any futures contracts and to reduce our risk related to our fixed price sales contracts, we operate under a hedging policy pursuant to which we purchase futures contracts to hedge our exposure to variability in expected future cash flows related to a particular fixed price contract or bid. Subject to the
conditions set forth in the policy, we purchase futures contracts in quantities reasonably expected to effectively hedge our exposure to cash flow variability related to fixed price sales contracts entered into after the date of the policy. Unless otherwise agreed in advance by our board of directors and the derivatives committee thereof, we will conduct our futures contract activities and enter into fixed price sales contracts only in accordance with our hedging policy.
Due to the restrictions of our hedging policy, we expect to offer few fixed price sales contracts to our customers. If we do offer a fixed price sales contract, we anticipate including a price component that would cover our estimated cash requirements over the duration of the underlying futures contracts. The amount of this price component will vary based on the anticipated volume and the natural gas price component to be covered under the fixed price sales contract.
In October 2018, in support of our Zero Now truck financing program, we executed two commodity swap contracts with TotalEnergies Gas & Power North America, an affiliate of TotalEnergies and THUSA, for a total of five million diesel gallons annually from April 1, 2019 to June 30, 2024. These commodity swap contracts are intended to manage risks related to the diesel-to-natural gas price spread in connection with the natural gas fuel supply commitments we have made and expect to make in our current and anticipated fueling agreements with fleet operators that participate in the Zero Now program.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion is based upon our consolidated financial statements included in this report, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates and may result in material effects on our operating results and financial position.
We believe the critical accounting policies discussed below affect our more significant estimates made in preparing our consolidated financial statements. See Notes 1 and 2 for more information about these and our other significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
In general, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the goods or services. To achieve that core principle, a five-step approach is applied: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue allocated to each performance obligation when we satisfy the performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account for revenue recognition.
We recognize revenue on various products and services.
Our volume-related revenue primarily consists of sales of RNG and conventional natural gas, in the form of CNG and LNG, O&M services, and RINs and LCFS Credits in addition to Amazon Warrant Charges and changes in fair value of our derivative instruments.
Fuel and O&M services are sold pursuant to contractual commitments over defined goods-and-service delivery periods. These contracts typically include a stand-ready obligation to supply natural gas and/or provide O&M services daily based on a committed and agreed upon routine maintenance schedule or when and if called upon by the customer.
We recognize fuel and O&M services revenue in the amount to which we have the right to invoice. We have a right to consideration based on the amount of GGEs of natural gas dispensed by the customer and current pricing conditions, which are typically billed to the customer on a monthly basis. Since payment terms are less than a year, we have elected the practical expedient which allows us to not assess whether a customer contract has a significant financing component.
We sell RIN Credits and LCFS Credits to third parties that need the credits to comply with federal and state requirements. Revenue is recognized on these credits when there is an agreement in place to monetize the credits at a determinable price.
Changes in fair value of derivative instruments relates to our commodity swap and certain customer fueling contracts under our Zero Now truck financing program. The contracts are measured at fair value with changes in the fair value recorded in our consolidated statements of operations in the period incurred. The amounts are classified as revenue because our commodity swap contracts are used to economically offset the risk associated with the diesel-to-natural gas price spread resulting from existing and anticipated customer fueling contracts under our Zero Now truck financing program.
Amazon Warrant Charges are determined based on the grant date fair value of the award, and the associated non-cash stock-based sales incentive charges, which is recorded as a reduction of revenue, are recognized as the customer purchases fuel and vesting conditions become probable of being achieved. See Note 1 for additional information.
Station construction contracts are generally short-term, except for certain larger and more complex stations, which can take up to 24 months to complete. For most of our station construction contracts, the customer contracts with us to provide a significant service of integrating a complex set of tasks and components into a single station. Hence, the entire contract is accounted for as one performance obligation.
We recognize station construction revenue over time as we perform under these contracts because of the continual transfer of control of the goods to the customer, which typically controls the work in process. Revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation and is recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. Costs to fulfill our obligations under these contracts typically include labor, materials and subcontractors’ costs, other direct costs and an allocation of indirect costs.
Refinements of estimates to account for changing conditions and new developments are continuous and characteristic of the process. Many factors that can affect contract profitability may change during the performance period of the contract, including differing site conditions, the availability of skilled contract labor, the performance of major suppliers and subcontractors, and unexpected changes in material costs. Because a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of these contracts, the contract price and cost estimates are reviewed periodically as work progresses and adjustments proportionate to the cost-to-cost measure of progress are reflected in contract revenues in the reporting period when such estimates are revised as discussed above. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are recorded in the period in which the losses become known.
In certain contracts with our customers, we agree to provide multiple goods or services, including construction of and sale of a station, O&M services, and sale of fuel to the customer. These contracts have multiple performance obligations because the promise to transfer each separate good or service is separately identifiable and distinct. This evaluation requires significant judgment and the decision to combine a group of contracts or separate the combined or single contract into multiple performance obligations could change the amount of revenue recognized in one or more periods.
We allocate the contract price to each performance obligation using best estimates of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. The primary method used to estimate the standalone selling price for fuel and O&M services is observable standalone sales, and the primary method used to estimate the standalone selling price for station construction sales is the expected cost plus a margin approach because we sell customized customer-specific solutions. Under this approach, we forecast expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an appropriate margin for the good or service.
AFTC is considered variable consideration because it can either increase or decrease the transaction price based on volumes of vehicle fuel sold. Additionally, AFTC is not recognized as revenue until it is authorized through federal legislation, which also provides a determinable price. We recognize revenue in the period the credit is authorized through federal legislation.
We collect and remit taxes assessed by various governmental authorities that are imposed on and concurrent with revenue-producing transactions between us and our customers. These taxes may include, among others, fuel, sales and
value-added taxes. We report the collection of these taxes on a net basis and they are excluded from revenue and cost of goods sold.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of costs incurred over the fair value of the net assets of acquired businesses. We assess our goodwill using either a qualitative or quantitative approach to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying value. We are required to use judgment when applying the goodwill impairment test, including, among other considerations, the identification of reporting unit(s), the assessment of qualitative factors, and the estimation of fair value of a reporting unit in the quantitative approach. We determined that we are a single reporting unit for the purpose of goodwill impairment tests. We perform the impairment test annually on October 1, or more frequently if facts or circumstances change that would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired.
The qualitative goodwill assessment includes the potential effect on a reporting unit’s fair value of certain events and circumstances, including its enterprise value, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, and other relevant entity-specific events. If it is determined, based upon the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative impairment test is performed. Alternatively, we may bypass the qualitative assessment for a reporting unit and directly perform the quantitative assessment.
The quantitative assessment estimates the reporting unit's fair value based on its market capitalization plus an assumed control premium as evidence of fair value. The estimates used to determine the fair value of the reporting unit may change based on results of operations, macroeconomic conditions stock price fluctuations or other factors. Changes in these estimates could materially affect our assessment of the fair value and goodwill impairment for the reporting unit.
For our most recent goodwill impairment test, which was our annual test performed on October 1, 2021, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment for the reporting unit as described above. In this test, the fair value of the reporting unit substantially exceeded its carrying value.
We evaluated the volatility in the market price of our common stock subsequent to our annual test date through December 31, 2021, and considered whether there were any other events or circumstances that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying value on a sustained basis, and concluded it was not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit decreased below its carrying value, on a sustained basis. As a result, an interim impairment test was not considered necessary during the three months ended December 31, 2021.
If a significant decline in the market price of our common stock and our market capitalization were sustained, or if other events or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying value, on a sustained basis, then we may perform impairment tests more frequently, and it is possible that our goodwill could become impaired, which could result in a material charge and adversely affect our results of operations.
We review the carrying value of our long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets with finite useful lives, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Events that could result in an impairment review include, among others, a significant decrease in the operating performance of a long-lived asset or asset group or the decision to close a fueling station. Impairment testing involves a comparison of the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows exceeds the carrying amount, then no impairment exists. If the carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows, then a second step is performed to determine the amount of impairment, if any, to be recognized. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds its fair value. The fair value of the asset or asset group is based on estimated discounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group using a discount rate commensurate with the related risk. The estimate of future cash flows requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment, including forecasting future sales and expenses and estimating useful lives of the assets. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors, including, among others, future results, demand and economic conditions, many of which can be difficult to predict.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are computed using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable to future years to differences between the tax bases and financial carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities. The impact on deferred taxes of changes in tax rates and laws, if any, are applied to the years during which temporary differences are expected to be settled and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the period of enactment. Valuation allowances are established when management determines it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be realized. When evaluating the need for a valuation analysis, we use estimates involving a high degree of judgment including projected future U.S. GAAP income and the amounts and estimated timing of the reversal of any deferred tax assets and liabilities.
We have a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The amount recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefit in income tax expense.
We operate within multiple domestic and foreign taxing jurisdictions and are subject to audit in these jurisdictions. These audits can involve complex issues, which may require an extended period of time to resolve. Although we believe that adequate consideration has been given to these issues, it is possible that the ultimate resolution of these issues could be significantly different than originally estimated.
Fair Value Measurements
We have established a framework that follows the authoritative guidance for fair value measurements with respect to assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis and non-recurring basis. Under the framework, fair value is defined as the exit price, or the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants, as of the measurement date. The framework also establishes a hierarchy for inputs used in measuring fair value that maximizes the use of observable inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that the most observable inputs be used when available. Observable inputs are inputs market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability and are developed based on market data obtained from sources independent of our Company. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our assumptions about the factors market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability and are developed based upon the best information available in the circumstances. The hierarchy consists of the following three levels: Level 1 inputs are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities; Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and inputs (other than quoted prices) that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly; Level 3 inputs are unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. Categorization within the valuation hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Our significant uses of fair value measurements include the valuation of commodity swaps and customer contracts, and warrants, all of which require significant judgment.
Recently Adopted Accounting Changes and Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards.
See Note 1 for information about recently adopted accounting changes and recently issued accounting standards.
Results of Operations
The discussions below compare our results of operations in 2021 and 2020. Historical results are not indicative of the results to be expected in the current period or any future period.
2021 Compared to 2020
The table below presents, for each period, each line item of our statement of operations as a percentage of our total revenue for the period. The narrative that follows provides a comparative discussion of certain of these line items between periods.
Revenue. Revenue decreased by $36.1 million to $255.6 million for 2021, from $291.7 million for 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the Amazon Warrant Charges of $83.6 million, an unrealized loss from the change in fair value of our commodity swap and customer contracts entered into in connection with our Zero Now truck financing program and a decrease in station construction sales, partially offset by an increase in volume-related revenue.
Volume-related revenue, excluding the effect of the change in fair value of our commodity swap and customer contracts entered into in connection with our Zero Now truck financing program and the Amazon Warrant Charges, increased by $62.5 million between periods, attributable to an increase in gallons delivered and a higher effective price per gallon delivered. The effect to volume-related revenue as a result of the change in fair value of our commodity swap and customer contracts entered into in connection with our Zero Now truck financing program was $5.6 million, as we recognized an unrealized gain of $2.1 million in 2020 compared to an unrealized loss of $3.5 million in 2021 (see Note 7 for more information).
Our effective price per gallon increased by $0.12 per gallon to $0.76 per gallon in 2021 compared to $0.64 in 2020, excluding the effects of the change in fair value of derivative instruments and Amazon Warrant Charges discussed above. Our effective price per gallon is defined as revenue generated from selling RNG and conventional natural gas and any related Environmental Credits and providing O&M services to our vehicle fleet customers at stations we do not own and for which we receive a per-gallon or fixed fee, all divided by the total GGEs delivered less GGEs delivered by non-consolidated entities, such as entities that are accounted for under the equity method. The increase in our effective price
per gallon was primarily due to higher RIN and natural gas prices, and a favorable fuel price mix, which is based on the variation of fuel types and locations where we deliver fuel.
Station construction sales decreased by $10.2 million between periods due to decreased construction activities as a result of construction delays relating to completion of certain projects.
AFTC revenue increased by $0.9 million between periods primarily due to the increase in gallons sold during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales increased by $30.2 million to $215.6 million in 2021, from $185.4 million in 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase in gallons delivered and an increase in our effective cost per gallon delivered, partially offset by a decrease in the cost of station construction activities.
Our effective cost per gallon increased by $0.08 per gallon to $0.50 per gallon in 2021 from $0.42 per gallon in 2020. Our effective cost per gallon is defined as the total costs associated with delivering our fuels, including commodity costs, transportation fees, liquefaction charges, and other site operating costs, plus the total cost of providing O&M services at stations that we do not own and for which we receive a per-gallon or fixed fee, including direct technician labor, indirect supervisor and management labor, repair parts and other direct maintenance costs, all divided by the total GGEs delivered less GGEs delivered by non-consolidated entities, such as entities that are accounted for under the equity method. The increase in our effective cost per gallon was due to higher commodity prices and transportation costs.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $21.4 million to $89.9 million in 2021, from $68.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $12.0 million in stock-based compensation expense due to equity awards granted during the year and our higher stock price, an increase of $2.9 million in salaries and benefits, and an increase of $2.0 million in legal and consulting fees.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization decreased by $2.5 million to $45.2 million in 2021, from $47.7 million in 2020, primarily due to a lower amount of depreciable assets.
Interest expense. Interest expense decreased by $2.9 million to $4.4 million in 2021, from $7.3 million in 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction of outstanding indebtedness between periods and a $1.2 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 that is included in interest expense.
Other income, net. Other income, net decreased by $2.1 million to $0.9 million in 2021, from $3.0 million in 2020, primarily due to higher gains recorded for the disposal of certain assets in the prior year period.
Loss from equity method investments. Loss from equity method investments increased by $0.2 million to $0.4 million in 2021, from $0.2 million in 2020, primarily due to the operating results of SAFE&CEC S.r.l., the bpJV, and the TotalEnergies JV.
Gain from sale of certain assets of subsidiary. In 2021, we recorded a gain of $3.9 million compared to a gain of $1.1 million in 2020 as a result of the satisfaction of specified performance criteria in each of 2020 and 2021 related to the assets sold in the bp Transaction in accordance with the related Amended Asset Purchase Agreement.
Gain from formation of equity method investment. In 2020, we recorded a gain of $0.7 million related to the release of costs accrued in satisfaction of commitments made in connection with the CEC Combination (defined in Note 3). There was no comparable gain or loss in 2021.
Income tax expense. Income tax expense decreased by $0.2 million to $0.1 million in 2021 from $0.3 million in 2020, primarily due to a decrease in deferred taxes associated with goodwill and a reduction in the Company’s expected foreign tax exposure.
Loss attributable to noncontrolling interest. In 2021 and 2020, we recorded a gain of $1.0 million and $1.7 million, respectively, for the noncontrolling interest in the net loss of NG Advantage. The noncontrolling interest in NG Advantage represents a 6.7% minority interest that was held by third parties during both the 2021 and 2020 periods.
Seasonality and Inflation
To some extent, we experience seasonality in our results of operations. Some of our customers tend to consume more of our vehicle fuels in the summer months, when buses and other fleet vehicles use more fuel to power their air conditioning systems, which typically translate to an increased volume of fuel delivered in the summer months. In addition, natural gas commodity prices tend to be higher in the fall and winter months, due to increased overall demand for natural gas for heating during these periods.
Historically, inflation has not significantly affected our operating results; however, costs for construction, repairs, maintenance, electricity and insurance are all subject to inflationary pressures, which could affect our ability to maintain our stations adequately, build new stations, expand our existing facilities or pursue additional facilities, and could materially impact our operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ability to meet present and future financial obligations through operating cash flows, the sale or maturity of investments or the acquisition of additional funds through capital management. Our financial position and liquidity are, and will continue to be, influenced by a variety of factors, including the level of our outstanding indebtedness and the principal and interest we are obligated to pay on our indebtedness, which could be influenced by the discontinuance of LIBOR for certain of our debt instruments that tie interest rates to this metric; the amount and timing of any additional debt or equity financing we may pursue; our capital expenditure requirements; any merger, divestiture or acquisition activity; and our ability to generate cash flows from our operations. We expect cash provided by our operating activities to fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including our operating results and the factors that affect these results, including the amount and timing of our vehicle fuel sales, station construction sales, sales of RINs and LCFS Credits and recognition of government credits, the effects of COVID-19, grants and incentives, if any; fluctuations in commodity, station construction and labor costs; Environmental Credit prices; variations in the fair value of certain of our derivative instruments that are recorded in revenue; and the amount and timing of our billing, collections and liability payments, as discussed under “Key Trends-Our Performance” above.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $41.3 million in 2021, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $61.0 million in 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily attributable to the collection of AFTC receivables related to 2018 and 2019 volumes in 2020.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $207.7 million in 2021, compared to cash provided by investing activities of $24.2 million in 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily attributable to $100.2 million in net purchases of short-term investments in 2021, compared to $27.6 million in net maturities of short-term investments in 2020, a $15.6 million increase in capital expenditures in 2021, higher investments in other entities in 2021, including our $70.2 million in contribution to the bpJV, a $1.7 million decrease in proceeds from property and equipment disposals, and $3.9 million in lower net earn-out proceeds received in connection with the bp Transaction.
Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities was $152.8 million in 2021, compared to cash used in financing activities of $18.7 million in 2020. Cash provided by financing activities in 2021 was primarily attributable to approximately $193.5 million net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our ATM Programs, proceeds from the Chevron Adopt-a-Port program, and proceeds from debt instruments, partially offset by repurchases of common stock and repayments of debt instruments and finance lease obligations. Cash used in financing activities in 2020 was primarily
attributable to repayments of debt instruments and finance lease obligations and repurchases of common stock, partially offset by proceeds received from debt instruments.
Capital Expenditures, Indebtedness and Other Uses of Cash
We require cash to fund our capital expenditures, operating expenses and working capital and other requirements, including costs associated with fuel sales; outlays for the design and construction of new fueling stations; additions or other modifications to existing fueling stations; RNG production facilities; debt repayments and repurchases; repurchases of common stock; purchases of heavy-duty trucks that use our fuels; additions or modifications of LNG production facilities; supporting our operations, including maintenance and improvements of our infrastructure; supporting our sales and marketing activities, including support of legislative and regulatory initiatives; financing vehicles for our customers; any investments in other entities; any mergers or acquisitions, including acquisitions to expand our RNG production capacity; pursuing market expansion as opportunities arise, including geographically and to new customer markets; and to fund other activities or pursuits and for other general corporate purposes.
Our business plan calls for approximately $70.9 million in capital expenditures in 2022. These capital expenditures primarily relate to the construction of fueling stations, IT software and equipment and LNG plant costs, and we expect to fund these expenditures primarily through cash on hand and cash generated from operations. Further, in 2022, we anticipate deploying up to approximately $195.0 million to develop ADG RNG production facilities. In 2021, we contributed $70.2 million and $4.8 million to the bpJV and the DR JV, respectively.
In addition, NG Advantage may spend up to $0.6 million in 2022 to purchase additional equipment in support of its operations and customer contracts. Although NG Advantage has sought financing from third parties for capital expenditures, we have provided and may continue to provide financing for these capital expenditures.
We had total indebtedness, consisting of our debt and finance leases, of approximately $39.4 million in principal amount as of December 31, 2021, of which approximately $13.7 million, $10.0 million, $5.6 million, $1.8 million, and $8.3 million is expected to become due in 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026, respectively. Based on outstanding debt balances and applicable interest rates as of December 31, 2021, we expect our total interest payment obligations relating to our indebtedness to be $2.1 million for the year ending December 31, 2022. We plan to and believe we are able to make all expected principal and interest payments in the next 12 months.
We also have indebtedness, including the amount representing interest, from our operating leases of approximately $68.2 million as of December 31, 2021, of which approximately $6.1 million, $6.0 million, $6.1 million, $6.0 million, $5.8 million and $38.0 million is expected to become due in 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 2026 and thereafter, respectively.
In addition, in connection with implementing our Zero Now truck financing program, we have entered into agreements that permit us to incur a material amount of additional debt on a delayed draw basis and obligate us to make interest and other fee payments that vary in amount depending on the outstanding principal of this debt and certain other factors; none of this potential debt nor the related interest and other payments are included in the foregoing estimates, other than the principal amount of $9.5 million drawn as of December 31, 2021. Our ability to draw additional debt under these agreements expired on January 2, 2022.
We intend to make payments under our various debt instruments when due and pursue opportunities for earlier repayment and/or refinancing if and when these opportunities arise. Although we believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to repay our debt coming due in the next 12 months, we may elect to suspend, or limit repurchases under, our share repurchase program or pursue alternatives, such as refinancing, or debt or equity offerings, to increase our cash management flexibility.
Sources of Cash
Historically, our principal sources of liquidity have consisted of cash on hand, cash provided by our operations, including, if available, AFTC and other government credits, grants and incentives, cash provided by financing activities,
and sales of assets. As of December 31, 2021, we had total cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $229.2 million, compared to $138.5 million as of December 31, 2020.
We expect cash provided by our operating activities to fluctuate depending on our operating results, which can be affected by the factors described above, as well as the other factors described in this MD&A and Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this report.
Subject to the following paragraph, we believe our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments and anticipated cash provided by our operating and financing activities will satisfy our business requirements for at least the 12 months following the date of this report. Subsequent to that period, we may need to raise additional capital to fund any planned or unanticipated capital expenditures, investments, debt repayments, share repurchases or other expenses that we cannot fund through cash on-hand, cash provided by our operations or other sources. Moreover, we may use our cash resources faster than we predict due to unexpected expenditures, the effects of COVID-19, or higher-than-expected expenses, in which case we may need to seek capital from alternative sources sooner than we anticipate. The timing and necessity of any future capital raise would depend on various factors, including our rate and volume of, and prices for, natural gas fuel sales and other volume-related activity, the effects of COVID-19, new station construction, debt repayments (either before or at maturity) and any potential mergers, acquisitions, investments, divestitures or other strategic relationships we may pursue, as well as the other factors that affect our revenue and expense levels as described in this MD&A and elsewhere in this report.
If we deploy additional capital to develop ADG RNG production facilities and fueling stations to support contracted RNG fueling volume, we could be required to raise additional capital.
We may raise additional capital through one or more sources, including, among others, obtaining equity capital, including through offerings of our common stock or other securities, obtaining new or restructuring existing debt, selling assets, or any combination of these or other potential sources of capital. We may not be able to raise capital when needed, on terms that are favorable to us or our stockholders or at all. Any inability to raise necessary capital may impair our ability to develop and maintain fueling infrastructure, invest in strategic transactions or acquisitions or repay our outstanding indebtedness and may reduce our ability to support and build our business and generate sustained or increased revenue.
Material Cash Requirements
The table below represents our material cash requirements, including the scheduled maturities of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021. This table excludes certain potential cash requirements because they may involve future cash payments that are considered uncertain and cannot be estimated because they vary based upon future conditions; however, the exclusion of these obligations should not be construed as an implication that they are immaterial, as they could significantly affect our short- and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs depending on a variety of future events, facts and conditions.
(1) Consists of long-term debt to finance acquisitions and equipment purchases, including future interest payments. For our variable-rate debt (which consists of the SG Facility, as defined in Note 12), we have assumed an interest rate of 1.4% (LIBOR plus 1.30%) as of December 31, 2021.
(2) Consists of finance lease obligations to finance equipment purchases, including future interest payments.
(3) Consists of various space and ground leases for our Boron Plant, office spaces and fueling stations as well as leases for equipment.
(4) Represents our estimates for long-term and quarterly natural gas purchase contracts with a take-or-pay commitment.
(5) Represents our estimates for one long-term natural gas supply contract for our subsidiary NG Advantage, which entered into an arrangement with bp for the supply, sale and transportation of CNG through February 2022.
(6) Consists of our obligations to fund various fueling station construction projects, net of amounts funded through December 31, 2021 and excluding contractual commitments related to station sales contracts.
(7) Represents outstanding commitments for the bpJV pursuant to the bpJV Capital Call (see Note 15).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had the following off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources:
● Outstanding surety bonds for construction contracts and general corporate purposes totaling $43.4 million;
● One long-term natural gas purchase contract with a take-or-pay commitment, the amount of which is shown under “Contractual Obligations” above;
● Quarterly fixed price natural gas purchase contracts with take-or-pay commitments, the amount of which is shown under “Contractual Obligations” above;
● One long-term natural gas sale contract with a fixed supply commitment, the amount of which is shown under “Contractual Obligations” above, along with a guaranty agreement; and
● One long-term natural gas sale contract with a fixed supply commitment.
We provide surety bonds primarily for construction contracts in the ordinary course of our business, as a form of guarantee. No liability has been recorded in connection with our surety bonds because, based on historical experience and available information, we do not believe it is probable that any amounts will be required to be paid under these arrangements for which we will not be reimbursed.
As of December 31, 2021, we had one long-term natural gas purchase contract with a take-or-pay commitment, which requires us to purchase minimum volumes of natural gas at index-based prices and expires in June 2022. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, we had quarterly fixed-price natural gas purchase contracts with take-or-pay commitments extending through June 2023.
NG Advantage has entered into an arrangement with bp for the supply, sale and reservation of a specified volume of CNG transportation capacity until February 2022. In connection with the arrangement, on February 28, 2018, we entered into a guaranty agreement with NG Advantage and bp, which was amended in June 2020, in which we guarantee NG Advantage’s payment obligations to the customer in the event of a default by NG Advantage under the supply arrangement, in an amount up to $15.0 million plus related fees. Our guaranty is in effect until thirty days following our notice to bp of termination.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we have a fixed supply arrangement with UPS for the supply and sale of 170.0 million GGEs of RNG through March 2026.