Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, hopes, beliefs, intentions, strategies, estimates, and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future financial condition or results of operations. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, for purposes of this section, the terms “we,” “us,” the “Company” or “our” are intended to mean the business and operations of Clene Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Business Overview
We are a clinical-stage pharmaceutical company pioneering the discovery, development, and commercialization of novel clean-surfaced nanotechnology (“CSN®”) therapeutics. CSN® therapeutics are comprised of atoms of transition elements that, when assembled in nanocrystal form, possess unusually high, unique catalytic activities not present in those same elements in bulk form. These catalytic activities drive, support, and maintain beneficial metabolic and energetic cellular reactions within diseased, stressed, and damaged cells.
Our patent-protected, proprietary position affords us the potential to develop a broad and deep pipeline of novel CSN® therapeutics to address a range of diseases with high impact on human health. We began in 2013 by innovating an electro-crystal-chemistry drug development platform that draws from advances in nanotechnology, plasma and quantum physics, material science, and biochemistry. Our platform process results in nanocrystals with faceted structures and surfaces that are free of the chemical surface modifications that accompany other production methods. Many traditional methods of nanoparticle synthesis involve the unavoidable deposition of potentially toxic organic residues and stabilizing surfactants on the particle surfaces. Synthesizing stable nanocrystals that are both nontoxic and highly catalytic has overcome this significant hurdle in harnessing transition metal catalytic activity for human therapeutic use.
Our clean-surfaced nanocrystals exhibit catalytic activities many-fold higher than multiple other commercially available nanoparticles, produced using various techniques, that we have comparatively evaluated. We now have multiple drug assets currently in development and/or clinical trials for applications in neurology, infectious disease, and oncology. Our development and clinical efforts are currently focused on addressing the high unmet medical needs in two areas: first, those related to central nervous system disorders including Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (“ALS”), Multiple Sclerosis (“MS”), and Parkinson’s Disease (“PD”); and second, those related to COVID-19, a highly infectious viral respiratory disease with serious and sometimes fatal co-morbidities.
We currently have no drugs approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from drug sales. We have never been profitable and have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. We generate revenue from sales of dietary supplements through our wholly owned subsidiary, dOrbital, Inc., or through an exclusive license with 4Life Research LLC (“4Life”), a stockholders and related party. We anticipate these revenues to be small compared to our operating expenses and to the revenue we expect to generate from potential future sales of our drug candidates, for which we are currently conducting clinical trials. Our total loss from operations was $50.0 million and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $163.3 million and $153.6 million, respectively.
We expect to continue investing in product development and sales and marketing, and we expect to incur additional losses in the future to fund our operations and conduct product research and development. We also recognize the need to raise additional capital to fully implement our business plan. The long-term continuation of our business plan is dependent upon the generation of sufficient revenues from our products to offset expenses and capital expenditures. In the event that we do not generate sufficient revenues and are unable to obtain funding, we will be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion, commercialization efforts, or capital expenditures, which could adversely affect our business prospects, ability to meet long-term liquidity needs, or we may be unable to continue operations.
Recent Developments of Our Clinical Programs
We have one Phase 2/3 registration clinical trial, the Healey ALS Platform Trial, which is currently ongoing to establish the safety and efficacy of CNM-Au8® in patients with ALS. Results for CNM-Au8® are anticipated in the second half of 2022. We completed the first dosing cohort of REPAIR-MS and REPAIR-PD, two open-label, investigator-blinded Phase 2 clinical trials which demonstrated target engagement of CNM-Au8® on the brain’s energy metabolites. REPAIR-MS will continue with the initiation of a second dosing cohort in 2022. In addition, we have an ongoing Phase 2 clinical trial, VISIONARY-MS, for the treatment of visual pathway deficits in chronic optic neuropathy to assess the efficacy, safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of CNM-Au8® for remyelination in stable relapsing MS. The VISIONARY-MS trial will conclude early due to COVID pandemic-related challenges. The full unblinded results
from the study are anticipated in the second half of 2022. We anticipate launching RESCUE-PD, a Phase 2 clinical trial for the treatment of patients with PD, in mid-2022. Finally, we have one Phase 2 clinical trial presently underway to establish the efficacy and safety of ZnAg liquid solution for the treatment of COVID-19.
We also support two Expanded Access Programs (“EAPs”) for patients with ALS. The initial EAP was launched in partnership with the Sean M. Healey & AMG Center for ALS at Massachusetts General Hospital in September 2019, which is closed to new enrollment, but remains ongoing for current participants. A second EAP was recently implemented in conjunction with the Healey ALS Platform Trial at three participating clinical sites.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, which began in December 2019 and has spread worldwide, has caused many governments to implement measures to slow the spread of the COVID-19 outbreak. The COVID-19 pandemic and government measures taken in response have had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce, as worker shortages have occurred, supply chains have been disrupted, and facilities and production have been suspended. The future progression of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on our business and operations remain uncertain. The COVID-19 pandemic may affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, delay the initiation of future clinical trials, disrupt regulatory activities, or have other adverse effects on our business and operations. In particular, we and our third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”) have faced disruptions that may affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, cause manufacturing disruptions, or create delays at clinical trial sites. The COVID-19 pandemic has already caused significant disruptions in the financial markets, and may continue to cause such disruptions, which could impact our ability to raise additional funds to support our operations. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted economies worldwide and could result in adverse effects on our business and operations.
We are monitoring the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial statements. While the COVID-19 pandemic has led to various research restrictions and paused certain of our clinical trials, these impacts have been temporary and to date we have not experienced material business disruptions or incurred impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We are not aware of any specific related event or circumstance that would require us to revise the estimates reflected in our financial statements. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, and financial condition, including planned and future clinical trials and research and development costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain or treat it, and the duration and intensity of the related effects.
Reverse Recapitalization with Tottenham and Clene Nanomedicine
On December 30, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we completed the previously announced business combination (the “Reverse Recapitalization”) with Tottenham Acquisition I Limited (“Tottenham”). At the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, Clene Inc. acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding Clene Nanomedicine, Inc. (“Clene Nanomedicine”) common stock, in exchange for 54,339,012 shares of Clene Inc. Common Stock, par value $0.0001 (“Common Stock”) issued to the Clene Nanomedicine common stockholders, of which 2,716,958 shares were to be issued and held in escrow to satisfy any indemnification obligations. The escrowed shares were released without restrictions following the six-month anniversary of the completion of the Reverse Recapitalization.
At the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization, each stock option of Clene Nanomedicine common stock was cancelled and the holders thereof in exchange received 0.1320 newly-issued stock options of our Common Stock, which is 95% of the Reverse Recapitalization exchange ratio. Additionally, we issued (i) rights to 370,101 restricted stock awards under the 2020 Plan to the option holders which complements the 5% closing payment shares held in escrow for Clene Nanomedicine common stockholders discussed above, and (ii) rights to 1,136,961 restricted stock awards to option holders to complement the earn-out payments that would contingently be issued to certain current Clene Nanomedicine stockholders upon the achievement of milestones. See “Earn-out Shares” for the milestones detail.
Immediately after giving effect to the Reverse Recapitalization and the 2020 PIPE offering (discussed below), there were 59,526,171 shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding.
Earn-out Shares
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, certain of Clene Nanomedicine’s common stockholders are entitled to receive earn-out payments (the “Clene Nanomedicine Contingent Earn-out”), and Tottenham’s former officers and directors and Norwich Investment Limited (collectively, the “Initial Stockholders”) are entitled to receive earn-out payments (the “Initial Stockholders Contingent Earn-out,” and both collectively the “Contingent Earn-outs”) based on achieving milestones discussed below. The Contingent Earn-outs have been classified as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and were initially measured at fair value on
the date of the Reverse Recapitalization and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date. The change in fair value of the Contingent Earn-outs has been recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The PIPE Offerings
Prior to the Closing Date, we entered into subscription agreements on December 28, 2020, with various investors (the “2020 PIPE”). Pursuant to the subscription agreements, we issued 2,239,500 shares of Common Stock at a price of $10.00 per share with net proceeds of $22.2 million. The purpose of the 2020 PIPE was to fund general corporate expenses. In addition, investors in the 2020 PIPE offering also received warrants to purchase a number of shares equal to one-half (1/2) of the number of 2020 PIPE shares, for an aggregate total of 1,119,750 shares of Common Stock, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share (the “PIPE Warrants”), subject to a 180-day holding period.
On May 24, 2021, we entered into subscription agreements with various investors for the 2021 PIPE. Pursuant to the subscription agreements, we issued 960,540 shares of Common Stock at a price of $9.63 per share with net proceeds of approximately $9.3 million. The closing of the 2021 PIPE occurred substantially concurrently with, and was conditioned upon, the closing of a loan agreement with Avenue Venture Opportunities Fund, L.P. (“Avenue”). The purpose of the 2021 PIPE was to fund the expansion of manufacturing capabilities in the state of Maryland and to fund general corporate expenses.
Between July 1, 2021 and December 20, 2021, various investors exercised PIPE Warrants for 1,119,750 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. The PIPE Warrants were issued prior to the Closing Date and were subject to a 180-day holding period which expired on June 28, 2021. We received cash proceeds of $11,198.
Financial Overview
Our results of operations, financial condition, and the period-to-period comparability of our financial results are principally affected by the following factors:
Research and Development Expense
The discovery and development of novel drug candidates require a significant investment of resources over a prolonged period of time, and a core part of our strategy is to continue making sustained investments in this area. As a result of this commitment, our pipeline of drug candidates has been advancing and expanding, with two clinical-stage drug candidates currently being investigated.
Historically, substantially all of our research and development expenses relate to CNM-Au8®, our lead asset. Our research and development expenses are affected by the timing and advancement of our existing product pipeline as well as the timing and quantity of new drug programs commenced. Drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to per patient clinical trial site fees for larger clinical trials, the costs of opening and monitoring clinical sites, CRO activity, and manufacturing expenses. We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase significantly due to the increase in clinical trial expenses incurred to develop our drug candidates.
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. Research and development costs include payroll and personnel expenses, including salaries and related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions; clinical trial supplies and materials to support our clinical trials; payments to CROs, principal investigators, and clinical trial sites; costs associated with preclinical activities; consulting costs; and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, utilities, depreciation, insurance, and facilities maintenance costs. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities initially as an asset and then as expenses when the goods have been received or when the service has been performed rather than when the payment is made.
Our clinical trial accrual process seeks to account for expenses resulting from obligations under contracts with CROs, consultants, and under clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. We reflect the appropriate trial expenses in the consolidated financial statements by matching the appropriate expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. In the event advance payments are made to a CRO, the payments will be recorded as a prepaid asset, which will be expensed over the period of time the contracted services are performed.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and personnel expenses, including salaries and related benefits and stock-based compensation expense; professional fees for legal, accounting, tax, and information technology services; fees for directors and officers’ insurance; expenses for business development activities; utilities and facility expenses; travel expenses; rental fees; consulting fees; and other administrative expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods to support increases in our drug development activities and as we build out our commercial capabilities in advance of receiving regulatory approval for the rapidly advancing clinical trials of our drug candidates. These increases will likely include increased headcount, increased stock compensation expenses, expanded infrastructure including certain sales and marketing activities performed ahead of regulatory approval, and increased insurance expenses. We also anticipate increasing legal, compliance, accounting, and investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, consists primarily of (i) changes in the fair value of our (a) preferred stock warrant liability, (b) common stock warrant liability, and (c) Contingent Earn-outs; (ii) interest expense resulting from changes in fair value of our notes payable; (iii) gains and losses on extinguishment of convertible notes payable and notes payable; (iv) gain on termination of a lease; and (v) the Australia research and development credit, discussed below.
We also received grants issued by non-government entities which require us to comply with conditions attached to the grants. Income from grants is recognized in the period during which the related qualifying expenses are incurred, provided that the conditions under which the grants were provided have been met. We receive tax incentives from the Australian government in the form of cash subsidies for research and development activities related to clinical trial activities conducted by our Australian subsidiary, which are recognized as other income upon compliance with certain conditions.
Components of Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Revenue
We generated product revenue totaling $0.6 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in our Supplements segment under a supply agreement with 4Life for KHC46 and Zinc Factor™, two dietary (mineral) supplements that we began supplying during those periods. We generated royalty revenue totaling $0.2 million and $30,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, under an exclusive and royalty-bearing license agreement with 4Life relating to the sale of KHC46. For more details on the supply and license agreements, see Note 20 to our consolidated financial statements.
We also generated minimal product revenue from sales of rMetx™ ZnAg Immune Boost during those periods.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue totaled $0.3 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, relating to production and distribution costs for the sales of KHC46, Zinc Factor™, and rMetx™ dietary supplements.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
The majority of our research and development expenses were related to the development of our lead drug candidate, CNM-Au8®, including ongoing clinical trials. The increase in research and development expense related to CNM-Au8® was primarily due to the progression of the clinical development process, including increased enrollment in the REPAIR-PD, REPAIR-MS, VISIONARY-MS, and RESCUE-ALS clinical trials and calendar payments for our participation in the Healey ALS Platform Trial. The increase in unallocated research and development expense was primarily due to increased rent expense related to our newly-leased facility in Elkton, Maryland and a decrease in milestone funding from certain grant awards; partially offset by decreased manufacturing and materials expenses. The increase in personnel and stock-based compensation expense was due to our increased headcount.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
The increase in general and administrative expense of $16.8 million or 327.0% was primarily due to (i) increased directors and officers insurance as a public company, (ii) increased legal fees as a public company, (iii) increased finance and accounting fees resulting from our SEC compliance function, filing fees for two registration statements on Form S-1, costs to improve our processes and internal controls, and fees for various financial vendors, institutions, investment bankers, and advisors, (iv) increased fees related to our public and investor relations efforts, (v) increased fees for information technology services, (vi) increased fees for pre-commercial activities in advance of receiving regulatory approval for the rapidly advancing clinical trials of our drug candidates, and (vii) increased personnel costs and stock-based compensation expense due to our increased headcount.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included the following:
(i)interest expense of $0.9 million and $1.0 million, respectively, due to a decrease in the fair value of certain notes payable, resulting from a decrease in the closing price of our Common Stock on the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) from September 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021; and interest expense on notes payable of $1.4 million;
(ii)gain on extinguishment of notes payable of $0.6 million and $0, respectively, due to the forgiveness of a Paycheck Protection Program loan (the “PPP Loan”) by the U.S. Small Business Administration;
(iii)loss on extinguishment of convertible notes payable of $0 and $0.5 million, respectively;
(iv)gain on termination of lease of $0 and $0.1 million, respectively, due to the termination of an operating lease for office space;
(v)expense of $0 and $14.6 million, respectively, relating to the change in fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability. Upon the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization, the preferred stock warrant liability qualified for classification as permanent equity and was reclassified to additional paid-in capital;
(vi)income of $1.0 million and $0, respectively, relating to the change in fair value of the common stock warrant liability. The change in fair value was primarily a result of the decrease of the closing price of our Common Stock on Nasdaq from $9.01 per share on May 21, 2021, when we initially measured the common stock warrant liability, to $4.10 per share on December 31, 2021, when we remeasured the common stock warrant liability; partially offset by the decrease of the expected term from 5.00 years on May 21, 2021 to 3.89 for the Tranche 1 warrants (defined below) and 4.39 years for the Tranche 2 warrants (defined below) on December 31, 2021;
(vii)recognized income of $34.0 million and $12.7 million, respectively, relating to the change in fair value of the Clene Nanomedicine Contingent Earn-out liability; and recognized income of $3.6 million and $1.5 million, respectively, relating to the change in fair value of the Initial Stockholders Contingent Earn-out liability. The change in fair value was primarily a result of the decrease of the closing price of our Common Stock on Nasdaq from $9.01 per share on December 31, 2020 to $4.10 per share on December 31, 2021 when we remeasured the Contingent Earn-out liabilities; and
(viii)recognized income of $1.5 million and $3.2 million, respectively, relating to the Australia research and development credit. We recognized Australia research and development credit in an amount equal to the qualifying expenses incurred in each period multiplied by the applicable reimbursement percentage. The decrease in research and development credit is the result of decreased research and development activities in Australia during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Taxation
United States
We are incorporated in Delaware in the U.S. and subject to statutory U.S. federal corporate income tax at a rate of 21% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We are also subject to state income tax in Utah and Maryland, at a rate of 4.95% and 8.25%, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty as to whether such assets will be realized resulting from our three-year cumulative loss position and the uncertainty surrounding our ability to generate pre-tax income in the foreseeable future.
Australia
Our wholly-owned subsidiary, Clene Australia Pty Ltd (“Clene Australia”), was established in Australia on March 5, 2018 and is subject to corporate income tax at a rate of 25% and 27.5% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Clene Australia income tax expense totaled $0.4 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We recorded $1.5 million and $3.2 million as other income during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for a refund of research and development credits pertaining to Clene Australia for the 2021 and 2020 tax years, respectively.
Netherlands
Our wholly-owned subsidiary, Clene Netherlands B.V. (“Clene Netherlands”), was established in the Netherlands on April 21, 2021 and will be subject to corporate income tax at a rate of 15% up to €245,000 of taxable income and 25% for taxable income in excess of €245,000. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Clene Netherlands had no taxable income and no provision for income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Capital
We have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. We expect to incur additional losses in the future to fund our operations and conduct product research and development. We recognize the need to raise additional capital to fully implement our business plan. The long-term continuation of our business plan is dependent upon the generation of sufficient revenues from our products to offset expenses and capital expenditures. In the event that we do not generate sufficient revenues and are unable to obtain funding, we will be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion, commercialization efforts, or capital expenditures, which could adversely affect our business prospects, ability to meet long-term liquidity needs, or we may be unable to continue operations.
Since our inception, we have dedicated substantially all of our resources to the development of our drug candidates. We have financed our operations principally through the following sources:
•gross proceeds of $87.2 million from sales of our preferred stock and other equity financing;
•gross proceeds of $28.1 million from borrowings under convertible promissory notes;
•gross proceeds of $0.6 million through government lending;
•gross proceeds of $2.3 million from grants from various organizations;
•gross cash proceeds of $31.8 million from the Reverse Recapitalization and the 2020 PIPE;
•gross cash proceeds of $0.6 million from a Program Paycheck Protection loan obtained through the U.S. Small Business Administration, which was forgiven in January 2021;
•gross cash proceeds of approximately $9.3 million from the 2021 PIPE; and
•gross cash proceeds of $20.0 million borrowings under notes payable.
We also receive indirect financial support for the Healey ALS Platform Trial, administered by Massachusetts General Hospital, which is conducting a platform trial of CNM-Au8® alongside other drugs at significantly lower costs than we would otherwise incur if we were to conduct a comparably designed clinical trial at reasonable market rates.
Liquidity
We incurred a loss from operations of $50.0 million and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and a net loss of $9.7 million and $19.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our accumulated deficit was $163.3 million as of December 31, 2021. Our cash and restricted cash totaled $50.3 million and $59.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and we used net cash in operating activities of $34.6 million and $18.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. We have not generated significant revenues to date, and we do not anticipate generating significant revenues unless we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for our drug candidates. We expect our expenses to increase significantly and to incur additional losses in the future to fund our operations, particularly as we advance the development of our clinical-stage drug candidates, continue research and development of our preclinical drug candidates, and initiate additional clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, these and other future drug candidates. We expect our expenses relating to regulatory compliance and sales and marketing personnel to increase significantly as we prepare to commence commercialization if we obtain regulatory approval for our drug candidates.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared presuming we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our long-term operations require obtaining additional capital to fund our operations. As part of our ongoing business plans, we will continue seeking to raise additional capital through equity financing and may seek debt financing or other capital sources, and we may attempt to collaborate with a third party for development and commercialization of our drug candidates. We may not be able to obtain capital on acceptable terms, or at all. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or rights of our stockholders. Depending on the results of our current business plans, we may need to implement cost-saving initiatives, including potentially delaying or reducing research and development programs and commercialization efforts beginning as early as the third quarter of 2022. Currently, without additional capital, we believe we have sufficient resources to fund our continuing operations into the second quarter of 2023.
Short-Term Material Cash Requirements
For at least the next twelve months, our primary capital requirements are to fund our operations, including research and development, personnel, regulatory, and other clinical trial costs related to development of our lead drug candidate, CNM-Au8®; and general and administrative costs to support our drug development and pre-commercial activities in advance of receiving regulatory approval for our drug candidates.
Firm commitments for funds include approximately $0.1 million and $0.9 million of payments under finance and operating lease obligations, respectively; payment of interest on notes payable totaling $2.0 million; and commitments under various agreements for capital expenditures totaling $0.6 million related to the construction of our manufacturing facilities. We expect to meet our short-term liquidity requirements primarily through cash on hand. Additional sources of funds, should we need them, include equity financing, debt financing, or other capital sources.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and with vendors for preclinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes, which are cancelable at any time by us, subject to payment of our remaining obligations under binding purchase orders and, in certain cases, nominal early termination fees. These commitments are not deemed significant.
Long-Term Material Cash Requirements
Beyond the next twelve months, our primary capital requirements are to fund our operations, including research and development, personnel, regulatory, and other clinical trial costs related to development of our lead drug candidate, CNM-Au8®; and general and administrative costs to support our drug development and pre-commercial activities in advance of receiving regulatory approval for our drug candidates. Additional funds may be spent to initiate new clinical trials, at our discretion. Known obligations beyond the next twelve months include $0.1 million and $6.9 million of payments under finance and operating lease obligations, respectively; and interest and principal repayment of notes payable of $24.0 million.
Use of Funds
Our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Our primary use of cash in all periods presented was to fund our research and development, regulatory and other clinical trial costs, and general corporate expenditures.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities represents cash receipts and disbursements related to all of our activities other than investing and financing activities. Operating cash flow is derived by adjusting our net loss for non-cash items and the net change in our operating assets and liabilities. Net cash used in operating activities was $34.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which resulted from a net loss of $9.7 million adjusted for non-cash items totaling ($25.9) million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million. Significant non-cash items included the change in the fair value of our (i) common stock warrant liability related to the Avenue Warrant of ($1.0) million, and (ii) Clene Nanomedicine and Initial Stockholders Contingent Earn-outs from the Reverse Recapitalization of ($34.0) million and ($3.6) million, respectively. The changes in fair value of these instruments were primarily driven by the decrease in our stock price as discussed under “Other Income (Expenses)” above. Additional significant non-cash items included (a) stock-based compensation expense of $12.4 million, driven by our increased headcount; (b) depreciation expense of $1.0 million relating to laboratory and office equipment and leasehold improvements; and (c) gain on extinguishment of notes payable of ($0.6) million, relating to the forgiveness of the PPP Loan. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to the following: (A) increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.3 million and $0.9 million, respectively, which in both cases was due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments, and (B) an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.7 million due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments and timing of receipt of metals to be used in research and development, partially offset by a decrease in Australia research and development credit receivable.
Net cash used in operating activities was $18.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted from a net loss of $19.3 million, adjusted for non-cash items totaling $3.7 million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of ($3.3) million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of the following: (i) depreciation expense of $1.0 million, (ii) stock-based compensation expense of $0.8 million, (iii) change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability of $14.6 million, (iv) change in fair value of Clene Nanomedicine Contingent Earn-out of ($12.7) million, (v) change in fair value of Initial Stockholders Contingent Earn-out of ($1.5) million, (vi) loss on extinguishment of convertible notes payable of $0.5 million, and (vii) increase in interest accrued on notes payable and accretion of debt discount of $0.7 million and $0.2 million, respectively. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to the following: (a) increase in inventory of $0.2 million, (b) increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $2.8 million due to an increase in prepayments to CROs and other vendors and an increase in Australia research and development credit receivable, (c) decrease in accounts payable of $0.3 million, (d) increase in income tax payable of $0.2 million related to Clene Australia, (e) decrease in accrued liabilities of $0.3 million due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments, (f) decrease in payable
to related parties of $0.1 million, (g) increase in deferred income tax of $0.3 million, (h) increase in deferred revenue from related parties of $0.1 million, and (i) decrease in operating lease obligations of $0.1 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.3 million and $0.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which in each instance consisted of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $27.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of the following: (i) proceeds from issuance of notes payable of $20.0 million offset by payments of notes payable offering costs of $0.5 million, (ii) proceeds from the 2021 PIPE of $9.3 million, (iii) payments of deferred offering costs of $1.9 million related to the Reverse Recapitalization, (iv) proceeds from exercise of stock options of $0.4 million, and (ii) payments of finance lease obligations of $0.2 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $69.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily consisted of the following: (i) proceeds from the issuance of Series D preferred stock of $35.1 million,, (ii) proceeds from the Reverse Recapitalization and 2020 PIPE of $31.8 million, offset by payments of related deferred offering costs of $4.0 million, (iii) proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable of $6.1 million, (iv) proceeds from issuance of notes payable of $0.7 million, (v) proceeds from exercise of stock options of $0.1 million, and (vi) payments of finance lease obligations of $0.2 million.
Maryland Loan
In February 2019, we entered into a loan agreement (the “2019 MD Loan”) with the Department of Housing and Community Development, a principal department of the State of Maryland. The agreement provides for a term loan of $0.5 million. Amounts outstanding under the 2019 MD Loan bear simple interest at an annual rate of 8.0%. Under the 2019 MD Loan, we agreed to affirmative and negative covenants to which we will remain subject until maturity. These covenants include providing information about our Company and operations; limitations on our ability to retire, repurchase, or redeem our common or preferred stock, options, and warrants other than per the terms of the securities; and limitations on our ability to pay dividends of cash or property. There are no financial covenants associated with the 2019 MD Loan. Events of default under the 2019 MD Loan include failure to make payments when due, insolvency events, and failure to comply with covenants. We are not in violation of any affirmative covenants. Repayment of the full balance outstanding is due on February 22, 2034. The 2019 MD Loan establishes “Phantom Shares,” based on 119,907 shares of Common Stock (based on 863,110 Series C Preferred Shares prior to the Reverse Recapitalization), determined at issuance. The 2019 MD Loan states the repayment amount is to be the greater of the balance of principal and accrued interest or the Phantom Shares value. We determined that the note should be accounted for at fair value. We record the fair value of the debt at the end of each reporting period. In order to value the note, we consider the amount of the simple interest expense that would be due and the value of Phantom Shares. The fair value of the 2019 MD Loan is determined based on the closing price of CLNN shares listed on Nasdaq.
Income of $0.5 million and expense of $0.5 million was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fair value of $0.6 million and $1.1 million of principal and accrued interest is included in long-term notes payable as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cecil County Loan
In April 2019, we entered into a loan agreement (the “2019 Cecil Loan”) with Advance Cecil Inc., a non-stock corporation formed under the laws of the State of Maryland with application for 501(c)(3) status pending before the Internal Revenue Service at the time of execution of the 2019 Cecil Loan. The agreement provides for a term loan of $0.1 million. Amounts outstanding under the 2019 Cecil Loan bear simple interest at an annual rate of 8.0%. Under the 2019 Cecil Loan, we agreed to affirmative covenants to which we will remain subject until maturity. These covenants include providing information about our Company and operations. There are no financial covenants associated with the 2019 Cecil Loan. Events of default under the 2019 Cecil Loan include failure to make payments when due, insolvency events, and failure to comply with covenants. We are not in violation of any affirmative covenants. Repayment of the full balance outstanding is due on April 30, 2034. The 2019 Cecil Loan establishes “Phantom Shares,” based on 23,981 shares of Common Stock (based on 172,622 Series C Preferred Shares prior to the Reverse Recapitalization), determined at issuance. The 2019 Cecil Loan states the repayment amount is to be the greater of the balance of principal and accrued interest or the Phantom Share value. We determined that the note should be accounted for at fair value. We record the fair value of the debt at the end of each reporting period. In order to value the note, we consider the amount of the simple interest expense that would be due and the value of Phantom Shares. The fair value of the 2019 Cecil Loan is determined based on the closing price of CLNN shares listed on Nasdaq.
Income of $0.1 million and expense of $0.1 million was recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fair value of $0.1 million and $0.2 million of principal and accrued interest is included in long-term notes payable as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Avenue Loan
In May 2021, we entered into a loan agreement (the “2021 Avenue Loan”) with Avenue. The agreement provides for a 42-month term loan of up to $30.0 million. The first tranche is $20.0 million, of which $15.0 million was funded at close and $5.0 million was funded in September 2021 (“Tranche 1”). We incurred issuance costs of $0.6 million of which $46,951 was expensed immediately. The remaining unfunded tranche of $10.0 million (“Tranche 2”) is available at our request until December 31, 2022. Funding of Tranche 2 is subject to (a) our receipt of $5.0 million financing through Maryland’s State Incentive Programs and/or other Maryland State programs; (b) our achievement of a statistically significant result on the primary endpoint, or if the totality of the results for any study warrant advancement into a subsequent clinical efficacy study, with respect to at least two of the following clinical trials: (i) RESCUE-ALS or the Healey ALS Platform Trial; (ii) REPAIR-PD; or (iii) REPAIR-MS (“Performance Milestone 1”); (c) our receipt of net proceeds of at least $30.0 million from the sale and issuance of our equity securities (including private placements or follow-on offerings) between May 2, 2021 and December 31, 2022; and (d) mutual agreement of us and Avenue.
The loans bear interest at a variable rate per annum equal to the sum of (i) the greater of (a) the prime rate, as published by the Wall Street Journal from time to time or (b) 3.25%, plus (ii) 6.60%. Payments are interest-only for the first 12 months and can be extended up to (i) 12 months (the “First Interest-only Period Extension”) if we achieve Performance Milestone 1 and (ii) 36 months if (a) we achieve the First Interest-only Period Extension and (b) have drawn from Tranche 2. On August 16, 2021, we mutually confirmed with Avenue that Performance Milestone 1 and the First Interest-only Period Extension had been achieved. The loan will amortize in equal payments of principal from the end of the interest period to the expiration of the 42-month term on December 1, 2024. On the maturity date, an additional payment equal to 4.25% of the funded loans, or $0.9 million, is due in addition to the remaining unpaid principal and accrued interest. The final payment was recorded as a debt premium and is being amortized over the contractual term using the effective interest method. The final payment provision is related to the loan host and is not bifurcated pursuant to ASC 815.
Pursuant to the agreement, we granted to Avenue a warrant for the purchase of 115,851 shares of Common Stock (the “Avenue Warrant”) at an exercise price equal to the lower of (i) $8.63 (which is equal to the five-day volume-weighted average price (“VWAP”) per share, determined as of the end of trading on the last trading day prior to execution of the loan agreement), or (ii) the lowest price per share paid by cash investors for our Common Stock issued in the next bona fide round of equity financing prior to March 31, 2022 (the “Next Round Price”). Upon the funding of Tranche 2, the Avenue Warrant shall be automatically adjusted to include an additional estimated 145,740 shares of Common Stock, which is equal to 5% of the principal amount of Tranche 2, divided by the lower of (i) the five (5)-day VWAP per share; determined as of the end of trading on the last trading day before the date of issuance of Tranche 2; or (ii) the Next Round Price. We accounted for the Tranche 2 warrants at inception of the 2021 Avenue Loan in accordance with ASC 815 and the fair value and issuable shares will be remeasured at each reporting period. Avenue also has the right, in its discretion, but not the obligation, at any time from time to time from the first- through the third-year anniversary of the agreement, while the loan is outstanding, to convert an amount of up to $5.0 million of the principal amount of the outstanding loan into Common Stock (the “Conversion Feature”) at a price per share equal to 120% of the stock purchase price set forth in the warrant. The Conversion Feature is subject to (i) the closing price of our Common Stock for each of the seven consecutive trading days immediately preceding the conversion being greater than or equal to the conversion price and (ii) the Common Stock issued in connection with any such conversion not exceeding 20% of the total trading volume of our Common Stock for the twenty-two consecutive trading days immediately prior to and including the effective date of such conversion.
Under the 2021 Avenue Loan, we agreed to affirmative and negative covenants to which we will remain subject upon maturity in the absence of prepayments. These covenants include providing information about our Company and operations; limitation on our ability to retire, repurchase, or redeem our Common Stock, options, and warrants other than per the terms of the securities; and limitations on our ability to pay dividends of cash or property. The financial covenant associated with the loan agreement includes maintaining minimum unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of at least $5.0 million; provided that upon our (i) achievement of Performance Milestone 1, and (ii) receiving of net proceeds of at least $30.0 million from the sale and issuance of our equity securities (including any PIPE or follow-on offering), we shall no longer be subject to financial covenants. We are not in violation of the covenants. The agreement provides for events of default customary for loans of this type, including but not limited to non-payment, breaches, the occurrence of a material adverse change, or defaults in the performance of covenants, insolvency, and bankruptcy. The 2021 Avenue Loan is collateralized by substantially all of our assets other than intellectual property, including our capital stock and the capital stock of our subsidiaries, in which Avenue is granted continuing security interest. The net proceeds from the issuance of the loan were initially allocated to the warrant at an amount equal to their fair value of $1.5 million and the remainder to the loan. The allocation of incurred financing costs of $0.5 million, which together with the fair value of the warrant and the final payment, are recorded as a debt discount and debt premium, respectively, and are being amortized over the contractual term using the effective interest method. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded interest expense of $1.4 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, and expenses. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis, and our actual results may differ from these estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones, and other various factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
We consider the following estimates to be critical as they involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a description of other significant accounting policies.
Contingent Earn-Out Liabilities
In connection with the Reverse Recapitalization, certain stockholders are entitled to the Contingent Earn-outs payments based on achievement of certain milestones. In accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”), we classified the Contingent Earn-outs as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets that were initially measured at fair value on the date of the Reverse Recapitalization. We remeasure the liabilities at each reporting date and record the change in fair value as a component of other income (expense), net, in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We estimate the fair value of the Contingent Earn-outs using a Monte Carlo valuation model. The unobservable inputs include the expected stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate, and the expected term. Additionally, for one milestone, we estimated of the probability of completing a clinical trial for treatment of COVID-19 which results in a statistically significant finding of clinical efficacy within twelve months after the closing of the Reverse Recapitalization (“Milestone 3”), which requires significant judgment.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the expected stock price volatility was 105.00% and 85.00%, respectively; the risk-free interest rate was 1.10% and 0.40%, respectively; the expected term was 4.00 years and 5.00 years, respectively. Milestone 3 was not achieved and was not an input in the valuation model as of as of December 31, 2021, and the probability of achieving Milestone 3 ranged between 5.80% and 11.70% as of December 31, 2020.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a change in the fair value of the Clene Nanomedicine Contingent Earn-out of $34.0 million and $12.7 million, respectively; and in the Initial Shareholders Contingent Earn-out of $3.6 million and $1.5 million, respectively.
Convertible Notes
Pursuant to the 2021 Avenue Loan, $5.0 million of the outstanding principal is subject to the Conversion Feature. In accordance with ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, we classified this portion as convertible notes payable in the consolidated balance sheets and did not bifurcate the Conversion Feature from the host contract. Consequently, we account for the convertible note as a single liability measured at its amortized cost. As of December 31, 2021, the convertible note was carried at $4.6 million.
Common Stock Warrant Liability
Pursuant to Tranche 1 of the 2021 Avenue Loan, we granted to Avenue the Avenue Warrant. In accordance with ASC 815, we also recognized the Tranche 2 warrants issuable pursuant to the potential draw of Tranche 2. We classified the warrants as a liability in the consolidated balances sheets that were initially measured at fair value at the inception of the 2021 Avenue Loan. We remeasure the liability at each reporting date and record the change in fair value as a component of other income (expense), net, in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We estimate the fair value of the Avenue Warrant using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, with a probability weight related to the potential draw of Tranche 2, which requires significant judgment. The unobservable inputs include the expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected term, and the probability of drawing Tranche 2.
As of December 31, 2021 and May 21, 2021, when the Avenue Warrant was issued, the expected stock price volatility was 105.00% and 90.00%, respectively; and the risk-free interest rate was 1.20% and 0.80%, respectively; and the probability of drawing Tranche 2 of the 2021 Avenue Loan was 50.00% and 50.00%, respectively. The expected term ranged between 3.89 and 4.39 years as of December 31, 2021, and was 5.00 years as of May 21, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a change in the fair value of the common stock warrant liability of $1.0 million.
Income Taxes
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the consolidated financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination by the taxing authorities. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the consolidated financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Additionally, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established through a charge to income tax expense. Potential for recovery of deferred tax assets is evaluated by estimating the future taxable profits expected and considering prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. The estimation of these factors requires significant judgment. Based on our evaluation of these factors, we have not recorded income tax benefits for the net operating losses or for research and development tax credits or other deferred tax assets due to uncertainty of realizing benefits from these items.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation arrangements using a fair value-based method for costs related to all share-based payments including stock options and stock awards. The fair value is recognized over the period during which a grantee was required to provide services in exchange for the option award and service-based stock awards, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period), on a straight-line basis. For stock awards with market conditions, the fair value is recognized over the period based on the expected milestone achievement dates as the derived service period (usually the vesting period), on a straight-line basis. For stock awards with performance conditions, the grant-date fair value of these awards is the market price on the applicable grant date, and compensation expense will be recognized when the conditions become probable of being satisfied. We will recognize a cumulative true-up adjustment once the conditions become probable of being satisfied as the related service period had been completed in a prior period. We elect to account for forfeitures as they occur, rather than estimating expected forfeitures.
We estimate the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The unobservable inputs include the expected price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, and expected term. The expected stock price volatility ranged between 87.40% and 91.51% during the year ended December 31, 2021, and between 75.00% and 119.30% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The risk-free interest rate ranged between 0.72% and 1.34% during the year ended December 31, 2021, and between 0.39% and 0.53% during the year ended December 31, 2020. The expected term was 6.00 years during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We estimate the fair value of restricted stock awards using a Monte Carlo valuation model to simulate the achievement of certain stock price milestones. The unobservable inputs include the expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected term. As of December 31, 2020, the expected stock price volatility was 85.00%, the risk-free interest rate was 0.40%, and the expected term was 5.00 years. There were no restricted stock awards granted during the year ended December 31, 2021.