Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Clover Leaf Capital Corp., a Delaware corporation. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Report includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act), and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company recently incorporated in the State of Delaware for the purpose of effecting a merger, stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We may pursue the initial Business Combination target in any industry or geographic location, and we intend to focus our search for a target business engaged in the cannabis industry.
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on July 19, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On July 22, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 13,831,230 at $10.00 per unit, and the sale of 675,593 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, in a private placement to our Sponsor and Maxim, the representative of the underwriters (the “Representative”), that closed simultaneously with the initial public offering. On July 22, 2021 the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option and purchased 1,331,230 of their full 1,875,000 units available and subsequently forfeited the remainder of their option as of July 28, 2021. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and sale of the private placement units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
Transaction costs amounted to $9,562,126 consisting of $2,766,246 of underwriting commissions, $4,840,931 of deferred underwriting commissions, $1,383,123 of fair value of the representative shares and $571,826 of other cash offering costs.
We will have only 12 months from the closing of the initial public offering to complete the initial Business Combination or we may extend the period of time to complete the initial Business Combination by three additional three-month periods (the “Combination Period”). Pursuant to the terms of the our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the trust agreement to be entered into between the Company and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, in order to extend the time available for us to consummate the initial Business Combination, the Sponsor or its affiliates or designees, upon five days advance notice prior to the applicable deadline, must deposit into the trust account for each additional three month period, $1,383,123 ($0.10 per share on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline) for each additional three month period. Any such payments would be made in the form of a loan. Any such loans will be non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of an initial business combination. If we complete an initial business combination, it will, at the option of the Sponsor, repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us or convert a portion or all of the total loan amount into units at a price of $10.00 per unit.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, the initial public offering and, since the closing of the initial public offering, a search for a Business Combination candidate. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest.
For the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021 we had a net loss of $834,087, which consisted of $851,777 in formation and operating costs offset by $47 in interest income from the operating bank account and interest income of $17,643 from marketable securities held in our trust account.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had $680,302 in cash and working capital of $418,498. Prior to the completion of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from our Sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from our sponsor of $300,000.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Until the consummation of a Business Combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, shareholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Account Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern.” We have until July 22, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern, also do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty about should a Business Combination not occur.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the unaudited condensed financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 13,831,230 Class A common stock sold as part of the units in the initial public offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity.
If it is probable that the equity instrument will become redeemable, we have the option to either accrete changes in the redemption value over the period from the date of issuance (or from the date that it becomes probable that the instrument will become redeemable, if later) to the earliest redemption date of the instrument or to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying amount of the instrument to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. We have elected to recognize the changes immediately.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have two classes of shares, redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock. Our redeemable common stock is comprised of Class A shares sold in the initial public offering. Our non-redeemable shares are comprised of Class B shares purchased by the Sponsor as well as Class A shares sold in the private placement units and representative shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Our statement of operations applies the two-class method in calculating net loss per share. Basic and diluted net loss per common share for redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing net loss, allocated proportionally to each class of common stock, attributable to us by the weighted average number of shares of redeemable and non-redeemable stock outstanding.
The calculation of diluted loss per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the rights issued in connection with the initial public offering since exercise of the rights is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such rights would be anti-dilutive. Accretion of the carrying value of Class A common stock to redemption value is excluded from net loss per redeemable share because the redemption value approximates fair value. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and administrative support. Upon completion of our Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement units and securities that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and extension loans will have registration rights to require us to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the underwriters may not exercise their demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five and seven years, respectively, after the effective date of the registration statement of which the initial public offering forms a part and may not exercise their demand rights on more than one occasion.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters had a 30-day option to purchase up to 1,875,000 additional units to cover any over-allotments, if any, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On July 22, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option and purchased an additional 1,331,230 units and forfeited the remainder of their over-allotment option as of July 28, 2021.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering held in the trust account upon the completion of the initial Business Combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are reviewing what impact, if any, adoption will have on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.