ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes many forward-looking statements. For cautions about relying on such forward-looking statements, please refer to the section entitled “Forward Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Report immediately prior to Item 1.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis including information with respect to Clearday, its plans, and strategy for its business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. On September 9, 2021, we completed the AIU Merger. In connection with the AIU Merger, we changed our name to Clearday, Inc. and continued the business of AIU as the acquired company and continued certain of STI’s businesses. The following discussion uses the term “Clearday” to mean the business and operations of AIU prior to the AIU Merger continued after the AIU Merger and the business of STI that is continued after the merger, unless otherwise indicated.
Overview
We are a health care services company focused on servicing the largest demographic in the country - the older care consumer market, which we define as adults that are 50 years of age or older. We provide a full care spectrum of care for older Americans through:
● Our foundational business, that includes our four residential memory care facilities that are located in three states; and one adult day care center; and
● Our Clearday Labs that develops and brings to market innovative non-acute care and wellness solutions intended to disrupt the traditional long-term care model. We have developed:
■ Clearday Restore, our proprietary sensory therapy that combines light, sound and aromas designed to reduce anxieties in older Americans which have successfully used in our facilities for more than two years;
■ Clearday at Home, our proprietary digital service, during 2020 as response to COVID-19, launched through consumer and business to business (B2B) sales channels and through our facilities;
■ Robotic services through our strategic alliance with a robotic developer and manufacturer;
■ Clearday Therapeutic Streams, our proprietary service that provides guidance to care givers as to specific issues such as assisting with activities of daily living, for example sundowning, during 2021; and
■ STI cryocooler technologies to develop our cryogenic air quality system that removes particulates and volatile organics (which effectively sterilizes the internal atmosphere), reduces CO2 (carbon dioxide), and regulates humidity, by condensing or freezing the air in interior built spaces in a system that can easily integrate with HVAC systems.
Clearday has two financial business segments:
● Non-Acute Care and Wellness, is Clearday’s operating business including:
- Clearday’s innovative non-acute care and wellness services and products, including a virtual service delivered through digital channels (Clearday at Home), and adult day care (Clearday Clubs);
- Clearday’s existing residential communities;
- Further development and commercial sales of products and services through Clearday Labs, including robotic technologies;
- Commercialization of its advanced air quality products; and
- All of Clearday’s general and administrative and research and development functions.
● Non-Core Assets and Related Businesses, which includes all of our assets that are held for disposition.
All net proceeds from dispositions of the non-core assets and related businesses have been used by Clearday for its working capital and to fund the development of its innovative non-acute care and wellness businesses.
Our four residential memory care facilities are located in three U.S. states and operated through our Memory Care America LLC (“MCA”) subsidiary. These facilities focus on treating residents suffering from any of the 25 forms of dementia that may be treated in a residential care facility, Alzheimer’s being the most common. We use our knowledge and our experience in treating dementia and other cognitive disorders to develop technology-enabled businesses, aligned to next-generation non-acute care and wellness services and products.
All of our long-lived assets are located in the United States and, during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, all of our revenue was derived from within the United States.
Seasonality
Our residential care facilities are seasonal in nature. Generally, residential care facilities suffer revenue losses in winter months as there is often an increase in the loss of residents during these periods primarily because flu and other health issues during such periods.
Results of Operations
Our operating revenues come predominately from our four residential memory care facilities and our adult day care center. MCA earns revenue primarily by providing services to individual residents for a specified monthly fee, which fee includes all services such as room, meals and programs and to a lesser extent, certain community fees for a resident to move into a facility. All of MCA’s revenues are “private pay” which are charged directly to the resident and paid by such individual’s family or administrator. Residents may terminate services upon advance notice of a specified period. A portion of our 2021 revenues were from our adult day care business. Our adult daycare service earns revenues primarily by providing services to individual clients for weekday sessions, which includes activities. A part of our revenues includes reimbursements to veterans under a program by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).
Our operating expenses are primarily the expenses of our MCA facilities described below as well as the expenses that we incur in our other businesses including adult day care and our digital platform.
SG&A Expenses. Certain costs and expenses incurred by the Company are accounted for as Selling, General & Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”), including costs and expenses that are summarized below, which we expect will not be incurred at the same level or amount. Because we do not expect to incur the same level of the costs and expenses that are summarized below, we believe that disclosure of such amounts would be useful to the analysis of our financial statements.
These SG&A Expenses during 2021 include:
(1) Development costs and expenses for the innovative services, including Clearday at Home, which primarily consisted of payments to a third-party consulting firm to develop the Clearday at Home and Clearday Club business models, strategies, branding and marketing, and to a lesser extent, the employment costs of the Company personnel dedicated to such development activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, these amounts were approximately $573,000 and $1,741,200 (including research and development costs), respectively. The decrease is primarily because of we completed a material amount of research and development related to our digital platform used for Clearday at Home and related digital services during 2020 and we capitalized a certain amount of payments in 2021. We may incur other development expenses through our Clearday Labs for the development of other products and services to the extent that such amounts are not funded by others through our strategic alliances.
(2) Accounting and finance expenses related to the merger and becoming a public company, which primarily consisted of accounting and consulting fees incurred to improve the accounting and finance department, the additional consulting fees regarding the audit and preparation of our financial statements. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 these costs were approximately $1,442,830 and $1,659,000 respectively. While some of these expenses will continue, such as audit fees, we have reduced our reliance on third party accounting consultants as we have increased the number and skill set of our accounting and financial staff. We incurred approximately $815,000 of costs and expenses paid to third party accounting consultants for the period from January 1, 2021 to November 30, 2021, which is the period that included these services for the audited financial statements included in the AIU Merger Registration Statement, our Current Report on Form 8-K for the AIU Merger and our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ending September 30, 2021, or approximately $74,330 per month. We significantly reduced our use of such consultants beginning December, 2021, which we expect will result in a significant decrease of future costs and fees to such consultants, offset in part by our increase in the compensation expense for our financial accounting staff. We believe that we will reduce accounting expenses for comparable accounting services by at least $500,000 per annum.
(3) Equity based compensation, which primarily consisted of restricted stock grants and warrants to the Company’s executives and third-party consultants. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, these amounts were $1,676,303 and $1,699,935 respectively. The 2021 annual amount includes compensation to our employees and approximately $689,776 and the remaining amount for compensation to certain consultants that received equity compensation through warrants. While we expect to continue to use equity-based compensation in future years such awards are not expected to continue, generally, at such levels on a recurring basis.
(4) Lease Disputes, which primarily consisted of legal and related costs in connection with the Simpsonville litigation described under Item 3 - Legal Proceedings. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, these amounts were approximately $160,000 and $750,000, respectively. We expect that these expenses will be significantly lower in 2022 as the Offering Costs related to our AIU Merger and the lease dispute related to the litigation regarding litigation regarding a MCA facility located in Simpsonville, South Carolina, which we expect will not require significant additional legal fees.
(5) Investment Banking Fees. We paid our financial consultant $2.6 million for fees regarding the AIU Merger, which included the identification of STI and consulting services regarding the merger and public market capital access.
The following summarizes the adjustments summarized above:
Certain Key MCA Statistical Data For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following table presents a summary of our operations of our residential care business for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, which do not include corporate overhead or our innovative care businesses such as Clearday at Home, our cryogenic air quality system or the development and uses of robotic services or our adult daycare operations:
(1) Lease expenses includes the accrual of rent and related amounts that have not been paid to the lessor of the Simpsonville facility in connection with a dispute described in Item 3 - Legal Proceedings based on the amounts stated in the applicable lease agreement.
(2) Impairment of Right of Use assets (leases) in New Braunfels, Naples, and Simpsonville.
(3) Other (income) expense includes the amount arising from the forgiveness of PPP loans, HHS grants and ERTC credits received.
MCA expenses are primarily related to the MCA facilities and providing care to the residents, including:
● wages and benefits, including wages and wage-related expenses, such as health insurance, workers’ compensation insurance and other benefits for the Company MCA employees, including MCA management;
● MCA facility operating expenses, including utilities, housekeeping, dietary, maintenance, regulatory requirements, insurance and administrative costs and salaries, including the compensation to persons who develop, market and provide our innovative products and services;
● lease expenses for four of the five MCA facilities;
● other general and administrative expenses, principally comprised of general management including the Company’s headquarters, general insurance, legal, accounting and investments in technology;
● depreciation and amortization expense on buildings and furniture and equipment;
● interest expenses for loans and other financings related to the MCA businesses, including loans to one lessor of three of the MCA facilities and the mortgage financing of the one owned MCA facility; and
● Other expenses for the development of technology used in supporting operations and next generation of tech-enabled non-acute care and wellness solutions.
Revenues. Our consolidated revenues increased by approximately 1.8% or $226,146 primarily due to due to additional revenues during 2021 from our adult day care which we acquired at the end of May, 2021, resulting in approximately seven months of revenues from this facility during 2021 and the change in our MCA Revenues. Our MCA revenues during 2021 increased slightly, $8,437, over our MCA revenues for 2020, primarily due to increased revenues for the four MCA facilities that we continue to operate, offset by the loss of revenues resulting by the transfer of operating management for our Simpsonville facility, in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the decrease of the revenues in such facilities during the second quarter 2021. Accordingly, during the fourth quarter of 2021, we operated 4 facilities compared with 5 facilities during 2020.
Operating Expense. Our consolidated operating expenses increased by approximately 24.2% or $4,388,220 to $22,487,970 during 2021 from $18,099,750 during 2020. Our operating expenses are primarily allocated to the MCA wages and benefits and MCA facilities operating expenses and MCA lease expenses, which amounts accounted for approximately 87.7% or $19,715,882 of such expenses during 2021 compared to approximately 100% during 2020, an increase of approximately 8.0% or $1,447,000. MCA wages and benefits increased by approximately 7.4%, or approximately $639,871 primarily due to a need to hire additional employees as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the use of agency fees and overtime compensation to maintain staffing levels. MCA facility total operating expenses increased by approximately 9.2% or $467,316, primarily due to (1) the reclassification of some operating expenses into Selling General & Administrative expenses (2) offset in part by the reduction of operating expenses because, in the fourth quarter, we transferred the operations and obligations of our Simpsonville facility resulting in our operating expenses for the Simpsonville facility were reduced to a specified limit during the last quarter of 2021, which did not including the rental expense which was included for the full annual period. As such, the decrease of operating expenses allocated to the Simpsonville facility reflected only the operating expenses such as compensation and insurance during the fourth quarter. MCA lease expenses also increased due to operations and related amounts. Operating expenses not allocated to such MCA expenses increased by approximately $2,772,088, primarily because of increased expenses related to our digital platform, insurance, legal and accounting costs.
SG&A Expenses. Our consolidated SGA Expenses increased by approximately 34.0% or $1,877,141 to $7,393,834 during 2021 from $5,516,693 during 2020, primarily due to the fees paid to our financial consultant or investment banker for the AIU Merger of approximately $2.8 million.
Research & Development. Our consolidated research and development expenses decreased by approximately 100% or $1,741,177 to $0 during 2021 from $1,741,177 during 2020, primarily because our developmental costs regarding our Clearday at Home services was completed in 2020 and additional development during 2021 that was capitalized and not included in research and development expenses.
Depreciation and amortization. Our consolidated depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by approximately 11.9% or $71,566 to $529,748 during 2021 from $601,314 during 2020, primarily because of the decrease in such expenses allocated to MCA facilities, which included a decrease of approximately 14.26%, or $77,388 primarily due to a decrease of the depreciable base after giving effect to the impairment charge, offset in part by additional depreciation amounts related to our headquarters building and related assets as well as the amortization of capitalized expenses related to our digital platform.
Interest. Our consolidated interest expense increased by approximately 192.12% or $689,211 to $1,381,670 during 2021 from $472,954 during 2020. Our interest expense is primarily allocated to the MCA, which amounts accounted for approximately 50% or $689,211 of such expenses during 2021 compared to approximately 100% during 2020, an increase of approximately 45.7% or $216,257. The increase in MCA allocated interest is primarily due to our high interest loans financings that were incurred to fund operating expenses and the development costs for our innovative products and services in advance of amounts received from the Internal Revenue Service under the employee retention tax credit (“ERTC”) program which was delayed. The interest expense that was not allocated to MCA related primarily to the mortgage on our headquarters building and other real estate assets.
Impairment. The amount of impairments required under GAAP increased by 100% or 4,396,228 primarily to our MCA facilities in New Braunfels, Texas; Naples, Florida; and Simpsonville, South Carolina. This increase is a non-cash expenses and related solely to analysis required under GAAP for long lived assets as described in footnote 4 to our 2021 audited financial statements included in this Report.
Other (income) expenses. Our consolidated other (income) expenses increased significantly by approximately 2,554% or $4,335,745 primarily due to ERTC grants, and HHS grants.
Gain on sale of investment. The amounts related to gain on sale of investment or $1,172,151 during 2021 and $0 are primarily due to the sale of a property investment in 2021.
Unrealized gain/(loss) on equity investments. The amounts related to unrealized gain/(loss) on equity investments of $0 in 2021 and $1,284,000 during 2020, are primarily due to the accounting for our investment in STI common stock during 2020, which was merged or eliminated during 2021 at the closing of the AIU Merger.
Concentration of Risk-Revenues.
The Company’s revenue for the year ended 2021 and 2020 consist of operations from our MCA residential facilities and our adult daycare facility in four states (three states as of December 31, 2021). The Company expects to continue to be dependent on revenues from the MCA communities until the other planned businesses have revenues. Any failure of the MCA communities to continue these businesses would significantly and adversely impact the Company. The MCA revenues are primarily private pay and do not rely on reimbursements from Medicare or Medicaid. The Company expects that such concentration will continue until revenues are realized from its Clearday Clubs and digital service Clearday at Home. The Company acquired an adult day care on May 28, 2021, which generated approximately $242,000 in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-Core Assets
The Company considers all its assets that are not used in the non-acute care and wellness industry as non-core assets. The non-core assets as of December 31, 2021 are:
● One hotel property that suspended its operations since March, 2020 due to COVID-19 and which was sold on October 1, 2021;
● Commercial real estate investments; and
● Investments in land.
The Company continues to evaluate the manner to sell or otherwise monetize such assets. One of our land investments is subject to a purchase and sale agreement for its sale that was entered into as of April 4, 2022.
Disposition Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company disposed of the following non-core assets:
● Transferred one hotel property to the lender;
● Sold one other hotel property; and
●
Sold our investment in a medical office building.
The COVID-19 pandemic has slowed the ability of the Company to dispose of its remaining non-core assets and lowered the expected price of such remaining assets. The Company recently has received an offer to sell one of its non-core assets, an investment in land, and expect to continue its efforts to sell its non-core assets to fund its operations.
During 2022, we entered into an agreement to sell one of our non-core assets, land located in Leander, Texas for approximately $1.8 million. The closing is subject to specified conditions, including land use and zoning approvals for the purchaser’s planned development of this land parcel.
Revenues of the Non-Core Assets.
The Company primarily derived revenues from Non-Core Assets from rents and related charges.
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
Clearday requires cash to fund its current operations and continued innovation of non-acute care and wellness services. As of December 31, 2021, Clearday has an accumulated deficit of $65,208,327, loss from continued operations of $(21,981,244) and losses from cash flows from operating activities in the amount of $(11,832,919). The COVID-19 pandemic has interrupted the non-core sale process and, to a certain extent, reduced the expected net proceeds.
Net cash from investing activities of continuing operations of $(493,451) and net cash from financing activities was $3,208,648 due mostly to the proceeds from sale of redeemable preferred shares and member units in subsidiaries.
We do not have sufficient cash resources from the net cash flows of operations from our current businesses to sustain our operations for the next twelve months and will rely on the continued sale of non-core assets, tax credits, government sponsored financing programs and related amounts, and raising capital through the sale of our securities.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to have a material adverse effect on Clearday’s business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and prospects in the near-term and beyond 2021. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Clearday’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is highly uncertain, and cannot currently be accurately predicted. Clearday’s results of operations, financial condition and cash flows are dependent on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic and the related length of Clearday’s impact on the global economy, such as a lengthy or severe recession or any other negative trend in the U.S. or global economy and any new information that may emerge concerning the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions to contain it or treat Clearday’s impact, which at the present time are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with any accuracy.
Clearday expects that the following factors will affect our future liquidity:
● Operating revenues are expected to be affected, primarily because of
- Our ability to increase residents through increased sales efforts and increased capacity as regulators are re-evaluating the number of beds required for COVID-19 and related quarantine areas;
- Increased revenues from adult daycare, including a full year of revenues from our acquired adult daycare facility;
- Our ability to increase revenues by providing certain additional products and services to residents, and clients through our Clearday Direct program, including our robotic service that we have begun to deploy in our Westover facility in April, 2022.
● Operating costs are expected to be affected, primarily because of:
- Our ability to reduce the staff to resident ratios in the post-COVID-19 environment and that our Clearday Clubs require less staff to client ratio;
- Our ability to reduce staff turnover through better training and recruitment;
- The expiration of the Employee Retention Credit under the CARES Act,
- Increased pressures on wages and agency fees due to industry staffing shortages;
- Additional interest expenses related to our high interest loans that we have incurred during 2022, offset in part by expected refinancing of certain mortgages and debt and the receipt of other financings such as SBA sponsored programs and additional amounts that we expect to receive through tax credits;
- Reduced operating expenses related to our Simpsonville memory care facility.
● Selling and general administrative costs will be effected and are expected to decrease, primarily because:
○ We expect to reduce our reliance on consultants that have a higher cost than its employees that have assumed such functions and work; and
○ The significant product development costs that are recorded as operating expenses are expected to remain consistent or be lower as the Clearday at Home and Clearday Clubs business models, strategies and marketing plans have been developed.
Improved because of no merger costs We will have additional costs and expenses incurred in the merger, including fees to our financial advisor and costs generally of being a public company.
MCA Initiatives.
As business operations for residential care facilities began to normalize in the COVID-19 environment, we continued our evaluation of our businesses. We expect to:
● Continue our sales and marketing training to maintain and increase resident or census occupancy percentages per available room in our facilities maintained after December 31, 2021;
● Increase revenues per resident through the sale of innovative products and services, including upgraded or premium Clearday rooms and digital and robotic services, as well as other revenue opportunities;
● Use innovative services such as digital platforms and robotic service to empower and enhance caregiver efficiency and effectiveness which are intended to reduce employee / caregiver stress and turnover.
During the latter part of the third quarter of 2021, MCA began marketing its “Calm Rooms” initially at our Little Rock facility. Calm Rooms incorporate Clearday Restore therapies and other premium services and are able to charge a premium monthly fee. There are no significant revenues from such sales in such quarter.
COVID-19. The pandemic and the regulatory responses and additional initiatives have and will likely continue to have a material effect to Company’s core businesses and operations.
Funding History.
Clearday has historically financed its operations primarily through the sale of its equity securities in private placements. Clearday has incurred negative cash flows from operations. On December 31, 2021, Clearday had an aggregate amount of cash and restricted cash of $0.9 million and a deficit of $48.1 million.
Cash Flows.
The following table ($ in 000) shows a summary of Clearday’s cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
We expect that our net cash flow will be subject to the same adjustments that we discussed above under Results of Operations - SG&A Expenses.
Operating Activities.
Net cash used in operating activities was $2.6 million for year ended December 31, 2021, and $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from a net loss of $19.6 million adjusted for certain non-cash items including: (i) an increase in stock-based compensation for certain officers, directors and consultative services of $.7 million (ii) depreciation and amortization of $1 million, (iii) $1.9 million of non-cash lease expenses and $7.4 million of Right of Use Asset Impairment losses relating to Clearday’s Right of Use Assets, (iv) a $4.4 million increase in impairment losses for our MCA Naples facility, (v) loan forgiveness of $1.6 million.
Investing Activities.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and net cash provided of $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used for year ended December 31, 2021, consists primarily of investment activities in payments for capitalized software costs of $1.6 million, $1.4 million in cash from sale of property & equipment.
Financing Activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and net cash used of $8.6 million for year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted primarily of net proceeds received from the new loans is $12.9 million (i) cash in-flow from the sale of preferred and member interests in non-controlling entity of $3.3 million; (ii) repayment of long-term debt in the amount of $13.3 million.
HHS Government Grants
The Company recognizes income for government grants when grant proceeds are received and the Company determines it is reasonably assured that it will comply with the conditions of the grant, the Company will recognize the distributions received in the income statement on a systematic and rational basis. The Company will estimate the fair value of the grant using the applicable HHS definitions of health care related expenses and lost revenue attributable to COVID-19, considering the Company’s projected and actual results at the end of each reporting period.
Upon conclusion that AIU is reasonably assured that it has met the conditions of the grant, it must measure the amount of unreimbursed health-care related expenses and lost revenue related to COVID-19 at the end of each reporting period and release that amount from Refundable Advance to Other Revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has received grants amounting to $289,487 and total grant received so far by the Company amounts to $675,868.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments.
See the “Commitment and Contingencies” section within Note 7 of the audited consolidated financial statements within this Quarterly analysis, which information is incorporated herein by reference
Legal Proceedings.
Clearday is subject to legal proceedings. The disclosures in this part of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are provided under Item 3 - Legal Proceedings.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.
Clearday is not a party to any off-balance sheet transactions. Clearday has no guarantees or obligations other than those which arise out of normal business operations.
Cash and Restricted Cash.
Cash, consisting of short-term, highly liquid investments and money market funds with original maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase, are carried at cost plus accrued interest, which approximates market.
Restricted cash as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 includes cash that Clearday deposited as security for obligations arising from property taxes, property insurance and replacement reserve Clearday is required to establish escrows as required by Clearday’s mortgages and certain resident security deposits. Restricted cash does not include the cash deposited of approximately $2,764,000 with the trial court in connection with certain litigation described in Item 3 Legal Proceedings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates.
The preparation of the audited consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On a regular basis, we evaluate these estimates. These estimates are based on management’s historical industry experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
For a description of the accounting policies that, in management’s opinion, involve the most significant application of judgment or involve complex estimation and which could, if different judgment or estimates were made, materially affect our reported financial position, results of operations, or cash flows, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition, Results of Operations - Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” and the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Quarterly analysis.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no significant changes in our accounting policies and estimates other than the newly adopted accounting standards that are disclosed in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Impact of Climate Change.
Concerns about climate change have resulted in various treaties, laws and regulations that are intended to limit carbon emissions and address other environmental concerns. These and other laws may cause energy or other costs at The Company’s communities to increase. In the long-term, the Company believes any such increased costs will be passed through and paid by the Company’s residents and other customers in higher charges for The Company’s services. However, in the short-term, these increased costs, if material in amount, could materially and adversely affect the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
Some observers believe severe weather in different parts of the world over the last few years is evidence of global climate change. Severe weather has had and may continue to have an adverse effect on certain senior living communities The Company operates. Flooding caused by rising seas levels and severe weather events, including hurricanes, tornadoes and widespread fires may have an adverse effect on the senior living communities the Company operates. The Company mitigates these risks by procuring insurance coverage The Company believes adequate to protect the Company from material damages and losses resulting from the consequences of losses caused by climate change. However, the
Company cannot be sure that its mitigation efforts will be sufficient or that future storms, rising sea levels or other changes that may occur due to future climate change could not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial results.
Market Risk
We are exposed to various market risks, including changes in interest rates. Market risk is the potential loss arising from adverse changes in market rates and prices. We do not enter into derivatives or other financial instruments for trading or speculation purposes. Our money market investments have no exposure to the auction rate securities market.
At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0 invested in a money market account yielding a nominal bank rate.