Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Clarim Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination.
We leverage the more than nine decades of combined operational and financial experience of our management team and board of directors who are both established e-commerce entrepreneurs and sophisticated investors. We believe our extensive industry experience and proven ability to source, acquire, grow and revitalize companies will provide our management team with a robust and consistent flow of acquisition opportunities. Our management team and board’s broad relationships across multiple networks, including leading consumer and technology company founders, executives of private and public companies, leading M&A investment banks and private equity firms, as well as their ability to engage early with founder-led businesses represents a differentiated advantage to successfully source transaction opportunities. Our team has been immersed in the same ecosystem as the current founders of private companies who are making decisions on how to build currency for future growth and monetization.
While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any business, industry or geographical location, we are focusing our search primarily within the consumer-facing e-commerce sector. We are capitalizing on the ability of our management team to identify, acquire and operate a business or businesses that can benefit from our management team and board’s established relationships and operating experience. Our management team has extensive experience in identifying and executing strategic investments and has done so successfully in several sectors, particularly in digital consumer-facing businesses. Over time, we believe that all companies will need to deploy an omni-commerce strategy to succeed, and we will leverage our management team and board’s unique experience to successfully develop our business target’s omni-commerce.
Recent Developments
We issued the Working Capital Note II, an unsecured promissory note, dated March 31, 2022, in the amount of up to $600,000, to our sponsor. The proceeds of such promissory note will be used for costs in connection with our initial business combination or as general working capital. The Working Capital Note II is non-interest bearing and payable (subject to the waiver against trust provisions) on the earlier of (i) the date on which the initial business combination is consummated and (ii) the date of our liquidation.
Upon the consummation of the initial business combination, the outstanding amount under the Working Capital Note II shall automatically convert into that number of warrants of the Company or our successor entity (the “Conversion Warrants”), equal to: (x) the outstanding amount of the Working Capital Note II being converted, divided by (y) $1.50, rounded up to the nearest whole number of warrants. The Conversion Warrants will be entitled to registration rights, as described in our registration rights agreement with certain other parties thereto on January 28, 2021.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, the initial public offering and, since the closing of the initial public offering, a search for an initial business combination candidate. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting, and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income (loss) was $2,465,392 which consisted of $5,265,833 from the change in the fair value of warrants, $89,794 in interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account, offset by $530,059 in warrant issuance costs, and $2,360,223 in operating costs (which included approximately $1,223,799 for accrued professional expenses for identifying targets, pursuing discussions with potential acquisition candidates, due diligence of prospective business combination partners and initial negotiations regarding deal terms for potential transactions.)
For the period from November 4, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,430 which consisted of operating costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern Considerations
As of December 31, 2021, we had $107,125 in our operating bank account, and a working capital deficit of $781,585 including franchise tax payable of $200,000.
Prior to the completion of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs, and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of $112,942. We paid 112,500 on the note to the sponsor on February 11, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
We also issued two promissory notes with the sponsor on November 19, 2021 and March 31, 2022, respectively, pursuant to which we may draw down capital to fund our working capital needs or in connection with our initial business combination, up to a total principal amount in aggregate of up to $1,350,000. The sponsor has also informally agreed to commit additional funding as and if necessary and agreed with us of up to $500,000 upon similar terms and conditions as the foregoing promissory note.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
However, as of the date of this Report, the Company is within 12 months of its mandatory liquidation date of February 2, 2023. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after February 2, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities.
The underwriters of the initial public offering are entitled to a deferred underwriting commission of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO held in the Trust Account, or $10,062,500, upon the completion of our initial business combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The deferred underwriting commission will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete an initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity (deficit). Our common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheets.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common stock
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The 14,750,000 potential common stock for outstanding warrants to purchase our stock were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met.
Offering Costs associated with the Initial Public Offering
We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the IPO based on a relative fair value basis compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities is expensed, and offering costs associated with the Class A common stock were charged to temporary equity upon the completion of the initial public offering.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheets as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined the warrants are a derivative instrument.
FASB ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options addresses the allocation of proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt into its equity and debt components. We apply this guidance to allocate IPO proceeds from the Units between Class A common stock and warrants, using the residual method by allocating IPO proceeds first to fair value of the warrants and then the Class A common stock.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section102 (b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results Of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.