ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” should be read in conjunction with the “Business” section and our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, which are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The financial information contained herein is taken or derived from such consolidated financial statements, unless otherwise indicated. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Actual results could differ materially from those that are discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, particularly under “Risk Factors.”
Amounts are presented in thousands of U.S. dollars, except for per share data or as otherwise noted.
Our Company
We are a multi-national operator in the botanical cannabinoid and nutraceutical industries, with operations and investments in Colombia, Portugal, Germany the United States and Canada. We are working to develop one of the industry’s leading, low-cost
global business-to-business supply chains with the goal of providing high quality, pharmaceutical grade cannabis and wellness products to customers and patients at competitive prices produced in a sustainable and environmentally friendly manner. Our customers consist of retail distributors and pharmaceutical and cannabis companies.
We have invested in ecologically sustainable, large-scale, botanical cultivation and processing, as the cornerstone of our medical cannabinoid business, and we continue to develop strategic distribution channels and brands.
We currently own approximately 2.1 million square feet of greenhouse cultivation capacity across two continents and approximately 13 million square feet of agricultural land, with an option to acquire approximately 73 million additional square feet of land for cultivation expansion. In addition, our pharmaceutical-grade extraction facility is capable of processing 104,400 kilograms of dry flower per year and is expandable to over 300,000 kilograms of dry flower per year with limited additional investment.
In July 2020, we became one of a number of vertically integrated cannabis companies to receive EU GMP certifications for our Colombian operations. We believe these features of our business provide us with one of the largest licensed capacities for cannabis cultivation and cannabinoid extraction globally, while our strategically located operations allow us to produce our products at a fraction of the average cost of production incurred by our peers in Canada and the United States.
In addition to the cannabinoid business, we are also engaged in the non-cannabinoid business of formulating, manufacturing, marketing, selling, distributing, and otherwise commercializing nutraceutical and other natural remedies, and wellness products to more than 20,000 retail locations across the United States, through our wholly owned subsidiary Herbal Brands, Inc. Herbal Brands is an Arizona based GMP-compliant, FDA registered facility and national distributor of nutraceutical products. Herbal Brands’ nationwide customer base provides a platform we intend to leverage for greater potential cannabinoid distribution in the future, should U.S. federal laws change and regulations permit.
Our business model is focused on partnering with leading and emerging cannabis and pharmaceutical businesses by providing them with lower cost product, variable cost structures, reliable supply throughout the year, and accelerated speed to market. We believe this is achievable due to our production locations, capacity, product registrations and various product certifications.
We manage our business in two segments: the Cannabinoid and Non-Cannabinoid segments.
1.The Cannabinoid operating segment is comprised of the Company’s cultivation, extraction, manufacturing, commercialization, and distribution of cannabinoid products. This operating segment is in the early stages of commercializing cannabinoid products internationally subject to applicable international and state laws and regulations. Our customers and sales for our cannabinoid segment products are mostly outside of the U.S.
2.The Non-Cannabinoid operating segment is comprised of the brands and manufacturing assets acquired as part of our acquisition of Herbal Brands. The segment is engaged in the business of formulating, manufacturing, marketing, selling, distributing, and otherwise commercializing wellness products and nutraceuticals, excluding cannabinoid products. Our principal customers for the Herbal Brands products include specialty and health retailers, mass retailers and specialty and health stores in the United States.
Factors Impacting our Business
We believe that our future success will primarily depend on the following factors:
Globalization of the industry. Due to our MNO model focused on geographic diversification, which distinguishes us from many of our competitors and allows us to scale our production in low-cost regions of the world, we believe we are well positioned to capitalize in markets where the medical cannabis and hemp industry offers a reasonably regulated and free flow of goods across national boundaries. While certain countries, such as Canada, have historically not welcomed imported cannabis or hemp products for commercial purposes, other countries, such as Germany and Brazil, depend primarily on imports.
Global medical market expansion. We believe that we are well-positioned to capitalize on expansion of global cannabis markets, as more legal medical cannabis geographies emerge. Medical cannabis is now authorized at the national or federal level in over 41 countries, and more than half of these countries have legalized or introduced significant reforms to their cannabis-use laws to broaden the scope of permitted medical uses beyond the original parameters. Over the past three years, we have established regional operations in Colombia, Portugal, Germany, the United States and Canada, and we have invested significant resources in personnel and partnerships to build the foundation for new export channels.
Product development and innovation. Because of the rapid evolution of the cannabis industry, the disparate regulations across different geographies, and the time required to develop and validate pharmaceutical-grade products, the pace at which we can expand our portfolio of products and formulations will impact market acceptance for our products. To increase our output while maintaining or reducing unit costs, we may need to enhance our cultivation, extraction, and other processing methods. We believe our focus on the production of proprietary and exclusive products or formulations that comply with stringent regulations, or that result in enhanced benefits for patients or consumers, could create advantages in various markets.
Regulatory expertise and adaptation. As more markets welcome the importation of cannabis or hemp products for commercial purposes, which requires navigating and complying with the strict and evolving cannabis regulations across the different geographies, we believe that we are well positioned to expand in these markets. We have built a global regulatory team that is experienced in developing good relationships with regulatory agencies and governments that govern and shape the cannabis industry in their respective jurisdictions. Key expertise includes complying with and securing quotas, product approvals, export permits, import permits and other geographic specific licenses.
Strategically expanding productive capacity and manufacturing capabilities. It is beneficial to have low operating costs and to control the production process to generate consistency and quality on a large scale. As we expand into new markets and grow our presence in existing markets, we expect significant investments in cultivation and processing will be required, which may necessitate additional capital raises. We also aim to increase productive capacity through innovation in cultivation or processing methods, improving yields and output levels of our existing assets. While we believe our core cultivation and extraction operations in Colombia are adequately sized for our current business operations, as our cannabis sales grow and expand to flower products, we plan to expand our operations and invest in advanced processing or finished good manufacturing capabilities, particularly in Colombia and Portugal.
Key Operating Metrics
We use the following key operating metrics to evaluate our business and operations, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, project our future performance and make strategic decisions. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate key operating metrics with similar names differently, which may reduce their usefulness as comparative measures.
The following table presents select operational and financial information of the Cannabinoid segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
_______________
(a)Kilograms (dry flower) harvested - represents the weight of dried plants post-harvest both for sale and for research and development purposes. This operating metric is used to measure the productivity of our farms.
(b)Costs to produce - includes costs associated with cultivation, extraction, depreciation, quality assurance and supply chain related to kilograms (dry flower) harvested.
(c)Kilograms sold - represents the amount in kilograms of product sold in dry plant equivalents. Extract is converted to dry plant equivalent for purposes of this metric.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we sold 11,131 and 24,035 kilograms, respectively, of dry flower equivalent. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our cannabinoid segment sales were primarily in Australia, Israel, Colombia, and Brazil. The decrease in sale of dry flower equivalent for the Cannabinoid segment was primarily due to a shift to selling more higher margin products.
We harvested 52,159 kilograms of cannabinoids in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 56,685 kilograms in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in our planned reduction in our production capacity at our Colombia facilities. The decrease in production capacity compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was partially offset by an increase in our production capacity at our Portugal facilities following completion of our cultivation facility expansion in the third quarter of 2021.
Costs to produce were approximately $0.22 per gram of dry flower equivalent for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.14 per gram of dry flower equivalent for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in costs to produce per gram was primarily driven by the initial higher production costs at our Portugal facility as we continued to expand production capacity. The increase in costs was party reduced by lower production costs at our facilities in Colombia and the resulting economies of scale.
Recent Developments
Licensing Requirement - Decree 811
The Colombian government passed Decree 811 in late July 2021, which replaced Decree 613. Decree 811 removed the prohibition contained in Decree 613 to export cannabis flowers. In February 2022, the Colombian government passed Regulation 227, which defines the procedures to begin cultivating cannabis for exporting the flower for medicinal use. An additional resolution defining the procedures for exporting is expected to be passed in the first half of 2022 by the Colombian government.
2024 Note Purchase Agreement and 2022 Convertible Notes Repayment
On July 19, 2021, we entered into the Note Purchase Agreement with Catalina LP in a transaction exempt from registration pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act, the Catalina LP Convertible Note in the principal amount of $25,000. The Catalina LP Convertible Note matures three years from its issuance date, and we have the option to prepay the outstanding principal and accrued interest on the Catalina LP Convertible Note at any time at our election. Interest accrues on the Catalina LP Convertible Note at 5% per annum and is payable on a quarterly basis, either in cash or, at our option, by increasing the principal amount of the note. The Catalina LP Convertible Note is guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company and secured by pledged equity interests in certain subsidiaries of the Company.
The principal and accrued interest owing under the Catalina LP Convertible Note may be converted at any time by the holder into common shares at a per share price of $13.50, subject to certain limitations. Up to $12,500 in aggregate principal under the Catalina LP Convertible Note may be so converted within one year of issuance. In addition, each of the Company and the holder may redeem all or a portion of the outstanding principal and accrued interest owing under the Catalina LP Convertible Note into common shares, at a per share price equal to the greater of (x) an 8% discount to the closing price per share on the applicable redemption date or (y) $6.44 (the “Optional Redemption Rate”), subject to certain limitations. Up to $12,500 in aggregate principal under the Catalina LP Convertible Note may be so redeemed within one year of issuance.
The holder of the Catalina LP Convertible Note will not be entitled to convert any portion of the Catalina LP Convertible Note if, after such conversion, such holder would have beneficial ownership of, and direct or indirect control or direction over, more than 9.99% of the Company’s outstanding common shares.
In connection with the issuance of the Catalina LP Convertible Note, we agreed, pursuant to a Registration Rights Agreement with Catalina LP dated as of July 19, 2021 (the “Catalina LP Registration Rights Agreement”), to register for resale with the
SEC all of the common shares issuable under the Catalina LP Convertible Note, and in any event not less than 3,881,988 common shares (which represents the number of common shares that would be issuable if the entire principal amount of the Catalina LP Convertible Note was redeemed at the minimum Optional Redemption Rate). Under the Catalina LP Registration Rights Agreement, we were required to use commercially reasonable efforts to have such registration statement declared effective by the SEC within 90 calendar days of the Catalina LP Convertible Note issuance date, and are required to keep such registration statement continuously effective until the earlier of (x) 30 days after the maturity date of the Catalina LP Convertible Note or (y) the date on which all common shares issued or issuable upon conversion of the Catalina LP Convertible Note are no longer restricted securities under Rule 144 of the Securities Act. There are no contractual transfer restrictions or lock-up arrangements on the common shares issuable upon conversion or redemption of the Catalina LP Convertible Note.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued a total of 720,085 common shares upon debt conversion to the noteholder of $5,559 aggregate principal amount. As of December 31, 2021, the Catalina LP Convertible Note's outstanding principal balance, including interest and net of debt discount and debt issuance cost was $17,699.
On July 19, 2021, the Company fully repaid its 2022 Convertible Notes with accrued interest and cancelled the associated warrants. Under the Payout and Release Agreement, the Company paid an amount equal to the sum of 90% of the aggregate outstanding principal on the 2022 Convertible Notes, including accrued interest and certain legal fees.
The Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt, net of unamortized debt financing costs, for approximately $2,267, in connection with the settlement of the 2022 Convertible Notes, during the December 31, 2021.
On January 13, 2022, the Company and Catalina LP entered a First Amendments to Secured Convertible Note (the "First Amendment Agreement"), amending certain terms of the original Secured Convertible Note issued by the Company to Catalina. These amendments are temporary amendments that expire on July 19, 2022, at which time the terms of the original note apply with respect to such amendments. The First Amendment Agreement allows Catalina to elect to receive cash repayment on account of Principal if the closing price per share of the Company’s common shares on the Nasdaq Capital Market is below $2.20 (from $7.00 in the original Catalina LP Convertible Note) on any 10 of the previous 20 trading days. The terms of the Original Note will apply to redemptions or repayments after July 19, 2022, unless further amended by the parties thereto. For more information refer to note 22, Subsequent Events for more information.
Equity Distribution Agreement
On January 14, 2022, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Equity Distribution Agreement”) with Canaccord Genuity LLC, as sales agent (the “Agent”). Under with the terms of the Equity Distribution Agreement, the Company may issue and sell its common shares, without par value, having an aggregate offering price of up to $50,000 from time to time through the Agent. The issuance and sale of the common shares under the Equity Distribution Agreement have been made, and any such future sales will be made, pursuant to the Company’s effective registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-262183), which includes an “at-the-market” (“ATM”) offering prospectus supplement. As of the date of filing this Form 10-K, the Company is now subject to “baby shelf” rules pursuant to Instruction I.B.6. of Form S-3. As such, the Company may not sell more than one-third of the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates, where such aggregate market value is calculated using figures from a date or dates, as the case may be, within the preceding 60-days from the date of filing this 10-K. Pursuant this baby shelf cap, we may not offer to or sell equity securities for more than one-third of our public float, which, as of the date of this filing, limits the aggregate offering price pursuant to the ATM to approximately $18,000, but may increase if our public float increases.
Subject to terms of the Equity Distribution Agreement, the Agent is not required to sell any specific number or dollar amount of common shares but has agreed to act as the Company’s sales agent, using commercially reasonable efforts to sell on the Company’s behalf all of the common shares requested by the Company to be sold, consistent with the Agent’s normal trading and sales practices, on terms mutually agreed between the Agent and the Company. The Agent is entitled to compensation under the terms of the Equity Distribution Agreement at a fixed commission rate not to exceed 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each issuance and sale of common shares. As of March 22, 2022, the Company has issued and sold 2,801,997 shares pursuant to the ATM offering, for aggregate net proceeds of $3,316 and may issue and sell additional shares, subject to the limitations described above.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue - in our Cannabinoid segment, revenue is primarily comprised of sales of our cannabis products, which currently include cannabidiol isolate, full spectrum and standardized extracts. In our Non-Cannabinoid segment, revenue is primarily composed of sales of our nutraceutical products to our retail customers. As we have only recently begun to carry out our cannabinoid sales operations, our main revenues are derived from our Herbal Brands business.
Cost of Sales - in our Cannabinoid segment, cost of sales is primarily composed of pre-harvest, post-harvest and shipment and fulfillment costs. Pre-harvest costs include labor and direct materials to grow cannabis, which includes water, electricity, nutrients, integrated pest management, growing supplies and allocated overhead. Post-harvest costs include costs associated with drying, trimming, blending, extraction, purification, quality testing and allocated overhead. Shipment and fulfillment costs include the costs of packaging, labelling, courier services and allocated overhead. Total cost of sales also includes cost of sales associated with accessories and inventory adjustments. In our Non-Cannabinoid segment, cost of sales primarily includes raw materials, labor, and attributable overhead, as well as packaging labelling and fulfillment costs.
Operating Expenses - We classify our operating expenses as general and administrative, sales and marketing, and research and development expenses.
•General and administrative expenses include salary and benefit expenses for certain employees, including share-based compensation, costs of legal expenses, professional services, general liability insurance, rent and other office and general expenses.
•Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of services engaged in marketing and promotion of our products and costs associated with initiatives and development programs and salary and benefit expenses for certain employees.
•Research and development expenses primarily consist of salary and benefit expenses for employees engaged in research and development activities, as well as other general costs associated with R&D activities.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Consolidated Statements of Net Loss Data
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
Revenue by Channel
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
The following table provides our revenues by channel for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue
Revenue increased to $15,374 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12,117 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by increased sales in both our Non-Cannabinoid and Cannabinoid segments. The increased sales in our Non-Cannabinoid segment were primarily driven by stronger demand from specialty distributors combined with less stringent COVID-19 restrictions compared to the prior period, during which we saw a decline in sales due to closure of store fronts and a reduction in foot traffic for our retail partners. The increase in our Cannabinoid segment sales was primarily driven by our continued expansion of sales activity.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales, before inventory write-down increased to $5,585 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $4,305 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to costs associated with increased sales from both the Non-Cannabinoid and Cannabinoid segments during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year.
Inventory write-down. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized inventory write-down of $2,980 and $399, respectively, to cost of sales for inventory, primarily related to aged, obsolete or unsaleable inventories.
Operating expenses
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
N/M: Not a meaningful percentage
(a) The Company reclassified $1,009 research and development expenses, reported in previous period in general and development expense and depreciation and amortization, to conform to the current period presentation.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased to $38,398 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $28,819 for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the increase in share-based compensation, increased legal fees, and insurance costs related to being a public company, partially offset by our cost-cutting measures.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased to $3,796 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2,577 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in spending was due to the launch of cannabinoid products and the launch of the Project Change Lives campaign we had initiated in the United States during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 combined with easing of cost control measures in 2020 to address the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and development. Research and development expenses increased to $1,546 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1,009 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to research and development activities related to our cannabinoid products development.
Goodwill impairment. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized goodwill impairment charges of $18,508 and $1,682, respectively. The goodwill impairment charge of $18,508 for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to the Eagle Canada Acquisition and operating segments, as compared to the impairment charge of $1,682 related to our Herbal Brands business in the prior year. For more information, see Note 9 and Note 10 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased slightly to $1,768 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1,854 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is mainly attributable to the lower amortization cost recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in amortization cost recognized was due to the acceleration of the period over which the useful life of the GNC intangible asset was amortized in 2020 and 2021, which was fully amortized as of June 30, 2021.
Non-operating income and expenses
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
N/M: Not a meaningful percentage
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6,818 as compared to $4,455 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the expense recognized related to the debt issuance costs in connection with the 2022 Convertible Notes and the debt discount costs in connection with the beneficial conversion factor related to the 2024 Convertible Note. For additional details, see Note 12 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Gain on remeasurement of warrant liability. Gains on remeasurement for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $16,856 and $10,780, respectively. The gains for both periods are directly attributable to remeasurement of the warrant liability at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 due to the decline in the underlying value related to the private warrants. For more information refer to Note 13 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Loss on investments. There was no loss or gain on investment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a loss of $464 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss on investments in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the decline in the carrying value of our investments in Lift & Co. and Cansativa.
(Gain) loss on debt extinguishment, net. The Company recognized a net gain on debt extinguishment of $3,262 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to recognizing a net loss on debt extinguishment of $2,360 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain on debt extinguishment during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the extinguishment of debt in connection with the settlement of the 2022 Convertible Notes. The loss on debt extinguishment during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the conversion of the Series E Convertible Debentures and the September 2023 Convertible Debentures at the closing of the Business Combination. For additional details, see Note 12 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Loss on fair value of derivative instrument. There was no loss on fair value of derivative instrument during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced a loss of $657 primarily due to the conversion of the September 2023 Convertible Debentures.
Foreign exchange loss. The impact of foreign exchange for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $1,276 compared to a loss of $491 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increased foreign exchange losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily driven by the exchange rate fluctuations between the Euro and the U.S. Dollar.
Other income, net. Other income, net includes costs not individually material to our consolidated financial statements.
Operating Results by Business Segment
Our management evaluates segment profit/loss for each of our reportable segments. We define segment profit/loss as income from continuing operations before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, share-based compensation expense, gains/losses on foreign currency fluctuations, gains/losses on the early extinguishment of debt and miscellaneous expenses. Segment profit/loss also excludes the impact of certain items that are not directly attributable to the reportable segments’ underlying operating performance. For a reconciliation of segment profit to loss from continuing operations before income taxes, see Note 17 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Revenue by segment
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
Cannabinoid. Cannabinoid revenue increased to $3,242 for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $2,511 for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by key customer contracts maturing and transitioning from a preparation to revenue generating phase.
Non-Cannabinoid. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $12,132 from $9,606 for the year ended December 31, 2020 driven primarily by stronger demand from specialty distributors combined with recovery of demand from COVID-19 that resulted in the closure of store fronts or reduction in foot traffic for our retail partners in the prior period and increased sales efforts in various revenue channels.
Segment Profit/(Loss)
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
(a) For a reconciliation of segment profit/(loss) to loss before income taxes see Note 17 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Cannabinoid - Cannabinoid segment loss decreased to $16,915 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $18,798 for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to cost control measures we implemented in 2020, as well as increased sales of cannabinoid products. The decrease was partly offset by costs incurred relating to the expansion of our operations in Portugal.
Non-Cannabinoid - Non-Cannabinoid segment profit increased to $2,631 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,863 the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to cost control measures we implemented during 2020, as well as increased sales of Non-Cannabinoid products.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table sets forth the major components of our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the periods presented:
(in thousands of U.S. dollars)
Cash flows used in operating activities
The increase in net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to changes in operating assets and liabilities. This change primarily consisted of increases in inventory, prepaid expense and other receivables, general and administrative expenses and sales and marketing expenses.
Cash flows from investing activities
The increase in net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to higher capital expenditures in Portugal.
Cash flows from financing activities
The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the higher cash inflows from net, debt and equity financing during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had financing activities related primarily to the Business Combination and the Series E Financing, whereas during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we had the funds raised through the issuance of the Catalina LP Convertible Note offset by the repayment of the 2022 Notes. For more information see Note 8 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K.
Sources of Liquidity
We have historically financed our operations through the issuance of shares, the issuance of convertible debt and our cash from operations. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, we received approximately $73,509 of net proceeds (refer to Note 8 to the audited consolidated financial statements included within this Form 10-K). As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents (excluding restricted cash) of $37,226 and $79,107, respectively, which were held for working capital and general corporate purposes. This represents an overall decrease of $41,881. Our outstanding warrants entitle the holder to receive one common share for each warrant, at an exercise price of $11.50 per warrant. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we received $1,410 from the exercise of warrants. As of March 22, 2022, we have 17,840,951 warrants outstanding.
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we entered into the Equity Distribution Agreement and filed the related shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (as described above under the caption “Equity Distribution Agreement”), which we believe will provide an ongoing source of liquidity. Due to our current public float and applicable SEC rules and regulations, our ability to raise capital pursuant to this shelf registration statement may be limited. See Note 22 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K for more information.
We have had operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception and expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant revenue from the sale of our available inventories. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses from operations due to pre-commercialization activities, marketing and manufacturing activities, and general and administrative expenses to support operations. On July 19, 2021, we entered into a Note Purchase Agreement and issued a secured convertible note in the principal amount of $25,000. See Note 12 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included in this Form 10-K for more information.
We have historically been able to manage liquidity requirements through cost management and cost reduction measures, supplemented with raising additional financing. While we have been successful in raising financing in the past, there can be no assurances that additional financing will be available when needed on acceptable terms, or at all. The continued spread of COVID-19 and uncertain market and regulatory conditions may further limit our ability to access capital. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, and suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations, financial condition, and prospects.
Uses of Liquidity
Our primary need for liquidity is to fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures, debt service obligations and for general corporate purposes. Our ability to fund operations and make planned capital expenditures and debt service obligations depends on future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors. Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes that we will continue to be in operation for the foreseeable future and, accordingly, will be able to realize our assets and discharge our liabilities in the normal course of operations as they come due.
We manage our liquidity risk by preparing budgets and cash forecasts to ensure we have sufficient funds to meet obligations. In managing working capital, we may limit the amount of our cash needs by selling inventory at wholesale rates, pursuing additional financing sources, and managing the timing of capital expenditures.
However, at December 31, 2021, the Company’s current working capital, anticipated operating expenses and net losses, and the uncertainties surrounding its ability to raise additional capital as needed, raise substantial doubt as to whether existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet its obligations as they come due within twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements were issued. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments for the recovery and
classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The Company’s ability to execute its operating plans through 2023 and beyond depends on its ability to obtain additional funding through equity offerings, debt financing, or other forms of financing to meet planned growth requirements and to fund future operations, which may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all.
Debt
Total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $25,095 and $33,843, respectively. The debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021 is comprised of the remaining balance of the 2024 Convertible Note of $17,699, net of debt issuance cost, that was issued in July 2021, the $5,230 Herbal Brands loan (as defined below) that was issued to finance the Herbal Brands acquisition in April 2019, and the remaining debt of $2,166 from other borrowings. Other borrowing consists of the debt related to the Portugal Line of Credit and Colombia working capital loan. For more information, refer to Note 12 to the audited consolidated financial statements included within this Form 10-K. On July 19, 2021, we repaid the holders of the 2022 Convertible Notes and the 2022 Convertible Notes were discharged.
The debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the 2022 Convertible Notes issued in March 2019 and the Herbal Brands Loan.
Portugal Debt
In January 2021, Clever Leaves Portugal Unipessoal LDA borrowed €1,000 ($1,213) (the "Portugal Debt"), from a local lender, (the "Portugal Lender") under the terms of its credit line agreement. The Portugal Debt requires interest payments quarterly at a rate of Euribor plus 3.0 percentage points. Principal will be repaid in quarterly installments of approximately €63 with the first installment having been paid on February 28, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the full amount borrowed was outstanding under the Portugal Debt.
Colombia Debt
During 2021, Ecomedics S.A.S. entered into loan agreements with multiple local lenders (collectively, the "Colombia Debt"), under which the Company borrowed approximately COP$5,015,800 ($1,222) of mainly working capital loans. The working capital loans are secured by mortgage of our farmland in Colombia as collateral. These loans bear interest at a range of 12.20% to 12.25% per annum denominated in Colombian pesos. The first payment of the principal and interest will be repaid six months after receiving the loan. After the first payment, the principal and interest will be repaid semi-annually. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding principal balance was COP$4,592,095 ($1,153).
Herbal Brands Debt
In April 2019, to facilitate the financing of the Herbal Brands acquisition, Herbal Brands entered into the Herbal Brands Loan (the “Herbal Brands Loan”) with, and issued warrants to, a third-party lender, Rock Cliff Capital LLC (“Lender”).
The Herbal Brands Loan is a non-revolving loan with a principal amount of $8,500 and interest of 8% per annum due and payable in arrears on the first day of each fiscal quarter, commencing July 1, 2019, and calculated based on the actual number of days elapsed. In addition, Herbal Brands is required to pay in kind interest ("PIK") on the outstanding principal amount of the Herbal Brands Loan from August 27, 2020 until payment in full at a rate equal to 4.0% per annum, with such PIK interest being capitalized as additional principal to increase the outstanding principal balance of the Herbal Brands Loan on the first day of each fiscal quarter. The Herbal Brands Loan is to be repaid or prepaid prior to its maturity date of May 2, 2023. On a quarterly basis, the loan requires Herbal Brands to repay 85% of positive operating cash flows. Herbal Brands can also choose to prepay a portion or the Herbal Brands Loan, subject to a fee equal to the greater of (1) zero, and (2) $2,338, net of interest payments already paid (excluding PIK interest paid and PIK interest capitalized as outstanding principal) on such prepayment date. The Herbal Brands Loan is guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company, secured by Herbal Brands’ assets and equity interests in Herbal Brands and is subject to certain covenants. The Herbal Brands Loan remained outstanding following the closing of the Business Combination.
Concurrently with the execution of the Herbal Brands Loan, Clever Leaves issued warrants to the Lender to purchase 193,402 Class C preferred shares of Clever Leaves on a 1:1 basis, at a price of $8.79 per share. The warrants can be exercised in whole or in part at any time prior to the expiration date of May 3, 2021, and are not assignable, transferable, or negotiable. Following
the closing of the Business Combination, the warrants issued to the Lender remained outstanding but entitle the Lender to purchase common shares of the Company rather than common shares of Clever Leaves.
On August 27, 2020, we amended certain terms of the Herbal Brands Loan to provide for an additional interest of 4% per annum, compounding quarterly and payable in-kind at maturity. In addition, we extended the expiry date of the outstanding 193,402 warrants until May 3, 2023. As part of the amendment, the covenant testing under the Herbal Brands Loan is no longer required due to the occurrence of a qualified IPO on December 18, 2020.
Following the closing of the Business Combination and pursuant to the terms, the holder of the Rock Cliff Warrants can purchase 63,597 of our common shares at a strike price of $26.73 per share.
Convertible Notes
In March 2019, as part of the Series D financing, Clever Leaves issued $27,750 aggregate principal amount of secured convertible notes (the “2022 Convertible Notes”) with a maturity date of March 30, 2022 (the “2022 Maturity Date”). The 2022 Convertible Notes initially had an interest of 8% per annum, payable quarterly in cash in arrears. The 2022 Convertible Notes were guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of Clever Leaves and were secured by pledged equity interests in certain subsidiaries. In March 2020 and June 2020, Clever Leaves and the noteholders amended the terms of the 2022 Convertible Notes, to increase the interest rate to 10% from January 1, 2020 and provided that such interest is to be paid in-kind on the 2022 Maturity Date.
On July 19, 2021, Clever Leaves prepaid the holders of the 2022 Convertible Notes and the 2022 Convertible Notes were discharged. The aggregate amount repaid by the Company was $25,115 representing the sum of (1) 90% of the aggregate outstanding principal amount owing under the 2022 Convertible Notes; (2) all accrued interest through July 19, 2021 and (3) certain legal fees.
In connection with the issuance of the 2022 Convertible Notes, Clever Leaves issued 9,509 warrants to acquire Clever Leaves common shares to one of the noteholders. The warrants were cancelled when the 2022 Convertible Notes issued to the warrant holder was repaid.
In October 2018, as part of the Series C financing, Clever Leaves issued $17,890 aggregate principal amount of noninterest bearing unsecured convertible debentures due 2021 (the “2021 Convertible Debentures”). The 2021 Convertible Debentures had a maturity date of September 30, 2021. All of the 2021 Convertible Debentures were converted into an aggregate of 2,546,670 of Class C preferred shares in March 2019.
Subsequently, in July 2021, Series D convertible notes with accrued interest were settled and the related warrants were cancelled. For more information, refer to Note 13 to the audited consolidated financial statements included within this Form 10-K.
On July 19, 2021, the Company entered into a Note Purchase Agreement with Catalina LP (the "Note Purchase Agreement") and issued a secured convertible note (the "Convertible Note") to Catalina LP (“SunStream”), an affiliate of SunStream Bancorp Inc., a joint venture initiative sponsored by Sundial Growers Inc. (Nasdaq: SNDL), pursuant to the Note Purchase Agreement in the principal amount of $25,000. The Convertible Note matures three years from the date of issuance and accrues interest from the date of issuance at the rate of 5% per annum. Interest on the Convertible Note is payable on a quarterly basis, either in cash or by increasing the principal amount of the Convertible Note, at the Company's election. The Company may, in its sole discretion, prepay any portion of the outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest on the Convertible Note at any time prior to the maturity date. For more information, refer to Note 12 to the audited consolidated financial statements included within this Form 10-K.
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we receive inquiries or become involved in legal disputes regarding various litigation matters. In the opinion of management, as of December 31, 2021 any potential liabilities resulting from claims we have received would not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("U.S. GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses. We base our estimates on our historical experience, known trends and
events, and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Share-Based Payments
We measure all stock option awards granted to employees, non-employee directors and consultants based on the fair value on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense over the requisite estimated service period which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The straight-line method of expense recognition is applied to all awards with service-only conditions. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The fair value of each option grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and restricted stock units, with a performance vesting condition based on risk-neutral Monte-Carlo model which requires assumptions regarding the expected volatility of our stock, the expected life of the options, an expectation regarding future dividends on our common shares, estimation of an appropriate risk-free interest rate and expected term. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model are as follows:
Expected Term. Due to the historical lack of a public market for the trading of our common shares and the lack of sufficient company-specific historical data, the expected term of employee options is calculated considering the weighted average mid-point of the vesting and expiry dates, compared to the grant date.
Expected Volatility. The expected volatility is based on our historical volatilities and that of similar entities within our industry for periods commensurate with the expected term assumption.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected term.
Expected Dividends. The expected dividend yield is 0% because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend on our common shares.
While assumptions used to calculate and account for share-based compensation awards represent management’s best estimates, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgement. As a result, if revisions are made to our underlying assumptions and estimates, our share-based compensation expense could vary significantly from period to period.
Impairment calculation
We test goodwill and intangible assets for impairment annually in 4th quarter or whenever there are any impairment indicators that may negatively impact the carrying value. Significant assumptions used in the impairment analysis include financial projections of free cash flow (including assumptions about revenue projections, regulations, operating margins, capital requirements and income taxes), long-term growth rates for determining terminal value beyond the discretely forecasted periods and discount rates. Underperformance to the financial projections used in the impairment analysis could negatively impact the fair value of our reporting units. Additionally, the passage of time, and the availability of additional information, regarding areas of uncertainty with respect to the reporting units’ operations could cause these assumptions to change in the future.
For our intangible assets related to the Cannabinoid segment, our estimated revenue projections reflect that Decree 811 that was followed by the passing of the Regulation 227 in February 2022 is expected to be further resolved to allow us to export cannabis flower from Colombia from 2023. If further regulation around the cannabis flower export does not pass and the Company is not able to export dried flower from Colombia, our intangible assets related to the Cannabinoid section may be impaired. As of December 31, 2021, we completed our annual impairment tests for goodwill and recorded $18,508 non-cash goodwill impairment charge and no impairment was recognized related to the carrying value of any of the Company’s intangible assets as a result of the annual impairment testing.