ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on acquiring, developing and commercializing innovative anti-cancer agents in the United States, Europe and additional international markets. We target our development programs for the treatment of specific subsets of cancer populations, and simultaneously develop, with partners, for those indications that require them, diagnostic tools intended to direct a compound in development to the population that is most likely to benefit from its use.
Rubraca® is an oral small molecule inhibitor of poly ADP-ribose polymerase (“PARP”) marketed in the United States for two indications specific to recurrent epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer and also an indication specific to metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (“mCRPC”). The initial indication received approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in December 2016 and covers the treatment of adult patients with deleterious BRCA (human genes associated with the repair of damaged DNA) mutation (germline and/or somatic)-associated epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who have been treated with two or more chemotherapies and selected for therapy based on an FDA-approved companion diagnostic for Rubraca. Rubraca received a second approval from FDA in April 2018 for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who are in a complete or partial response to platinum-based chemotherapy. Diagnostic testing is not required for patients to be prescribed Rubraca in this maintenance treatment indication.
In May 2020, the FDA also approved Rubraca for the treatment of adult patients with mCRPC associated with a deleterious BRCA mutation (germline and/or somatic) who have been treated previously with androgen receptor-directed therapy and a taxane-based chemotherapy and selected for therapy based on an FDA-approved companion diagnostic for Rubraca. The FDA approved this indication under accelerated approval based on objective response rate and duration of response data from the TRITON2 clinical trial. As an accelerated approval, continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification and description of clinical benefit in confirmatory trials. The TRITON3 clinical trial is expected to serve as the confirmatory study for Rubraca’s approval in mCRPC as well as the basis for us to seek a potential second-line label expansion. We anticipate the initial data readout from TRITON3 in the second quarter of 2022.
In Europe, the European Commission granted a conditional marketing authorization in May 2018 for Rubraca as monotherapy treatment of adult patients with platinum-sensitive, relapsed or progressive, BRCA mutated (germline and/or somatic), high-grade epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer, who have been treated with two or more prior lines of platinum-based chemotherapy, and who are unable to tolerate further platinum-based chemotherapy. In January 2019, the European Commission granted a variation to the marketing authorization to include the maintenance treatment of adult patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who are in a complete or partial response to platinum-based chemotherapy. With this approval, Rubraca is authorized in Europe for certain patients in the recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance setting regardless of their BRCA mutation status. Following successful reimbursement negotiations, Rubraca is marketed in each of Germany, United Kingdom, Italy, France, Spain, the Netherlands and Switzerland.
Beyond our labeled indications, we have a clinical development program underway to further evaluate Rubraca in a variety of solid tumor types, either as monotherapy or in combination with other agents, including the ATHENA Pahse 3 study as part of our ongoing clinical collaboration with Bristol Myers Squibb Company (“Bristol Myers Squibb”) to evaluate its immunotherapy OPDIVO® (nivolumab) in combination with Rubraca. We anticipate initial data from two independent readouts for ATHENA during 2022: Rubraca monotherapy versus placebo (ATHENA-MONO ) in the second quarter of 2022, with results of the separate analysis of Rubraca in combination with Opdivo (ATHENA-COMBO) anticipated in the fourth quarter of 2022.
The three anticipated data readouts, ATHENA-MONO, ATHENA-COMBO and TRITON3 discussed above, provide the potential to obtain approvals that reach larger patient populations in earlier lines of therapy for ovarian and prostate cancers. Following availability of top-line results from ATHENA-MONO, we plan to file a supplemental New Drug Application (“sNDA”) with the FDA and request a variation to the European MAA, and we plan to do the same for the subsequent TRITON3 and ATHENA-COMBO anticipated data readouts, assuming, in each case, that the Phase 3 clinical data is supportive.
The timing for each Phase 3 data readout is contingent upon the occurrence of the protocol-specified progression free survival (“PFS”) events, and timing estimates are based on event-based projections.
We hold worldwide rights to Rubraca.
FAP-2286 is our initial product candidate to emerge from our targeted radionuclide therapy collaboration with 3B Pharmaceuticals GmbH (“3BP”). FAP-2286 is a peptide-targeted radionuclide therapy (“PTRT”) and imaging agent targeting fibroblast activation protein (“FAP”). PTRT uses cancer cell-targeting peptides to deliver radiation-emitting radionuclides specifically to tumors. Following the clearance by FDA of two INDs submitted in December 2020 to support the use of FAP-2286 as an imaging and treatment agent, we initiated the phase 1 portion of the LuMIERE clinical study in June 2021. LuMIERE is a phase 1/2 study of FAP-2286 labeled with lutetium-177 (177Lu-FAP-2286) evaluating the compound in patients with advanced solid tumors to determine the dose, schedule, and tolerability of FAP-2286 as a therapeutic agent with expansion cohorts planned in multiple tumor types as part of a global development program. FAP-2286 labeled with gallium-68 (68Ga-FAP-2286) is being utilized to identify tumors that contain FAP for treatment in this study.
During 2022, we also anticipate the first presentation of phase 1 data from LuMIERE at nuclear medicine-focused meetings, additional presentations of non-clinical data for FAP-2286 and the launch of our combination study program to explore FAP-2286 in combination with other oncology compounds, and in 2023, a potential IND filing of FAP-2286 linked to a FAP-targeted alpha-emitter PTRT.
We hold U.S. and global rights to FAP-2286, excluding Europe (defined to include Russia, Turkey and Israel), where 3BP retains rights.
We are also collaborating with 3BP on a discovery program directed to up to three additional, undisclosed targets for targeted radionuclide therapy, to which we would have global rights for any resulting product candidates.
Lucitanib, our product candidate currently in clinical development, is an investigational, oral, potent angiogenesis inhibitor which inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor receptors 1 through 3 (“VEGFR1-3”), platelet-derived growth factor receptors alpha and beta (“PDGFR α/β”) and fibroblast growth factor receptors 1 through 3 (“FGFR1-3”). Lucitanib inhibits the same three pathways as Lenvima® (lenvatinib), which has received an FDA approval for use in certain populations of patients with endometrial cancer in combination with Keytruda® (pembrolizumab), a PD-1 inhibitor. This, together with preclinical data for lucitanib in combination with a PD-1 inhibitor that demonstrated enhanced anti-tumor activity compared to that of single agents, represent a scientific rationale for development of lucitanib in combination with a PD-1 inhibitor, and in February 2019, lucitanib was added to our clinical collaboration with Bristol Myers Squibb. The phase 1b/2 LIO-1 study is evaluating the combination of lucitanib and Opdivo in gynecologic cancers. Interim data from the non-clear cell ovarian cancer expansion cohort were presented at ASCO 2021 and the initial efficacy data do not support further development in non-clear cell ovarian cancer. The remaining three cohorts, which include non-clear cell endometrial, cervical and clear-cell ovarian and endometrial cancers, showed sufficient responses in stage one of each of the cohorts to advance to stage 2. The data from the cervical cohort have been accepted as a plenary presentation at the Society of Gynecologic Oncology (SGO) 2022 Annual Meeting on Women’s Cancer in March 2022 and represent encouraging data in this subset of gynecological cancers. However, given the competing priorities, including development of FAP-2286, we have determined that we will not pursue further development of lucitanib in gynecological cancers at this time.
We hold the global (excluding China) development and commercialization rights for lucitanib.
We commenced operations in April 2009. To date, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to identifying and in-licensing product candidates, performing development activities with respect to those product candidates and the general and administrative support of these operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $148.8 million product revenue related to sales of Rubraca. We have principally funded our operations using the net proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, convertible senior notes offerings and our financing agreement related to our ATHENA trial.
We have never been profitable and, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $2,877.3 million. We incurred net losses of $264.5 million, $369.2 million and $400.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and had cash and cash equivalents totaling $143.4 million at December 31, 2021.
We have incurred significant net losses since inception and we expect operating losses and negative cash flows to continue for the foreseeable future.
Product License Agreements
For a discussion of our product license agreements, see Note 13, License Agreements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
During 2021, we recorded $148.8 million in revenue related to sales of Rubraca. For further discussion of our revenue recognition policy, see “Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates” below. Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends upon our ability to successfully commercialize products. Any inability on our part to successfully commercialize Rubraca in the United States, Europe and any foreign territories where it may be approved, or any significant delay in such approvals, could have a material adverse impact on our ability to execute upon our business strategy and, ultimately, to generate sufficient revenues from Rubraca to reach or maintain profitability or sustain our anticipated levels of operations.
We supply commercially labeled Rubraca free of charge to eligible patients who qualify due to financial need through our patient assistance program and the majority of these patients are on Medicare. This product is distributed through a separate vendor who administers the program on our behalf. It is not distributed through our specialty distributor and specialty pharmacy network. This product is neither included in the transaction price nor the variable considerations to arrive at product revenue. Manufacturing costs associated with this free product is included in selling, general and administrative expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the supply of this free drug was approximately 18% and 17%, respectively, of the overall commercial supply or the equivalent of $24.8 million and $30.4 million, respectively, in commercial value.
Our ability to generate product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily due to the ongoing effect the pandemic has had on oncology treatment and practice, and in particular, in ovarian cancer, resulting in fewer diagnoses and fewer patients going to in-person office visits in the U.S. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our U.S. and European sales forces have had physical access to hospitals, clinics, doctors and pharmacies curtailed and/or have been limited. Our European launches occurred in an environment in which our field-based personnel were not allowed to visit hospitals beginning as early as late February 2020. Similarly, we launched Rubraca for prostate cancer in the U.S beginning in May 2020, but our physical access to hospital, clinics, doctors and pharmacies remains limited. It is difficult to discern or predict any trend in new patient starts due to the unpredictability of the COVID-19 situation and the changing competitive landscape.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates and companion diagnostics, which include:
● license fees and milestone payments related to the acquisition of in-licensed products, which are reported on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss as acquired in-process research and development;
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials;
● the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
● costs associated with non-clinical activities and regulatory operations;
● market research and disease education; and
● activities associated with the development of companion diagnostics for our product candidates.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. License fees and milestone payments related to in-licensed products and technology are expensed if it is determined that they have no alternative future use. Costs for certain
development activities, such as clinical trials and manufacturing of clinical supply, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors. Our research and development expenses decreased for 2021 compared to 2020. We expect research and development costs to be generally consistent in the full year 2022 compared to 2021.
We did not see material disruption to our clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic for the year ended December 31, 2021. However, with the increase in cases of COVID-19 due to the Omicron variant, and the potential for quarantines, unavailability of medical services regarded as non-essential, or reluctance of patients to seek treatment, we may see delays in enrollment during 2022. For example, new patient recruitment in clinical studies, including LuMIERE, may be affected and the conduct of clinical trials may vary by geography as some regions are more adversely affected. Additionally, we may slow or delay enrollment in certain trials to manage expenses.
The following table identifies research and development and acquired in-process research and development costs on a program-specific basis for our products under development. Personnel-related costs, depreciation and share-based compensation are not allocated to specific programs, as they are deployed across multiple projects under development and, as such, are separately classified as personnel and other expenses in the table below.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel in executive, commercial, finance, legal, investor relations, human resources and information technology functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facilities expenses, communication expenses, information technology costs, corporate insurance and professional fees for legal, consulting and accounting services. With the FDA approval of Rubraca on December 19, 2016, all sales and marketing expenses associated with Rubraca are included in selling, general and administrative expenses. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our U.S. and European sales forces have had physical access to hospitals, clinics, doctors and pharmacies curtailed and/or have been limited, which have decreased sales and marketing expenses during 2021 and may extend into, and through at least a significant portion, of 2022. In addition, due to increased travel restrictions, quarantines, “work-at-home” and “shelter-in-place” orders and extended shutdown of certain non-essential business in the United States, and European and Asia-Pacific countries, in-person conferences and meetings requiring travel will continue to decrease resulting in a decrease of our selling, general and administrative expenses.
The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated a preference by oncology practices for more digital programming, including digital, peer-to-peer interactions and reduced in-person promotion. In order to meet these changing preferences, we adopted a hybrid commercial strategy combining increased digital promotion activities, greater online resources and more peer-to-peer interactions with reduced and more targeted in-person promotion. New tools and performance indicators based on this hybrid approach were rolled out during the fourth quarter of 2020. We adopted this strategy in order to better reach customers in the way they want to be reached with the goal of returning to growth,
especially as the ongoing impact of COVID-19 is reduced. The adoption of this strategy also contributed to decreased sales and marketing expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the reduction in size of our U.S. commercial organization by approximately 45 employees during the fourth quarter of 2020. We expect selling, general and administrative costs to be generally consistent in 2022 as compared to 2021.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses
Acquired in-process research and development expenses consist of upfront payments to acquire a new drug compound, as well as subsequent milestone payments. Acquired in-process research and development payments are immediately expensed provided that the drug has not achieved regulatory approval for marketing and, absent obtaining such approval, has no alternative future use. Once regulatory approval is received, payments to acquire rights, and the related milestone payments, are capitalized and the amortization of such assets recorded to product cost of sales.
Other Income and Expense
Other income and expense are primarily comprised of foreign currency gains and losses resulting from transactions with CROs, investigational sites and contract manufacturers where payments are made in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Other expense also includes interest expense recognized related to our convertible senior notes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses, revenue and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue, intangible asset impairment, clinical trial accruals and share-based compensation expense. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We are currently approved to sell Rubraca in the United States and the Europe markets. We distribute our product principally through a limited number of specialty distributor and specialty pharmacy providers, collectively, our customers. Our customers subsequently sell our products to patients and health care providers. Separately, we have arrangements with certain payors and other third parties that provide for government-mandated and privately-negotiated rebates, chargebacks and discounts.
Revenue from product sales are recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied, which is when customers obtain control of our product at a point in time, typically upon delivery. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that we would have recognized is one year or less.
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price (transaction price), which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and which result from price concessions that include rebates, chargebacks, discounts, co-pay assistance, estimated product returns and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our customers, health care providers, payors and other indirect customers relating to the sales of our product. These reserves are based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable or a current liability. Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes which are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which
we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration which is included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we adjust these estimates, which would affect product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $148.8 million of product revenue. For a complete discussion of the accounting for product revenue, see Note 3, Revenue Recognition.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include:
● fees paid to CROs in connection with clinical studies;
● fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
● fees paid to vendors in connection with non-clinical development activities;
● fees paid to vendors associated with the development of companion diagnostics; and
● fees paid to vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Share-Based Compensation
Determining the amount of share-based compensation to be recorded requires us to develop estimates of the fair value of stock options as of their grant date. Compensation expense is recognized over the vesting period of the award. Calculating the fair value of share-based awards requires that we make highly subjective assumptions. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our stock option awards. Use of this valuation methodology requires that we make assumptions as to the expected dividend yield, price volatility of our common stock, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and the expected term of our stock options. We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no current intention to pay cash dividends.
The fair value of stock options for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was estimated at the grant date using the following weighted average assumptions for the respective periods:
(a)
Volatility: The expected volatility was estimated using our historical data.
(b)
Risk-free interest rate: The rate is based on the yield on the grant date of a zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bond whose maturity period approximates the option’s expected term.
(c)
Expected term: The expected term of the award was estimated using our historical data.
We recognized share-based compensation expense of approximately $25.5 million, $50.8 million and $54.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the unrecognized share-based compensation expense related to unvested options, adjusted for expected forfeitures, was $8.4 million, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average remaining vesting period of 1.5 years. As of December 31, 2021, the unrecognized share-based compensation expense related to RSUs, adjusted for expected forfeitures, was $25.9 million, which is expected to be recognized over an estimated weighted-average remaining vesting period of 1.9 years.
We estimate the level of forfeitures expected to occur and record compensation expense only for those awards that we ultimately expect will vest.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value, on a first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) basis. Inventories include active pharmaceutical ingredient (“API”), contract manufacturing costs and overhead allocations. We begin capitalizing incurred inventory related costs upon regulatory approval. Prior to regulatory approval, incurred costs for the manufacture of drugs that could potentially be available to support the commercial launch of our products are recognized as research and development expense.
We regularly analyze our inventory levels for excess quantities and obsolescence (expiration), considering factors such as historical and anticipated future sales compared to quantities on hand and the remaining shelf-life of Rubraca. Rubraca finished goods have a shelf-life of four years from the date of manufacture. We expect to sell the finished goods prior to expiration. The API currently has a shelf-life of five years from the date of manufacture but can be retested at an immaterial cost with no expected reduction in potency, thereby extending its shelf-life as needed. We expect to consume substantially all of the API over a period of approximately seven years based on our long-range sales projections of Rubraca.
We write down inventory that has become obsolete, inventory that has a cost basis in excess of its estimated realizable value and/or inventory in excess of expected sales requirements. Expired finished goods inventory would be disposed of and the related costs would be written off as cost of product revenue. Inventories that are not expected to be consumed within 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as long-term inventories. Long-term inventories primarily consist of API.
API is currently produced by Lonza. As the API has undergone significant manufacturing specific to its intended purpose at the point it is purchased by us, we classify the API as work-in-process inventory. In addition, we currently manufacture Rubraca finished goods with a single third-party manufacturer. The disruption or termination of the supply of API or the disruption or termination of the manufacturing of our commercial products could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position and results of operations. API that is written off due to damage and certain costs related to our production train at Lonza are included in Other Operating Expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Inventory used in clinical trials is expensed as research and development expense when it has been identified for such use.
At December 31, 2021, we had $13.7 million of current inventory and $109.8 million of long-term inventory.
Intangible Assets
Definite-lived intangible assets related to capitalized milestones under license agreements are amortized on a straight-line basis over their remaining useful lives, which are estimated to be the remaining patent life. If our estimate of the product’s useful life is shorter than the remaining patent life, then a shorter period is used. Amortization expense is recorded as a component of cost of sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Intangible assets are evaluated for impairment at least annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently if impairment indicators exist. Events that could result in an impairment, or trigger an interim impairment assessment, include the decision to discontinue the development of a drug, the receipt of additional clinical or nonclinical data regarding our drug candidate or a potentially competitive drug candidate, changes in the clinical development program for a drug candidate, or new information regarding potential sales for the drug. In connection with any impairment assessment, the fair value of the intangible assets as of the date of assessment is compared to the carrying value of the intangible asset. Impairment losses are recognized if the carrying value of an intangible asset is both not recoverable and exceeds its fair value.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 to the Year Ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands)
Product Revenue. Total product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to fewer diagnoses and fewer patient starts in the U.S., primarily caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as there have been fewer patients going to in-person office visits as oncology practices and patients continue to adapt to the impact of the virus and competition from other products on the market, including the impact on second-line maintenance that may result from an increase in first-line maintenance treatment of ovarian cancer.
U.S. product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $30.6 million compared to the same period in the prior year while ex-U.S. product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $14.8 million compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in ex-U.S. product revenue is due to Rubraca being launched in countries in Europe throughout 2019 and 2020.
Product revenue is recorded net of variable considerations comprised of rebates, chargebacks and other discounts. Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $115.7 million in the United States and $33.1 million outside of the United States. Total variable considerations represented 28.0% and 23.3% of the transaction price recognized in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in variable considerations is primarily due to the European National Health Service rebates related to our sales in Europe and the PHS/340B discounts related to our sales in the U.S. Countries in Europe contract larger government rebates and discounts compared to the U.S. contributing to the overall increase in variable considerations. As European sales increase as a percent of total sales, variable considerations will also increase. The PHS discount related to our U.S. sales has increased as a result of expanding 340B Drug Program purchases by covered entities.
Cost of Sales - Product. Product cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased primarily due to the decrease in product revenue. Product cost of sales primarily relate to manufacturing, freight and royalty costs associated with Rubraca sales in the period.
U.S. product cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $7.0 million compared to the same period in the prior year due to the decrease in product revenue.
Ex-U.S. product cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $4.3 million compared to the same period in the prior year due to the increase in product revenue.
Cost of Sales - Intangible Asset Amortization. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized cost of sales of $5.4 million and $5.2 million, respectively, associated with the amortization of capitalized milestone payments related to the approvals of Rubraca by the FDA and the European Commission.
Research and Development Expenses. Except for activities related to medical research and disease education, research and development expenses are attributable to our U.S. segment. Research and development expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to lower research and development costs for Rubraca. The decrease related to our TRITON studies for prostate cancer, our ARIEL and ATHENA studies for ovarian cancer, manufacturing costs, molecular diagnostic costs and personnel costs. These decreases were partially offset by increased costs related to FAP and lucitanib.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year due to a $29.6 million decrease in personnel costs, marketing costs and share-based compensation expense primarily due to the reduction in size of our U.S. commercial organization by approximately 45 employees during the fourth quarter of 2020. In addition, we had a $5.6 million decrease in legal expenses. The total decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses mostly related to our U.S. segment while our ex-U.S. selling, general and administrative expenses remained relatively consistent during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses. In April 2021, we made a milestone payment to 3BP under the license and collaboration agreement of $2.2 million as a result of the FDA’s acceptance of the IND for the treatment agent. In September 2021, we made a $3.3 million milestone payment to 3BP under the license and collaboration agreement.
Other Operating Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized other operating expenses related to our production train at Lonza. This expense is related to our fixed facility fee paid to Lonza each quarter, which we recognize as other operating expense when we do not produce inventory at Lonza.
As discussed in Note 12, Commitments and Contingencies, we amended this agreement in June 2021, resulting in the derecognition of the lease components recognized under the original agreement. The derecognition of the lease components, payment of $1.1 million to Lonza and derecognition of fixed assets related to our Lonza production train resulted in a loss of $0.3 million, which is included in other operating expenses. Lonza is guaranteeing a minimum
percentage usage of this production train for third parties and Lonza would reduce our fixed facility fee starting in 2023 based on this minimum percentage usage. If Lonza is able to utilize greater than the minimum guaranteed percentage, it will increase the reduction to our fixed facility fee.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year due to the $9.3 million increase in interest expense under our financing agreement related to our ATHENA trial. This was partially offset by the write off of $4.3 million of unamortized debt issuance costs related to our convertible senior notes transactions that occurred in the prior year. We did not have a similar write off in the current year.
Foreign Currency Loss. Transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are recorded based on exchange rates at the time such transactions arise. Transaction losses increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year due to significant exchange rate fluctuations that occurred during the year.
Loss on Convertible Senior Notes Conversion. In January 2020, we completed a registered direct offering of an aggregate 17,777,679 shares of our common stock at a price of $9.25 per share. We used the proceeds of the share offering to repurchase an aggregate of $123.4 million principal amount of 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) in privately negotiated transactions. In addition, we paid customary fees and expenses in connection with the transactions. These transactions resulted in a loss of $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021.
In November 2020, we entered into a privately negotiated exchange and purchase agreement with a holder of our 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance). Pursuant to the agreement, in exchange for approximately $64.8 million aggregate principal amount of 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) held by the holder, we agreed to issue to the holder a number shares of our common stock (the “Exchanged Shares”) utilizing an exchange ratio that is based in part on the daily volume-weighted average prices (“VWAPs”) per share of our common stock during a seven-day pricing period following execution of the agreement.
The number of Exchanged Shares was calculated utilizing an exchange ratio that is based in part on the average VWAPs of our common stock (subject to a floor) during a seven-day pricing period beginning on November 5, 2020 and ending on, and including, November 13, 2020. In November 2020, we issued 15,112,848 Exchanged Shares pursuant to the debt exchange transaction. As a result, we recognized a $27.3 million loss on the transactions.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. In April 2020, we entered into a privately negotiated exchange agreement with a Holder of our 2021 Notes, pursuant to which we issued to such Holder of the 2021 Notes approximately $36.1 million in additional 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) of our currently outstanding 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) in exchange for approximately $32.8 million in aggregate principal of 2021 Notes held by such Holder, which resulted in a $3.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt.
Legal Settlement Loss. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we recorded a charge of $2.3 million in connection with the settlement of the Consolidated Derivative Complaint discussed in Note 12, Commitments and Contingencies.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands)
Product Revenue. Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to continued growth in sales of Rubraca, which is approved for sale in the United States and Europe markets. Following successful reimbursement negotiations, Rubraca has been launched in countries in Europe throughout 2019 and 2020. In May 2020, the FDA approved Rubraca as a monotherapy treatment of adult patients with BRCA1/2-mutant recurrent, metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer and we have launched Rubraca for prostate cancer in the U.S. Product revenue is recorded net of variable considerations comprised of rebates, chargebacks and other discounts. Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $146.3 million in the United States and $18.2 million outside of the United States. Variable considerations represented 23.3% and 15.0% of the transaction price recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in variable considerations is primarily due to the European National Health Service rebates related to our sales in Europe. Countries in Europe contract larger government rebates and discounts compared to the U.S. contributing to the overall increase in variable considerations. As sales in Europe increase in percentage terms compared to the U.S., variable considerations will also increase. In the United States, PHS chargebacks increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. In addition, in the United States, GPO discounts increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 and beginning in January 2020, we began providing payor rebates, which is included in discounts and fees for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Sales - Product. Product cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased primarily due to the increase in product revenue. Product cost of sales primarily relate to manufacturing, freight and royalties costs associated with Rubraca sales in the period.
U.S. product cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $1.3 million compared to the same period in the prior year due to the increase in product revenue.
Ex-U.S. product cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $4.9 million compared to the same period in the prior year due to the increase in product revenue.
Cost of Sales - Intangible Asset Amortization. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized cost of sales of $5.2 million and $4.8 million, respectively, associated with the amortization of capitalized milestone payments related to the approvals of Rubraca by the FDA and the European Commission.
Research and Development Expenses. Except for activities related to medical research and disease education, research and development expenses are attributable to our U.S. segment. Research and development expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to lower research and development costs for Rubraca. The decrease related to our TRITON studies for prostate cancer, our ARIEL studies for ovarian cancer, discontinuation of our ATLAS study, diagnostic development costs and personnel costs. These decreases were partially offset by increased costs related to our ATHENA combination study with Bristol Myers Squibb’s immunotherapy OPDIVO for ovarian cancer. The ATHENA study was initiated in the second quarter of 2018 and we completed target enrollment during the second quarter of 2020. In addition, research and development costs related to FAP and lucitanib have increased since the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year due to a decrease of $13.1 million in marketing costs and $3.2 million in share-based compensation expense. In addition, there was a decrease of $4.0 million in travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
U.S. selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $21.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year due to decreases in marketing costs, share-based compensation expense and a decrease in travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ex-U.S. selling, general and administrative expenses increased $2.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year due to the commercial activities related to the Rubraca launches in European countries during 2020.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development Expenses. Upon the signing of the license and collaboration agreement with 3BP in September 2019, we made a $9.4 million upfront payment to 3BP, which is related to our U.S. segment.
Other Operating Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized other operating expenses related to the write off of some damaged API and certain costs related to our production train at Lonza, which is related to our U.S. segment. We expect these expenses to increase during 2021 related to our fixed facility fee each quarter since we expect to have sufficient inventory and do not plan to produce inventory at Lonza during 2021.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year due to the May 2019 financing agreement related to our ATHENA trial. In addition, our convertible senior notes transactions during the year resulted in the write off of $4.3 million of unamortized debt issuance costs, which was recorded as interest expense.
Loss/Gain on Extinguishment of Debt. In April 2020, we entered into a privately negotiated exchange agreement with a Holder of our 2021 Notes, pursuant to which we issued to such Holder of the 2021 Notes approximately $36.1 million in additional 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) of our currently outstanding 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) in exchange for approximately $32.8 million in aggregate principal of 2021 Notes held by such Holder, which resulted in a $3.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt.
In August 2019, we repurchased $190.3 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 2021 Notes and $2.0 million of accrued interest for an aggregate repurchase price of $171.8 million. This repurchase resulted in the write off of $2.0 million in unamortized debt issuance costs and the recognition of $18.5 million gain on extinguishment of debt.
Loss on Convertible Senior Notes Conversion. In January 2020, we completed a registered direct offering of an aggregate 17,777,679 shares of our common stock at a price of $9.25 per share. We used the proceeds of the share offering to repurchase an aggregate of $123.4 million principal amount of 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) in privately negotiated transactions. In addition, we paid customary fees and expenses in connection with the transactions. These transactions resulted in a loss of $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In November 2020, we entered into a privately negotiated exchange and purchase agreement with a holder of our 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance). Pursuant to the agreement, in exchange for approximately $64.8 million aggregate principal amount of 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance) held by the holder, we agreed to issue to the holder a number shares of our common stock (the “Exchanged Shares”) utilizing an exchange ratio that is based in part on the daily volume-weighted average prices (“VWAPs”) per share of our common stock during a seven-day pricing period following execution of the agreement.
The number of Exchanged Shares was calculated utilizing an exchange ratio that is based in part on the average VWAPs of our common stock (subject to a floor) during a seven-day pricing period beginning on November 5, 2020 and ending on, and including, November 13, 2020. In November 2020, we issued 15,112,848 Exchanged Shares pursuant to the debt exchange transaction. As a result, we recognized a $27.3 million loss on the transactions.
Legal Settlement Loss. During the second quarter of 2019, we recorded a charge of $26.8 million to settle a complaint filed by Antipodean Domestic Partners.
Other Income. Other income decreased during the year ended December 30, 2020 due to interest income earned on our available-for-sale securities. We did not have available-for-sale securities starting with the quarter ended June 30, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern and Management’s Plans
We have incurred significant net losses since inception and have relied on our ability to fund our operations through debt and equity financings. We expect operating losses and negative cash flows to continue for the foreseeable future even with Rubraca now generating revenues. Rubraca revenues have not been consistent in prior quarters, mainly as a result of the impact of COVID-19 and competition from other products on the market, including the impact on second-line maintenance that may result from an increase in first-line maintenance treatment of ovarian cancer, which has made forecasting revenues difficult. In addition to other factors, future Rubraca revenues will depend, in part, on the timing and extent of any recovery from the impacts of COVID-19, with any such recovery expected to take several quarters to have a meaningful impact on our financial results. We do not expect to generate a sufficient amount of Rubraca revenues to finance our cash requirements in the foreseeable future, and which we may never be able to do in sufficient amounts. We require significant cash resources to execute our business plans and we will need to raise additional cash to continue to fund our operating plan. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all especially given that we will need our stockholders to approve an amendment to our certificate of incorporation to increase the number of shares of common stock that we are authorized to issue. The aforementioned factors, which are largely outside of our control, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the date of filing of this annual report. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of asset amounts or the classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financial statements contained in the Annual Report on Form 10-K are issued.
In the near term, we believe there is some flexibility within our operating plan, particularly with managing certain discretionary expenses, to adjust to variations in our expected Rubraca revenues and the availability and timing of potential sources of financings to meet our working capital requirements. However, based on our current cash, cash equivalents and liquidity available under our ATHENA clinical financing agreement, together with current estimates for revenues generated by sales of Rubraca, we will need to raise additional capital in the near term in order to fund our operating plan for the next 12 months. Our ability to obtain additional financing (including through collaborating and licensing arrangements) will depend on a number of factors, including, among others, our ability to generate positive data from our clinical studies, importantly our ATHENA-MONO clinical trial for which we anticipate initial data in the second quarter of 2022, the condition of the capital markets and the other risks described under Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We expect to finance our operating plan through a combination of public or private equity or debt offerings, collaborations, strategic alliances and other similar licensing arrangements in both the short term and the long term.
We currently have capacity to issue approximately $15.3 million of additional shares of common stock under our previously established ATM Program, assuming the remaining authorized but unissued shares of our common stock are sold at an offering price of $1.69 per share, the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on February 22, 2022. There can be no assurance that we will be able to sell any shares of our common stock under the ATM Program or regarding the price at which we will be able to sell any such shares, and any sales of shares of our common stock under the ATM Program may be at prices that result in additional dilution to existing stockholders of the Company.
It is highly unlikely that we will be able to raise sufficient additional capital through public or private equity offerings (or offerings of securities convertible into our equity securities) until our stockholders approve an amendment to our certificate of incorporation, at our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders, to increase the number of shares of common stock that the Company is authorized to issue. We cannot be certain that our stockholders will approve such a proposal. In the event our stockholders do not approve such a proposal, our ability to raise capital to fund our operations beyond the next 12 months will be significantly limited.
In light of the uncertainty about our ability to raise sufficient capital through potential equity offerings, we will also consider other sources of funding, potentially through incurring further indebtedness or entering into strategic partnerships or licensing arrangements for one or more of our products or product candidates in which we may have to give up certain of our future commercialization rights for interim funding. We are exploring various partnership and licensing arrangements for our products and product candidates outside the U.S., but those will largely depend on our ability to generate positive data from our clinical studies. We cannot be certain that such other sources of funding will be available to us or on acceptable terms or in sufficient amounts to meet our requirements.
In the event that we are unable to raise sufficient additional capital, which is dependent on factors outside of our control, we will need to cut expenses further, including potentially delaying, scaling back or eliminating certain of our pipeline development programs, and undertake a more significant restructuring of our operations, in order to continue as a going concern and fund our committed obligations and working capital requirements. There can be no assurances that we will be able to achieve such a restructuring or that such a restructuring will be successful over the long term to allow us to fund our requirements and our plan to invest sufficient amounts to fund the development of FAP-2286 to its potential.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was lower during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a lower net loss adjusted for non-cash items and changes in components of working capital.
Net cash used in operating activities was lower during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a lower net loss, as adjusted for non-cash items related to our debt transactions. In addition, there was a reduction in payments made for inventory during the period partially offset by payments made for prepaid and accrued research and development expenses.
Investing Activities
There were no significant investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 while net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included sales of available-for-sale securities of $144.6 million, partially offset by purchases of available-for-sale securities of $10.0 million and a milestone payment of $8.0 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included sales of available-for-sale securities of $622.0 million partially offset by purchases of available-for-sale securities of $459.8 million and milestone payments of $15.8 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included $116.9 million net proceeds resulting from our “at the market” offerings that occurred during 2021 and $47.5 million proceeds from borrowings under our financing agreement related to our ATHENA trial, partially offset by a $64.4 million payment of our 2021 Notes.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included proceeds of $246.7 million from the issuance of common stock, proceeds of $56.6 million from the issuance of our 2024 Notes (2020 Issuance), partially offset by a $164.4 million payment of our 2024 Notes. In addition, we had $65.1 million proceeds from borrowings under our financing agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included proceeds of $254.9 million from the issuance of our 2024 Notes (2019 Issuance), $32.9 million proceeds from borrowings under our financing agreement and $3.3 million received from employee stock option exercises and issuance of stock under the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by the $170.0 million extinguishment of a portion of our 2021 Notes.
On May 17, 2021, we entered into a distribution agreement (the “Distribution Agreement”) with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and BofA Securities, Inc., as agents (the “Agents”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through the Agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million in transactions that are deemed to be “at the market” offerings as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including sales made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions, including directly on the Nasdaq Global Select Market or into any other existing trading market for the shares, or sales made to or through a market maker, in block transactions or by any other method permitted by law, including negotiated transactions. Sales may be made at market prices prevailing at the time of a sale or at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices. During the period between May 18, 2021 and June 9, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 13,492,231 shares of our common stock under the Distribution Agreement resulting in gross proceeds of $75.0 million and net proceeds to us of $72.5 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses, effectively closing out sales we may make pursuant to the Distribution Agreement.
The issuance and sale of the shares under the Distribution Agreement were be made pursuant to our effective registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 25, 2021 (File No. 333-253485) as amended by pre-effective Amendment No. 1 thereto filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021. The offering is described in the Company’s prospectus dated May 7, 2021, as supplemented by a prospectus supplement dated May 17, 2021, as filed with the SEC on May 17, 2021. We have used and intend to use the net proceeds of this offering for general corporate purposes, including funding of our development programs, sales and marketing expenses associated with Rubraca, repayment, repurchase or refinance of our debt obligations, payment of milestones pursuant to our license agreements, general and administrative expenses, acquisition or licensing of additional product candidates or businesses and working capital.
On August 16, 2021, we entered into a distribution agreement (the “August Distribution Agreement”) with the Agents, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through the Agents, shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $125.0 million in transactions that are deemed to be “at the market” offerings as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including sales made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions, including directly on the Nasdaq Global Select Market or into any other existing trading market for the shares, or sales made to or through a market maker, in block transactions or by any other method permitted by
law, including privately negotiated transactions. Sales may be made at market prices prevailing at the time of a sale or at prices related to prevailing market prices or at negotiated prices. During the period between August 17, 2021 and September 15, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 9,379,976 shares of our common stock under the August Distribution Agreement resulting in gross proceeds of $43.0 million and net proceeds to us of $41.5 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses. During the period between November 5, 2021 and November 16, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 731,292 shares of our common stock resulting in gross proceeds of $3.1 million and net proceeds to us of $3.0 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses. During the period between January 18, 2022 and February 15, 2022, we sold an aggregate of 12,697,044 shares of our common stock resulting in gross proceeds of $28.1 million and net proceeds to us of $27.2 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses.
The issuance and sale of the shares under the August Distribution Agreement are being made pursuant to our effective registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021 (File No. 333-253485) as amended by pre-effective Amendment No. 1 thereto filed with the SEC on May 5, 2021. The offering is described in the Company’s prospectus dated May 7, 2021, as supplemented by a prospectus supplement dated August 16, 2021, as filed with the SEC on August 16, 2021. We have used and intend to use the net proceeds of this offering for general corporate purposes, including funding of our development programs, sales and marketing expenses associated with Rubraca, repayment, repurchase or refinance of our debt obligations, payment of milestones pursuant to our license agreements, general and administrative expenses, acquisition or licensing of additional product candidates or businesses and working capital.
Cash Requirements
We expect to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future, as we commercialize Rubraca and expand our selling, general and administrative functions to support the growth in our commercial organization and as we complete research and development activities related to FAP-2286 and lucitanib.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $143.4 million and total current liabilities of $125.2 million. As noted above, subsequent to December 31, 2021, we raised an additional $27.2 million in net proceeds through our “at-the-market” equity offering program.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amounts of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
● revenues from the sale of our Rubraca product;
● the number and characteristics of the product candidates, companion diagnostics and indications we pursue;
● the achievement of various development, regulatory and commercial milestones resulting in required payments to partners pursuant to the terms of our license agreements;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates and related companion diagnostics and conducting clinical and non-clinical trials;
● the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates and companion diagnostics;
● the cost of commercialization activities, including marketing and distribution costs;
● the cost of manufacturing any of our product candidates we successfully commercialize;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and outcome of such litigation; and
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales, if any, of our products.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(a) On October 3, 2016, we entered into a Manufacturing and Services Agreement (the “Agreement”) with a non-exclusive third-party supplier for the production of the active ingredient for Rubraca. Under the terms of the Agreement, we will provide the third-party supplier a rolling forecast for the supply of the active ingredient in Rubraca that will be updated by us on a quarterly basis. We are obligated to order material sufficient to satisfy an initial quantity specified in any forecast. In addition, the third-party supplier constructed, in its existing facility, a production train to manufacture of the Rubraca active ingredient. We are obligated to make scheduled capital program fee payments toward capital equipment and other costs associated with the construction of the production train. Once the facility became operational in October 2018, we were obligated to pay a fixed facility fee each quarter for the duration of the Agreement, which expires on December 31, 2025, unless extended by mutual consent of the parties.
(b) Amounts reflected on the balance sheet and in the table above in respect of the Financing Agreement represent the maximum amounts payable by us to the lenders during the periods indicated. Payments due under our Financing Agreement are based, for the most part, on net sales of Rubraca by us and our licensees. Rubraca sales have not been consistent historically and sales in future periods is difficult to predict. Therefore, expected maturities of our Financing Agreement as of December 31, 2021 are shown based on the quarterly capped amount and certain other mandatory payments set forth in the Financing Agreement. Actual payments may fluctuate and may be less than the amounts reflected in the table above. For a full description of the Financing Agreement and our payment obligations thereunder, see Note 9, Debt.
Royalty and License Fee Commitments
Rubraca. We have certain obligations under licensing agreements with third parties contingent upon achieving various development, regulatory and commercial milestones. During 2016 through 2020, we paid Pfizer a total of $82.5 million in milestone payments related to FDA and European Commission approvals received for Rubraca. These milestone payments were recognized as intangible assets and are amortized over the estimated remaining useful life of Rubraca.
We are obligated under the license agreement to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize Rubraca and we are responsible for all ongoing development and commercialization costs for Rubraca. We are required to make regulatory milestone payments to Pfizer of up to an additional $8.0 million in aggregate if specified clinical study objectives and regulatory filings, acceptances and approvals are achieved. In addition, we are obligated to make sales milestone payments to Pfizer if specified annual sales targets for Rubraca are met, which relate to annual sales targets of $250.0 million and above, which, in the aggregate, could amount to total milestone payments of $170.0 million, and tiered royalty payments at a mid-teen percentage rate on net sales, with standard provisions for royalty offsets to the extent we need to obtain any rights from third parties to commercialize Rubraca.
FAP. In September 2019, we entered into a global license and collaboration agreement with 3BP to develop and commercialize a PTRT and imaging agent targeting FAP. The lead candidate, designated internally as FAP-2286, is being developed pursuant to a global development plan agreed to by the parties. We are responsible for the costs of all preclinical and clinical development activities described in the plan, including the costs for a limited number of 3BP full-time equivalents and external costs incurred during the preclinical development phase of the collaboration. Upon the signing of the license and collaboration agreement in September 2019, we made a $9.4 million upfront payment to 3BP, which we recognized as acquired in-process research and development expense.
Pursuant to the terms of the FAP agreement, we are required to make additional payments to 3BP for annual technology access fees and upon the achievement of certain development and regulatory milestone events (or on certain
dates, whichever occur earlier). We are also obligated to pay 3BP single- to low-double-digit royalties on net sales of the FAP-targeted therapeutic product and imaging agent, based on the volume of annual net sales achieved. In addition, 3BP is entitled to receive 34% of any consideration, excluding royalties on the therapeutic product, pursuant to any sublicenses we may grant.
We are obligated under the license and collaboration agreement to use diligent efforts to develop FAP-2286 and commercialize a FAP-targeted therapeutic product and imaging agent, and we are responsible for all commercialization costs in our territory. The agreement with 3BP will remain in effect until the expiration of our royalty obligations to 3BP, determined on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, unless we elect to terminate the agreement earlier. If we fail to meet our obligations under the agreement and are unable to cure such failure within specified time periods, 3BP can terminate the agreement, resulting in a loss of our rights. 3BP also has the right to terminate the agreement under certain circumstances in connection with our change of control in which the acquiring party retains a product competitive with the FAP-targeted therapeutic product or, in the event marketing authorization has not yet been obtained, does not agree to the then-current global development plan.
We submitted two INDs for FAP-2286 for use as imaging and treatment agents in December 2020 to support an initial phase 1 study to determine the dose and tolerability of FAP-2286 as a therapeutic agent with expansion cohorts planned in multiple tumor types as part of a global development program. In April 2021, we made a milestone payment to 3BP under the license and collaboration agreement of $2.2 million as a result of the FDA’s acceptance of the IND for the treatment agent. In September 2021, we made a $3.3 million milestone payment to 3BP under the license and collaboration agreement.
In February 2020, we finalized the terms of a drug discovery collaboration agreement with 3BP to identify up to three additional, undisclosed targets for PTRT, to which we will obtain global rights for any resulting product candidates. We are responsible for the costs of all preclinical and clinical development activities conducted under the discovery program, including the costs for a limited number of 3BP full-time equivalents and external costs incurred during the discovery and preclinical development phase for each collaboration target. The discovery collaboration agreement was effective December 31, 2019, for which we incurred a $2.1 million technology access fee, which we accrued and recognized as a research and development expense.
Pursuant to the terms of the discovery collaboration agreement, we are required to make additional payments to 3BP for annual technology access fees and upon the achievement of certain development and regulatory milestone events (or on certain dates, whichever occur earlier). We are also obligated to pay 3BP a 6% royalty on net sales of License Products (as defined in the agreement), based on the volume of quarterly net sales achieved.
We are obligated under the discovery collaboration agreement to use diligent efforts to develop and commercialize the product candidates, if any, that result from the discovery program, and we are responsible for all clinical development and commercialization costs. The agreement with 3BP will remain in effect until the expiration of our royalty obligations to 3BP, determined on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, unless we elect to terminate the agreement earlier. If we fail to meet our obligations under the agreement and are unable to cure such failure within specified time periods, 3BP can terminate the agreement, resulting in a loss of our rights.
Lucitanib. On November 19, 2013, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of EOS pursuant to the terms set forth in that certain Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of November 19, 2013 (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”), by and among the Company, EOS, its shareholders (the “Sellers”) and Sofinnova Capital V FCPR, acting in its capacity as the Sellers’ representative. Following the acquisition, EOS became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Under the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement, in addition to the initial purchase price paid at the time of the closing of the acquisition and other license fees due to Advenchen described below, we will also be obligated to pay to the Sellers a milestone payment of $65.0 million upon obtaining the first NDA approval from the FDA with respect to lucitanib.
In October 2008, Ethical Oncology Science, S.p.A. (“EOS”) (now known as Clovis Oncology Italy Srl) entered into an exclusive license agreement with Advenchen Laboratories LLC (“Advenchen”) to develop and commercialize lucitanib on a global basis, excluding China.
We are obligated to pay Advenchen tiered royalties at percentage rates in the mid-single digits on net sales of lucitanib, based on the volume of annual net sales achieved. In addition, after giving effect to the first and second
amendments to the license agreement, we are required to pay to Advenchen 25% of any consideration, excluding royalties, we receive from sublicensees, in lieu of the milestone obligations set forth in the agreement. We are obligated under the agreement to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize at least one product containing lucitanib, and we are also responsible for all remaining development and commercialization costs for lucitanib.
The license agreement with Advenchen will remain in effect until the expiration of all of our royalty obligations to Advenchen, determined on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, unless we elect to terminate the agreement earlier. If we fail to meet our obligations under the agreement and are unable to cure such failure within specified time periods, Advenchen can terminate the agreement, resulting in a loss of our rights to lucitanib.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
Our ability to generate product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily due to the ongoing effect the pandemic has had on oncology treatment and practice, and in particular, in ovarian cancer, resulting in fewer diagnoses and fewer patients going to in-person office visits in the U.S. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our U.S. and European sales forces have had physical access to hospitals, clinics, doctors and pharmacies curtailed and/or have been limited. Our European launches occurred in an environment in which our field-based personnel were not allowed to visit hospitals beginning as early as late February 2020. Similarly, we launched Rubraca for prostate cancer in the U.S beginning in May 2020, but our physical access to hospital, clinics, doctors and pharmacies remains limited. It is difficult to discern or predict any trend in new patient starts due to the unpredictability of the COVID-19 situation and the changing competitive landscape.
This curtailment of and/or limited physical access has decreased sales and marketing expenses during 2021 and may extend into, and through at least a significant portion, of 2022. In addition, due to increased travel restrictions, quarantines, “work-at-home” and “shelter-in-place” orders and extended shutdown of certain non-essential business in the United States, and European and Asia-Pacific countries, in-person conferences and meetings requiring travel will decrease, resulting in a decrease of our selling, general and administrative expenses. We believe that we have a sufficient supply of Rubraca and our product candidates to continue our commercial and clinical operations as planned.
The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated a preference by oncology practices for more digital programming, including digital, peer-to-peer interactions and reduced in-person promotion. In order to meet these changing preferences, we adopted a hybrid commercial strategy combining increased digital promotion activities, greater online resources and more peer-to-peer interactions with reduced and more targeted in-person promotion. New tools and performance indicators based on this hybrid approach were rolled out during the fourth quarter of 2020. We adopted this strategy in order to better reach customers in the way they want to be reached with the goal of returning to growth, especially as the ongoing impact of COVID-19 is reduced.
We did not see material disruption to our clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic for the year ended December 31, 2021. However, with the increase in cases of COVID-19 due to the Omicron variant, and the potential for quarantines, unavailability of medical services regarded as non-essential, or reluctance of patients to seek treatment, we may see delays in enrollment during 2022. For example, new patient recruitment in clinical studies, including LuMIERE, may be affected and the conduct of clinical trials may vary by geography as some regions are more adversely affected. Additionally, we may slow or delay enrollment in certain trials to manage expenses.
On March 18, 2020, the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (“FFCR Act”), and on March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act were each enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The FFCR Act and the CARES Act contain numerous income tax provisions, such as relaxing limitations on the deductibility of interest and the use of net operating losses arising in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2017. On March 11, 2021, President Biden signed an additional coronavirus relief package entitled the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (“ARPA”), which included, among other things, provisions relating to stimulus payments to some Americans, extension of several CARES Act relief programs, expansion of the child tax credit, funding for vaccinations and other COVID-19 related assistance programs. The CARES Act, FFCR Act, and the ARPA have not had a material impact on the Company; however, we will continue to examine the impacts that these Acts, as well as any future economic relief legislation, may have on our business.
The trading prices for our common stock and of other biopharmaceutical companies have been highly volatile as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. As a result of this volatility and uncertainties regarding future impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations, we may face difficulties raising capital or may only be able to raise capital on unfavorable terms.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under the rules promulgated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Tax Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we have net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards of approximately $1.8 billion to offset future federal income taxes. We also have research and development and orphan drug tax credit carryforwards of $259.3 million to offset future federal income taxes. The federal net operating loss carryforwards and research and development and orphan drug tax credit carryforwards expire at various times through 2041.
We believe that a change in ownership as defined under Section 382 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code occurred as a result of our public offering of common stock completed in April 2012. Future utilization of the federal net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards accumulated from inception to the change in ownership date will be subject to annual limitations to offset future taxable income. It is possible that a change in ownership will occur in the future, which will limit the NOL amounts generated since the last estimated change in ownership. At December 31, 2021, we recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets in the U.S. of $873.9 million, as we believe it is more likely than not that the tax benefits will not be fully realized. In the future, if we determine that a portion or all of the tax benefits associated with our tax carryforwards will be realized, net income would increase in the period of determination.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently adopted and issued accounting standards, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.