Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations was prepared to provide the reader with a view and perspective of our business through the eyes of management and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto of Cambium Networks Corporation (“Cambium”, “we”, “our”, or “us”) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materiality from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly those discussed under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We provide fixed wireless broadband and Wi-Fi networking infrastructure solutions for network operators, including medium-sized wireless internet service providers, enterprises, mobile network operators and government agencies, communities and cities worldwide. Our scalable, reliable and high-performance solutions enable the creation of a purpose-built wireless fabric that connects people, places and things with a unified wireless fabric that spans multiple standards and frequencies of fixed wireless and Wi-Fi, all managed centrally via the cloud, deployed indoors and outdoors. Our multi-gigabit wireless fabric offers a compelling value proposition to traditional fiber and alternative wireless solutions mobile infrastructure.
Our wireless fabric includes intelligent radios, smart antennas, radio frequency algorithms, wireless-aware switches and our on-premises or cloud-based network management software. Our embedded proprietary RF technology and software enables automated optimization of data flow at the outermost points in the network, which we refer to as the “intelligent edge.” This intelligent edge offers network operators increased performance, visibility, control and management, as well as the ability to efficiently transfer large amounts of data back to enterprise data centers for fast and efficient analysis and decision-making even in conditions characterized by a high degree of interfering signals generated both within the network or from outside sources, which we refer to as noise. Our products support licensed and unlicensed spectrum, tailored for many frequency bands. We provide deep technical and operational expertise based on years of deploying networks, resulting in ease of use of our products, and all Cambium Networks solutions are backed by our global organization that provides support services tailored to meet the business needs of our end users.
We were formed in 2011 when Cambium Networks acquired the Point-to-Point, or PTP, and Point-to-Multi-Point, or PMP, businesses from Motorola Solutions. Prior to the acquisition, Motorola Solutions had invested over a decade in developing the technology and intellectual property assets that formed the foundation for our business, having launched the Canopy PMP business in 1999 and having acquired the Orthogon Systems PTP business in 2006. Following the acquisition, we renamed the business Cambium Networks and we leveraged the technology to continue to develop and offer an extensive portfolio of reliable, scalable and secure enterprise-grade fixed wireless broadband and PTP and PMP platforms, Wi-Fi, switch and IIoT solutions.
We offer our fixed wireless broadband and Wi-Fi solutions in three categories:
•PTP: We offer PTP solutions designed to operate in unlicensed spectrum from 220 MHz to 6.05 GHz and in licensed spectrum from 6-38 and 71-86 GHz. In addition, our PTP 700 operates in NATO Band IV from 4.4-5.9 GHz, as well as in the 7 GHz and 8 GHz bands, and meets stringent federal operating, performance and security standards. The mainstay of our backhaul offering is the PTP 670 for commercial applications and PTP 700 for defense and national security applications. In addition, our PTP 820 and PTP 850 series offer carrier-grade microwave backhaul in licensed spectrum, and our PTP 550 offers price-performance leadership in spectral efficiency in sub-6GHz unlicensed spectrum. In addition to dedicated point-to-point platforms, as technology has evolved, solutions have developed that, while principally supporting point-to-multi-point architectures, also support point-to-point applications, including the 60 GHz cnWave v3000 Client Node and the ePMP Force 425. Revenues from these products are included in the PMP product category in our revenues by product category reporting, as that is their primary application.
•PMP: Our PMP portfolio ranges from our top-of-the-line PMP 450 series to our ePMP solutions for network operators that need to optimize for both price and performance to our cnReach family of narrow-bandwidth connectivity products for industrial communications. The PMP 450 series is optimized for performance in high-density and demanding physical environments, and includes the PMP 450m with integrated cnMedusa massive multi-user multiple input multiple output, or MU-MIMO, technology. The PMP 450 product line also supports the FCC’s Citizen Broadband Radio Service, or CBRS. PMP provides a high-quality platform at a more affordable price for less demanding environments. The ePMP 3000 supports 4x4 MU-MIMO and is complemented by a broad portfolio of ePMP Force 300 subscriber radios. The FCC and other regulatory bodies around the world have begun to release the 6 GHz band, ranging from 5825 MHz to 7125 MHz, to unlicensed use in indoor and outdoor applications. We have commenced development on both the PMP 450 and the ePMP platform to take advantage of this new spectrum offering. cnRanger, our Fixed LTE solution, operates in the 2 GHz (Bands 38, 40, 41) and 3 GHz (Bands 42, 43, 48). Like the PMP 450 platform, the 3 GHz cnRanger solution supports the CBRS service, while the 2 GHz bands support the FCC's Educational Broadband Service, or EBS, classification. cnReach products enable IIoT applications, such as supervisory control and data acquisition, or SCADA,
processes in the oil and gas, electric utility, water, railroad and other industrial settings. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we began shipping our 60 GHz solution, cnWave, which enables Gbps networking using the 60 GHz band and includes Meta's Terragraph technology. We expect to commence commercial shipment of our fixed 5G platform, operating from 24.25 to 29.50 GHz, encompassing the 3GPP 5G channels N257, N258 and N261 in the first half of 2022.
•Wi-Fi: Our Wi-Fi portfolio includes our cnPilot cloud-managed Wi-Fi solutions, our cnMatrix cloud-managed wireless-aware switching solution, our Xirrus Wi-Fi solutions, and our Wi-Fi 6 portfolio of Wi-Fi 6 access points which support both cnMaestro and Xirrus XMS management. cnPilot is for indoor and outdoor enterprise, small business, and home applications and offers a range of Wi-Fi access points and RF technology that enable network optimization based on desired geographic coverage and user density. cnMatrix provides the intelligent interface between wireless and wired networks. cnMatrix’s policy-based configuration accelerates network deployment, mitigates human error, increases security, and improves reliability. Xirrus has a portfolio of high performance enterprise Wi-Fi access points and cloud-based subscription services. In June 2020, we introduced our first Wi-Fi 6 access point, the XV3-8, which supports both cnPilot and Xirrus solutions. In January 2021, we announced our XE series, which incorporates Wi-Fi 6E, support of the 6 GHz band, and will commence shipment in the first quarter of 2022. Additional Wi-Fi 6 access points are under development and will be released throughout 2022. In the first quarter of 2021, we introduced and began shipping the cnMatrix TX 2020R-P. The TX 2020R-P is the first in a series of switches designed specifically to support PMP and PTP fixed wireless broadband networks, incorporating the cnMatrix enterprise-class feature set and incorporating additional features and services pertinent to network operators deploying fixed wireless broadband networks. The TX2021-RP was introduced in April of 2021 and with the December introduction of the TX 2028RF-P and the TX 1012R-P, we have a comprehensive portfolio of switches to support our range of PMP and PTP networks operators, complementing the EX series intended to support enterprise Wi-Fi networks.
We generate a substantial majority of our sales through our global channel distribution network, including, as of December 31, 2021, approximately 170 distributors that we sell to directly, together with over 11,100 value added resellers and system integrators supplied by these distributors, for further sales to end-users. Our channel partners provide lead generation, pre-sales support and product fulfillment, along with professional services for network design, installation, commissioning and on-going field support. Although we fulfill sales almost exclusively through our channel partners, through our global sales team we engage directly with network operators in our key vertical markets including service providers, enterprises, industrials, defense and national security entities, and state and local governments. Our sales team responds to bids or requests for quotes, typically in collaboration with a channel partner. Our distributors carry inventory of our products for resale, and generally have stock rotation rights only if they simultaneously place an off-setting order for product. As such, we generally recognize revenue from sales to distributors on a sell-in basis, and manage our finished goods inventory to plan for distributor demand.
We outsource production to third-party manufacturers, who are responsible for purchasing and maintaining inventory of components and raw materials and, in certain cases, we resell third-party products on a white-label basis. We believe that this approach gives us the advantages of relatively low capital investment and significant flexibility in scheduling production, managing inventory levels and providing a comprehensive solution to meet network operator demand. The majority of our products are delivered to us at one of three distribution hubs, where we have outsourced the warehousing and delivery of our products to a third-party logistics provider and from which we manage worldwide fulfillment.
Trends impacting our business
Component shortages and increased freight costs
We remain constrained by the global component part shortages, particularly the shortage in available semiconductor chipsets and related components, as the global integrated circuit supply is under pressure as demand surpasses supply capacity, causing foundries to allocate existing supply among their customers. These supply constraints are occurring at a time of increasing demand for us and others globally, further exacerbating the supply constraint. As a result, we are experiencing increased lead times for the supply of many of our products, impacting our ability to timely supply our customers. In particular, semiconductor chips and merchant silicon and related semiconductor parts are currently in high demand with limited supply, which is resulting in significantly longer than usual lead times and increased costs for these components. We have encountered, and are likely to continue to encounter, shortages and delays in obtaining these and other components, and this could have a material adverse effect on our ability to meet customer orders. Shortages are expected to continue into 2022. In addition, such shortages or delays are resulting in increased component and delivery costs, as suppliers raise the cost of components. We have also experienced price increases in base commodities, impacting component pricing generally and in particular for electromechanical commodities. These component shortages and increases in costs have impacted, and are expected to continue over the short term to continue to impact, our sales and revenues, and our gross margins and net income.
Logistics challenges remain as well, as container shortages continue to lengthen availability times of containers and carriage, resulting in increases in relevant freight costs, all at a time when demand across many of our product lines has increased, together with increasing demand for shipment of many other products globally. Ports have increasing lead times with delays becoming
commonplace in the container freight market as port delays, worker shortages and the impact of COVID-19 are impacting the ability to import and export goods, particularly from China. Logistics and freight costs are increasing substantially as a result. We are also experiencing increasing rates, resulting in increased use of expedited freight modes due to supply shortages. The use of expedited freight modes has increased our cost of revenues, resulting in a decrease in our gross margins, and is expected to continue in the short term.
COVID-19
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the disruption to our business and operations as well as the operations of our customers and suppliers, has lessened, and our markets are recovering as the need for additional connectivity continues to grow and as the market adopts newer technologies. We have benefitted from investments we have made over the past few years in fixed wireless infrastructure technologies in such areas as PMP, including CBRS-compatible products in the U.S. and in new opportunities such as gigabit wireless solutions with our 60 GHz millimeter wave products, our new enterprise Wi-Fi 6, and cloud-enabled wireless switching products and our 5G 28 GHz millimeter wave products enabling us to enter markets demanding higher broadband performance. In the U.S., the first phase of the Rural Digital Opportunity Fund, or RDOF, launched by the Federal Communications Commission, or FCC, is expected to accelerate the provision of high-speed broadband service to millions of underserved communities in the U.S. over the next ten years.
We remain subject to continued social distancing measures, continuing shutdowns globally that impact the ability of our end user customers to deploy our products, and continued restrictions on in person marketing and sales activities and even cessation in travel that impacts our sales activities, and resulting in continued general business uncertainty that negatively impacts demand in several of our markets.
We continue to focus on making sure our employees are safe and continue to operate with a substantial portion of our workforce working from home. We have allowed limited opening of our offices, but continue to have extended remote working and will continue to monitor conditions as we extend this further. We are slowly increasing travel to meet customer needs and are beginning to increase our business travel to customers, as well as to conferences and other marketing events. The extent of the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, severity and spread of the pandemic, related restrictions on travel and transportation and other actions that may be taken by governmental authorities and the impact to the business of our suppliers or customers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
With respect to liquidity, we believe our balance sheet will provide us the necessary capital to navigate the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we implemented several initiatives to conserve cash and optimize profitability, including limiting discretionary spending, temporarily reducing personnel costs, eliminating non-essential travel, delaying or reducing hiring activities, deferring certain discretionary capital expenditures and have continued to enforce these initiatives throughout 2021.
Digital transformation and new product introductions
While enterprises and governments continue to look to digital transformation to improve operations by harnessing new technologies, software and applications, our revenues have been impacted by the component shortages and freight and logistics delays referenced above, impacting our ability to manufacture and ship products according to orders. Enterprises seek to gain analytics and improve security and risk, while governments seek to connect more of the unconnected, including people, places (such as schools and government buildings) and things (such as meters, valves, doors, cameras), as well as to enable digital education, digital economy and digital currency. Each of these digital transformation objectives are underpinned by the need for increased connectivity, as employees, customers and others must be able to access the enterprise network securely from anywhere. As a result, we continue to see increased interest in connection with our wireless broadband solutions for customers accessing the CBRS band where we have benefitted from investments we have made over the past few years in fixed wireless infrastructure technologies in such areas as PMP, including CBRS-compatible products in the U.S. We have also seen increases in interest from our new opportunities such as gigabit wireless solutions with our 60 GHz cnWave millimeter wave products, our enterprise Wi-Fi 6, and cloud-enabled wireless switching products which enable higher speed connectivity (gigabits per second) and can be very rapidly deployed with a lot of flexibility to keep pace with the network demand these digital transformations are presenting. In the U.S., the first phase of the Rural Digital Opportunity Fund, or RDOF, launched by the Federal Communications Commission, or FCC, is expected to accelerate the provision of high-speed broadband service to millions of underserved communities in the U.S. over the next ten years, as well as the anticipated Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act currently being considered.
International trade
A substantial portion of our Wi-Fi products are manufactured in China, and we continue to monitor tensions between the U.S. and China and their potential impact on our ability to produce and ship our products. Should tensions escalate, our ability to manufacture our products in China could be affected, causing disruption in our supply chain, and requiring us to seek other sources of supply.
Xirrus acquisition
In August 2019, we acquired select assets and assumed select liabilities of the Xirrus Wi-Fi products and cloud services business from Riverbed Technology, Inc. Xirrus has a portfolio of high performance enterprise Wi-Fi access points and subscription services. We paid $2.0 million upon closing and the agreement provided for additional $3.0 million of contingent consideration subject to Xirrus attaining certain booking targets. As of December 31, 2019, all booking targets were met and we paid the full $3.0 million of consideration through February 2020. This acquisition is intended to enhance and accelerate our existing network service application capabilities.
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC 805, Business Combinations. We recorded the acquisition using the acquisition method of accounting and recognized assets and liabilities at their fair value as of the date of acquisition. We based the preliminary allocation of the purchase price on estimates and assumptions known at the date of acquisition that are subject to change within the purchase price allocation period, which is generally one year from the acquisition date. Our review of the purchase price allocation was completed in the period ended June 30, 2020. We determined the estimated fair value of identifiable intangible assets acquired primarily using an income approach.
Basis of presentation
Revenues
Our revenues are generated primarily from the sale of our products, which consist of hardware with essential embedded software. Our revenues also include limited amounts for software products, extended warranty on hardware products and subscription services. We generally recognize product revenues at the time of shipment, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Revenues are recognized net of estimated stock returns, volume-based rebates and cooperative marketing allowances that we provide to distributors. We recognize subscription services revenue ratably over the term in which the services are provided and our performance obligation is satisfied. We provide a standard warranty on our hardware products, with the term depending on the product, and record a liability for the estimated future costs associated with potential warranty claims. In addition, we also offer extended warranties for purchase and represents a future performance obligation for us. The extended warranty is included in deferred revenues and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the extended warranty. We provide our cnMaestro, LINKPlanner and cnArcher applications as supplemental tools to help network operators design, install, and manage their networks, and as a means of driving sales of our hardware products.
Cost of revenues and gross profit
Our cost of revenues is comprised primarily of the costs of procuring finished goods from our third-party manufacturers, third-party logistics and warehousing provider costs, freight costs and warranty costs. We outsource our manufacturing to third-party manufacturers located primarily in Mexico, China, Israel and Taiwan. Cost of revenues also includes costs associated with supply operations, including personnel related costs, provision for excess and obsolete inventory, third-party license costs and third-party costs related to services we provide. Cost of revenues also includes amortization of capitalized software costs associated with products marketed to be sold.
Gross profit has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including changes in product mix. The margin profile of products within each of our core product categories can vary significantly depending on the operating performance, features and manufacturer of the product. Generally, our gross margins on backhaul and fixed wireless access point products are greater than those on our CPE products. Because the ratio of CPE to PTP and PMP access points typically increases as network operators build out the density of their networks, increases in follow-on sales to network operators as a percentage of our total sales typically have a downward effect on our overall gross margins. Finally, gross margin will also vary as a function of changes in pricing due to competitive pressure, our third-party manufacturing and other production costs, cost of shipping and logistics, provision for excess and obsolete inventory and other factors. We expect our gross margins will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these various factors.
Operating expenses
We classify our operating expense as research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expense. Personnel costs are the primary component of each of these operating expense categories, which consist of cash-based personnel costs, such as salaries, sales commissions, benefits, share-based compensation and bonuses. In addition, we separate depreciation and amortization in their own category.
Research and development
In addition to personnel-related costs, research and development expense consists of costs associated with design and development of our products, product certification, travel and recruiting. We generally recognize research and development expense as incurred. For certain of our software projects under development, we capitalize the development cost during the period between
determining technological feasibility of the product and commercial release. We amortize the capitalized development cost upon commercial release, generally over three years and is included in cost of revenues. We typically do not capitalize costs related to the development of first-generation product offerings as technological feasibility generally coincides with general availability of the software. Although research and development expenses decreased in 2020 related to lower contractor spend and travel as a result of restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as these restrictions have lifted in 2021, research and development expense have increased as we continue to invest in our future products and services.
Sales and marketing
In addition to personnel costs for sales, marketing, service and product line management personnel, sales and marketing expense consists of our training programs, trade shows, marketing programs, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, national and local regulatory approval on our products, travel and entertainment, and recruiting. In 2020, we experienced a decrease in payroll related costs driven by a reduction in headcount as part of the restructuring announced in November 2019 and February 2020. In addition, in 2020 we experienced a reduction in travel and entertainment and marketing related spending as a result of restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, sales and marketing expenses have increased as these restrictions are lifted and we increase the size of our sales, marketing, service, and product line management organization to support our growth, and, in particular, as we continue to expand our global distribution network.
General and administrative
In addition to personnel costs, general and administrative expense consists of professional fees, such as legal, audit, accounting, information technology and consulting costs, insurance, facilities and other supporting overhead costs. We expect general and administrative expense to increase as we increase the size of our finance, information technology, legal and human resources organization to support our growth and continue to incur additional costs associated with being a public company.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense consist of depreciation related to fixed assets such as computer equipment, furniture and fixtures, and testing equipment, as well as amortization related to acquired and internal use software and definite lived intangibles.
Provision for income taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in the jurisdictions in which we conduct business. As we have expanded our international operations, we have incurred additional foreign tax expense, and we expect this to continue. Management assesses our deferred tax assets in each reporting period, and if it is determined that it is not more likely than not to be realized, we will record a valuation allowance in that period.
Results of operations
The following table presents the consolidated statements of operations, as well as the percentage relationship to total revenues for items included in our consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021:
The following is the discussion and analysis of changes in the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021. The discussion and analysis of 2019 and changes in the financial condition and results of operations for the year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K may be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation" in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") on March 1, 2021.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021
Revenues
Revenues increased $57.4 million, or 20.6%, from $278.5 million in 2020 to $335.9 million in 2021, which was attributable to increased demand for and pricing of our point-to-multi-point products due to increased network traffic, new product introductions and demand for CBRS solutions and our Wi-Fi products, which benefitted from higher volume and pricing of our Wi-Fi 6 and switching products. Complementing this overall trend, revenue growth in 2021 also benefitted from continued expansion of our channel, with more than 11,300 total registered channel partners, which includes over 170 distributors, as of December 31, 2021.
Revenues by product category
Point-to-Multi-Point
Our PMP product line comprised 62% of total revenues for 2020 and 61% of total revenues for 2021. PMP revenue growth was due to increased volume and pricing, mostly due to network buildouts in North America, new product introductions, including 60 GHz and demand for our CBRS solutions.
Point-to-Point
PTP revenues remained flat overall, but saw increased demand in the defense sector partially offset by softer demand for backhaul products.
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volume and pricing, with strength from new product introductions, including Wi-Fi 6 and cnMatrix.
Revenues by geography
Revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020 reflecting higher revenues in all regions. The increased revenues in North America was driven by higher revenues for PMP and Wi-Fi products, driven mostly by higher PMP revenues due to increased volume and pricing along with increased demand for CBRS and robust network traffic and Wi-Fi due to increased volume and pricing, mostly with Wi-Fi 6 and switching products. Europe, Middle East, Africa revenues increased mostly due to higher Wi-Fi revenues from increased volume and pricing, along with new products and higher PMP revenues driven by higher volume and pricing. Caribbean and Latin America revenues increased due to higher Wi-Fi revenues largely due to increase in volume and pricing in hospitality and larger government projects along with higher PMP revenues due to higher pricing and new product introductions. The increase in Asia Pacific revenues was driven by higher PMP revenues and improving Wi-Fi revenues, both due to higher volume and pricing, with higher volumes principally reflecting new product introductions.
Cost of revenues and gross margin
Cost of revenues increased $36.0 million, or 25.9%, from $139.0 million for 2020 to $175.0 million for 2021. The increase in cost of revenues was primarily due to increased revenues, but also included higher freight costs as a result of material shortages and COVID-19 surcharges, and increases in freight and logistics charges as a result of increases due to container shortages, use of other distribution, shipment and transportation modes, and increases in costs by logistics and freight providers to meet the high global demand.
Gross margin decreased from 50.1% in 2020 to 47.9% in 2021. The decrease reflects higher logistics costs to meet demand and higher production costs due to increases in component charges as a result of component shortages and increases in freight and logistics costs.
Operating expenses
Research and development
Research and development expense increased $4.7 million, or 11.0%, from $43.2 million in 2020 to $47.9 million in 2021. As a percentage of revenues, research and development expenses decreased from 15.5% in 2020 to 14.3% in 2021. Research and development expense increased mainly due to a $3.0 million increase in payroll-related expenses due to increased headcount and impact of full salaries for all of 2021, $1.4 million higher share-based compensation expense due to new grants issued and addition of employee share purchase program in 2021, $0.9 million increase in corporate bonus accrual due to the increased headcount and salary increases in 2021, along with $2.6 million higher contractor expense due to increases in the number of contractors to support ramping of projects and the impact of lower negotiated rates in 2020. These expenses are partially offset by $2.1 million higher capitalized software expense due to an increase in projects eligible for capitalization, $0.7 million of restructuring expense recognized in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021 and absence of $0.2 million software impairment recognized in 2020.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $4.0 million, or 10.9%, from $36.8 million in 2020 to $40.8 million in 2021. As a percentage of revenues, sales and marketing expense decreased from 13.2% in 2020 to 12.1% in 2021. Sales and marketing expense increased mainly due to a $2.6 million increase in payroll-related expenses due to increased headcount and impact of full salaries for all of 2021, $1.0 million increase in share-based compensation expense due to new grants issued and addition of employee share purchase program in 2021, and $0.9 million higher variable compensation expense due to increased headcount and increased revenues. These expenses are partially offset by $0.5 million of restructuring expense recognized in 2020 that did not repeat in 2021.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense increased $0.6 million, or 2.2%, from $28.9 million in 2020 to $29.5 million in 2021. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expense decreased from 10.4% in 2020 to 8.8% in 2021. The increase in general and administrative expense is mainly due to $1.8 million higher share-based compensation expense due to new grants issued and addition of employee share purchase program in 2021, $1.3 million higher payroll-related expenses due to increased headcount and impact of full salaries for all of 2021, $0.4 million of expense related to the secondary offering completed in June 2021. These expenses are partially offset by $2.9 million lower legal expense, mostly related to the $1.6 million of nonrecurring legal expenses recognized in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $0.5 million, or 7.0%, from $6.7 million in 2020 to $6.2 million in 2021. The decrease in depreciation and amortization was mostly driven by the decrease in depreciation expense from fully depreciated assets and fully amortized intangibles exceeding the increase in depreciation expense from newly added assets.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense decreased $1.0 million, or 19.8% from $5.3 million in 2020 to $4.3 million in 2021. The decrease was primarily due to lower debt balances in 2021 compared with 2020 reflecting the mandatory excess cash flow payment of $19.6 million made in the second quarter of 2021. In addition, the decrease resulted from lower interest rates on the term loan beginning in 2021.
Other expense, net
Other expense remained decreased $0.3 million, or 50.3%, from $0.5 million in 2020 to $0.2 million in 2021. The decrease is primarily associated with foreign currency fluctuations.
Benefit for income taxes
Our tax expense changed from a tax benefit of ($0.4) million in 2020 to a tax benefit of ($5.5) million for 2021. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 were (2.4)% and (17.3)%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our income tax benefit changed by $5.1 from the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to release of a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets of $7.9 million during 2021, versus net utilization of valuation allowance in 2020 of $1.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s effective tax rate of (2.4)% differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to a benefit on research and development credit, a benefit on the partial release of a valuation allowance, and partially offset by the tax expense due to the increase of the tax rate applied to UK deferred tax assets. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s effective tax rate of (17.3)% differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to a benefit on the release of a valuation allowance on the UK deferred tax asset and tax benefits arising on employee restricted share vesting and option exercises. See Note 14 - Income taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information related to income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had a cash balance of $59.3 million. Our financial condition and liquidity remain strong. We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate adequate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. We
believe our existing cash, operating cash flow and revolving credit facilities provide us with the financial flexibility needed to fund normal operating expenses, to meet interest and principal requirements of our outstanding indebtedness, and fund capital expenditures. We believe these needs will be satisfied over at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements may vary materially from those currently planned and will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the timing of new product introductions, market acceptance of our products and overall economic conditions. We expect to regularly assess market conditions and may raise additional equity or incur additional debt if and when management, along with our board of directors, determines that doing so is in our best interest.
We refinanced our credit facilities on November 17, 2021 by establishing a new credit facility with Bank of America and extinguishing our existing credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank. The new credit facility with Bank of America allows for total borrowings of $75.0 million, which includes a $30.0 million term loan and a revolving loan of $45.0 million. On November 17, 2021, we borrowed the entire $30.0 million term loan, which was used to pay off the term loan with Silicon Valley Bank. At December 31, 2021, we had $30.0 million outstanding debt on our term loan, including the current portion of $2.6 million. We have $45.0 million available under our revolving loan facility. In accordance with the terms of our credit facility with Bank of America, we are required to pay quarterly principal payments of $0.7 million, commencing with the quarter ending March 31, 2022.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth summarized cash flow data for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2020 of $56.9 million consisted primarily of net income of $18.6 million, adjustments for depreciation and amortization of $7.8 million, share-based compensation expense of $3.4 million, decrease in provision for inventory excess and obsolescence of $1.9 million and $1.1 million increase in deferred income taxes along with changes in operating assets and liabilities that resulted in net cash inflows of $25.7 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a $11.1 million increase in accrued employee compensation related to higher bonus due to improved financial results in 2020, which amounts were paid in 2021, higher accounts payable of $6.1 million due to timing of purchases and payments, lower inventories of $5.7 million as we implemented inventory management strategies in 2020, along with a reduction in accounts receivable of $3.2 million due to stronger cash collections.
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2021 of $30.0 million consisted primarily of net income of $37.4 million, adjustments for depreciation and amortization of $8.1 million, share-based compensation expense of $7.7 million, and an increase in deferred income taxes of $6.1 million along with changes in operating assets and liabilities that resulted in net cash outflows of $17.0 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of a $11.2 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher sales in the last month of the quarter, along with $8.0 million increase in prepaid assets due to prepayments made to suppliers to procure inventory and $2.7 million decrease in accounts payable due to timing of purchases and payments, offset by $2.5 million increase in accrued liabilities, and a $1.9 million increase in accrued employee compensation related to higher bonus due to increased headcount and salaries.
Cash flows from investing activities
Our investing activities for both periods presented consisted of capital expenditures for property, equipment and software in support of the growth of our business. Capital expenditures increased $5.1 million in 2021 due to delaying capital expenditures originally planned in 2020 due to uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic. Our investing activities in 2020 included the remaining $0.3 million contingent consideration payment for the Xirrus acquisition paid in February 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities of $8.4 million for 2020 was primarily due to payment of $10.0 million in scheduled principal payments due under our term loan facility offset by $1.6 million in proceeds from the exercise of share options.
Net cash used in financing activities of $23.0 million for 2021 was primarily due to payment of $55.3 million on our existing term loan, $2.8 million of taxes paid on net share settlement of equity awards and a $1.2 million payment of debt issuance costs incurred with our new credit facility. These outflows are partially offset by $29.8 million in proceeds received under our new credit facility, $4.8 million in proceeds from the exercise of share options and $1.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of ordinary shares under our employee share purchase program.
Debt
We refinanced our credit facilities on November 17, 2021, by establishing a new credit facility with Bank of America ("BofA Credit Agreement") and extinguishing our existing credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank. The BofA Credit Agreement allows for total borrowings of $75.0 million, which includes a $30.0 million term loan and a revolving loan of $45.0 million. On November 17, 2021, we borrowed the entire $30.0 million term loan, which was used to pay off the term loan with Silicon Valley Bank. At December 31, 2021, we had $30.0 million outstanding debt on our term loan, including the current portion of $2.6 million. The Company has $45.0 million available under the revolving loan.
In accordance with the terms of the BofA Credit Agreement, we are required to pay quarterly principal payments of $0.7 million, commencing with the quarter ending March 31, 2022. The BofA Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants. Commencing with the year ended December 31, 2021, we are required to maintain a minimum consolidated leverage ratio. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our consolidated leverage ratio. Commencing with the quarter ended March 31, 2022, in addition to the consolidated leverage ratio, we will be required to maintain a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio.
Prior to the BofA Credit Agreement, our credit facilities were with Silicon Valley Bank. At December 31, 2020, we had $55.3 million outstanding debt on our term loan with Silicon Valley Bank, including the current portion of $29.7 million. The current portion of debt at December 31, 2020 included $19.7 million related to a required repayment in principal in accordance with the excess cash flow provision in our credit facilities with Silicon Valley Bank based on our calculation of excess cash flow at December 31, 2020, which was paid in May 2021. We had no outstanding debt on our revolving facility with Silicon Valley Bank at December 31, 2020.
The agreement with Silicon Valley Bank contained customary representations, warranties and affirmative and negative covenants. We were required to maintain a quarterly minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and minimum consolidated leverage ratio, and a monthly minimum adjusted quick ratio. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all affirmative and negative covenants.
Summary of contractual obligations
We lease office space and equipment under operating leases that run through 2026. Additionally, our BofA Credit Agreement matures and becomes due and payable in November 2026.
A summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 are as follows (in thousands):
(1)These amounts represent the scheduled principal payments based on their contractual maturities related to our term loan with Bank of America and interest payments based on the interest rate in effect on December 31, 2021 of 2.225%. Refer to Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our debt obligations.
(2)Our purchase obligations represent amounts included in Accounts payable and Accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2021 along with unrecorded open purchase orders at December 31, 2021, primarily related to inventory.
(3)Comprises liabilities recorded on the balance sheet of $79.6 million and obligations not recorded on the balance sheet of $69.1 million.
Commitments for purchase obligations has increased from 2020 due to planned revenue growth and the impact from component shortages and extended lead times we are experiencing with our suppliers. In addition to the contractual obligations reported above,
we have obligations related to our variable compensation programs of approximately $13.7 million with anticipated payments in March 2022 and is included in Accrued employee compensation in our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2021. We believe that cash generated from operations, together with existing sources of liquidity, will satisfy the cash requirements for these contractual obligations.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expense and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. For a summary of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting policies discussed below, see Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recognition of revenues
Our revenues are generated primarily from the sale of hardware products, with essential embedded software. Our revenues also include limited amounts for software products, extended warranty on hardware products and subscription services. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products. We generally recognize product revenues at the time of shipment, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Revenues are recognized net of estimated stock returns, volume-based rebates and cooperative marketing allowances that we provide to distributors. Estimated stock returns, volume-based rebates and cooperative marketing allowances are based on historical experience together with any known future business trends. The assumptions used to derive these estimates did not change significantly in the current period, nor did the value of each estimate. We recognize revenues on extended warranty on a straight-line basis over the term of the extended warranty. We recognize subscription services revenue ratably over the term in which the services are provided and our performance obligation is satisfied. We determine the appropriate revenue recognition for our contracts with customers by analyzing the type, terms and conditions of each contract or arrangement. Certain of our contracts have multiple performance obligations for which we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling price of each distinct product or service in the contract. The standalone selling price is the price at which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the promised good or service to the customer. The best evidence of standalone selling price is the observable price of a product or service when the Company sells that product or service separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers. In certain cases, the standalone sales price is not directly observable, and we estimate the transaction price allocated to each performance obligation using the expected cost plus margin approach. When, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied, we recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to that performance obligation. The transaction price recognized excludes an estimate for the consideration related to products we expect to be returned or amounts we expect to refund.
Inventory and inventory valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. In determining the cost of raw materials, consumables and goods purchased for resale, the weighted average purchase price is used. For finished goods, cost is computed as production cost including capitalized inbound freight costs.
The valuation of inventory requires us to estimate excess or obsolete inventory. The determination of excess or obsolete inventory is estimated based on a comparison of the quantity and cost of inventory on hand to our forecast of customer demand. The assumptions used to derive this estimate did not change significantly in the current period, nor did the value of the estimate. The actual amount of inventory written off in future periods will likely differ from the inventory excess and obsolete provisions reflected in our consolidated balance sheets due to difference between estimated and actual future demand, which could have a material effect on our net inventory as reported in our consolidated financial statements. Any adjustments to the valuation of inventory are included in cost of revenues.
Product warranties
We provide a standard warranty on our products, with the term depending on the product, and record a liability for the estimated future costs associated with potential warranty claims at the time products are sold. Our responsibility under our standard warranty is the repair or replacement of in-warranty defective product, or to credit the purchase price of the defective product, at our discretions, without charge to the customer. Our estimate of future warranty costs is largely based on historical experience factors, including product failure rates, material usage, and service delivery cost incurred in correcting product failures. These provisions are reviewed and adjusted by management periodically to reflect actual and anticipated experience. The assumptions used to derive this estimate did not change significantly in the current period, nor did the value of the estimate. The warranty costs are reflected in our consolidated statements of operations within cost of revenues.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between the financial statement carrying amount and the tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted income tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in income tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax asset in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes. Based on 2021 income and forecast of future taxable income, management concluded that all of the valuation allowance on the Company's UK entity's deferred tax assets was no longer needed and recorded a benefit of $7.7 million related to the reversal of this valuation allowance in 2021.
We may be subject to income tax audits in all the jurisdictions in which we operate and, as a result, we must also assess exposures to any potential issues arising from current or future audits of current and prior years’ tax returns. Accordingly, we must assess such potential exposures and, where necessary, provide a reserve to cover any expected loss. We recognize the benefit of a tax position if it is more likely than not to be sustained. Recognized tax positions are measured at the largest amount more likely than not of being realized upon settlement. To the extent that we establish a reserve, our income tax expense would be increased. If we ultimately determine that payment of these amounts is unnecessary, we reverse the liability and recognize an income tax benefit during the period in which new information becomes available indicating the liability is no longer necessary. We record an additional income tax expense in the period in which new information becomes available indicating the tax liability is greater than our original estimate.
Share-based compensation
We recognize all share-based compensation expense as a cost in the consolidated financial statements. Equity classified awards are measured at the grant date fair value of the award and expense is recognized, net of estimated forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the award and forfeiture rates are periodically updated for actual experience over the vesting term. We estimate the fair value of share options granted using the Black-Sholes option pricing model. The assumptions used to derive this estimate did not change significantly in the current period, nor did the value of the estimate.
JOBS Act accounting election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, are subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.