ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes contained in this Annual Report.
Our discussion and analysis of fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021 is included herein. Our discussion and analysis of fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 can be found in Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended August 31, 2021, which was filed with the SEC on October 14, 2021.
OVERVIEW
Our vertically integrated steel-related operations manufacture, recycle and fabricate steel and metal products and provide related materials and services through a network of facilities that includes seven electric arc furnace ("EAF") mini mills, two EAF micro mills, one rerolling mill, steel fabrication and processing plants, construction-related product warehouses and metal recycling facilities in the United States and Poland. Through our Tensar operations, CMC is a leading global provider of innovative ground and soil stabilization solutions selling into more than 80 national markets through two major product lines: Tensar® geogrids and Geopier® foundation systems. Our operations are conducted through two reportable segments: North America and Europe. See Part I, Item 1, Business for further information regarding our business and reportable segments.
Key Performance Indicators
When evaluating our results for the period, we compare net sales, in the aggregate and for both of our segments, in the current period to net sales in the corresponding period of the prior year. In doing so, we focus on changes in average selling price per ton and tons shipped compared to the prior period for each of our vertically integrated product categories (raw materials, steel products and downstream products) as these are the two variables that typically have the greatest impact on our net sales. Raw
materials include ferrous and nonferrous scrap, steel products include rebar, merchant and other steel products, such as billets and wire rod, and downstream products include fabricated rebar and steel fence posts.
Adjusted EBITDA from continuing operations ("adjusted EBITDA") is used by management to compare and evaluate the period-over-period underlying business operational performance of our segments. Adjusted EBITDA is the sum of the Company's earnings from continuing operations before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and impairment expense. Although there are many factors that can impact a segment’s adjusted EBITDA and, therefore, our overall earnings, changes in metal margin of our steel products and downstream products period-over-period is a consistent area of focus for our Company and industry. Metal margin is a metric used by management to monitor the results of our vertically integrated organization. For our steel products, metal margin is the difference between the average selling price per ton of rebar, merchant and other steel products and the cost of ferrous scrap per ton utilized by our steel mills to produce these products. An increase or decrease in input costs can impact profitability of these products when there is no corresponding change in selling prices due to competitive pressures. The metal margin for our downstream products is the difference between the average selling price per ton of fabricated rebar and steel fence post products and the scrap input costs to produce these products. The majority of our downstream products selling prices per ton are fixed at the beginning of a project and these projects last one to two years on average. Because the selling price generally remains fixed over the life of a project, changes in input costs over the life of the project can significantly impact profitability.
BUSINESS CONDITIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS
Tensar Acquisition
On April 25, 2022 (the "Acquisition Date"), we completed the acquisition of TAC Acquisition Corp. ("Tensar") for approximately $550 million, net of cash acquired. Through its patented foundation systems, Tensar produces ground stabilization and soil reinforcement solutions that complement our existing concrete reinforcement product lines and broaden our ability to address multiple early phases of commercial and infrastructure construction, including subgrade, foundation and structures. End customers for these products include commercial, industrial and residential site developers, mining and oil and gas companies, transportation authorities, coastal and waterway authorities and waste management companies. The acquired operations within North America are presented within our North America reportable segment and the remaining acquired operations are presented within our Europe reportable segment, in each case since the Acquisition Date. See Note 2, Acquisition, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information about the Tensar acquisition.
Capital Expenditures
In January 2022, we announced the plan to construct a fourth micro mill geographically situated with the intention of primarily serving the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic and Mid-Western U.S. markets. This new micro mill will enhance our steel production capabilities in the U.S. and create meaningful synergies within the existing network of mills and downstream fabrication plants. Following site selection, permitting and other necessary approvals, the construction and commissioning of the planned mill is expected to take roughly two years.
In July 2021, we completed the construction of and commissioned a third rolling line at our mini mill in Poland. The third rolling line takes advantage of historical excess melting capacity in Poland, expands our overall rolling capacity and allows the rolling lines to operate independently for each steel product produced by the mini mill (rebar, merchant bar and wire rod).
In August 2020, we announced the construction of a third micro mill. This micro mill will be the first in the world with the capability to produce merchant bar quality products through a continuous production process and will employ the latest technology in EAF power supply systems which will allow us to directly connect the EAF and the ladle furnace to renewable energy sources such as solar and wind. The new facility, located in Mesa, Arizona, will replace the rebar capacity at our Rancho Cucamonga, California mill, which was sold during fiscal 2022, and will allow us to more efficiently meet West Coast demand for steel products. We began construction of the third micro mill in 2021 and expect this micro mill to be commissioned in early calendar 2023. For further details on the sale of the Rancho Cucamonga, California mill, refer to Note 3, Changes in Business, in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Russian Invasion of Ukraine
The Russian invasion of Ukraine did not have a direct material adverse impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations during 2022. Our Europe segment has not had an interruption in energy supply and was able to identify alternate sources for a limited number of materials previously procured through Russia. However, we will continue to monitor
disruptions in supply of energy and materials and the indirect effects on our operations of inflationary pressures, foreign exchange rate fluctuations, commodity pricing, potential cybersecurity risks and sanctions resulting from the invasion.
COVID-19
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic ("COVID-19" or "pandemic") on our operations was limited during 2022, 2021 and 2020. We continue to evaluate the nature and extent of future impacts of the evolving pandemic on our operations and are complying with applicable U.S. federal, state and local law and considering relevant guidance, including the guidelines of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and other authorities, to prioritize the health and safety of our employees, families, suppliers, customers and communities. At this time, given the dynamic and uncertain nature and duration of the pandemic, we cannot reasonably estimate the long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and overall financial performance.
See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, in this Annual Report for further discussion related to the above business conditions and developments.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS SUMMARY
2022 Compared to 2021
Net sales during 2022 increased $2.2 billion, or 32%, compared to 2021. Net sales in our North America segment increased in 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to a year-over-year increase in average selling prices across all of our major product lines. In North America, shipments of raw materials and downstream products increased slightly year-over-year, while shipments of steel products decreased slightly in 2022 compared to 2021. Net sales in our Europe segment also increased in 2022 compared to 2021 due to a year-over-year increase in steel products average selling prices, coupled with increased shipments of steel products. Further, the acquired Tensar operations contributed $102.1 million to the increase in net sales in 2022.
During 2022, we achieved net earnings of $1.2 billion, an increase of $804.4 million, or 195%, compared to 2021. Included in net earnings during 2022 was a $273.3 million gain on the sale of the Rancho Cucamonga facilities. See Note 3, Changes in Business, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on the sale of the Rancho Cucamonga facilities. The remaining increase was primarily due to the significant margin expansion experienced on all of our major product lines. Increases in selling prices for all of our major product lines outpaced the rising input costs associated with scrap, freight, energy and other steelmaking inputs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2022 increased $39.9 million compared to 2021. Included in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2022 were $30.3 million of selling, general and administrative expenses resulting from Tensar's operations. The largest components of selling, general and administrative expenses from Tensar's operations were $19.4 million of labor-related expense, $2.8 million of professional services expense and $2.5 million of amortization expense resulting from acquired intangible assets. Additionally, we incurred $8.7 million of acquisition and integration expenses during 2022 with no such expenses during 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $1.2 million in 2022 compared to 2021. Capitalized interest increased $9.1 million in 2022 compared to 2021 due to construction of our third micro mill, which decreased interest expense. Partially offsetting the impact of increased capitalized interest was an increase in long-term debt interest expense of $6.7 million in 2022 compared to 2021 due to the additional long-term debt outstanding in 2022 compared to 2021.
Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate for 2022 was 19.7% compared to 22.7% for 2021. The year-over-year decrease was primarily due to tax benefits recorded during 2022 from the recognition of research and development credits and a capital loss on a restructuring transaction. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in state and local taxes due to a prior year valuation allowance benefit that did not repeat in the current year. See Note 13, Income Tax, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further discussion of our effective tax rate.
SEGMENTS
All amounts are computed and presented in a manner that is consistent with the basis in which we internally disaggregate financial information for the purpose of making operating decisions. See Note 20, Operating Segments, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further information on how we evaluate financial performance of our segments. The operational data by product category presented in the tables below reflects activity from sales of raw materials, steel products and downstream products, as applicable, which comprise the majority of sales in North America and Europe. The data is calculated using averages, and therefore, it is not meaningful to quantify the effect that any individual metric had on the segment's net sales or adjusted EBITDA.
2022 Compared to 2021
North America
Net sales in the North America segment increased $1.6 billion, or 29%, in 2022 compared to 2021. The increase in net sales was primarily due to increases in average selling prices of 22%, 41% and 27% for raw materials, steel products and downstream products, respectively, in 2022 compared to 2021. The year-over-year increases in average selling prices were attributed to a
rising scrap price environment throughout the first nine months of the year and steady demand in end-use markets for our steel products driven by greater construction and industrial activity. While scrap prices decreased during the fourth quarter due to decreased export demand, the price of steel products decreased at a lesser rate. Additionally, during the second half of 2022, prices of downstream products, many of which are fixed at the beginning of the project, grew to reflect the increased input costs from rising scrap and energy prices during 2021 and 2022. Shipments of these higher priced contracts, along with consistent demand contributed by construction and industrial projects, caused increases in the year-over-year average selling prices. Net sales in 2022 were impacted to a lesser extent by shipment volumes year-over-year, which remained relatively flat for raw materials and downstream products and decreased 7% for steel products. Steel product volumes decreased slightly in 2022 compared to 2021 due to planned maintenance activities at certain of our facilities in the second and third quarters, destocking of inventory by our customers in the fourth quarter in anticipation of downward price adjustments and slowed construction activity in certain months. The slowed construction activity was caused by constrained labor at construction sites in certain geographies and weather disruptions throughout the year. Also contributing to the increase in net sales in 2022 compared to 2021 were $74.8 million of net sales from the acquired Tensar operations.
Adjusted EBITDA in 2022 increased $807.3 million compared to 2021. Included in adjusted EBITDA in 2022 was a $273.3 million gain on the sale of the Rancho Cucamonga facilities. The remaining growth in adjusted EBITDA during 2022 was primarily due to expansion of steel products metal margin per ton and downstream products margin over scrap costs compared to 2021. The price increases of steel products and downstream products described above outpaced the rising cost of goods sold, which increased 23% year-over-year due to ferrous scrap price increases during the first nine months of the year and increased costs for energy, alloys and freight.
Europe
Net sales in the Europe segment increased $572.6 million, or 55%, in 2022 compared to 2021. This increase was primarily due to a $284 per ton, or 46%, year-over-year increase in steel products average selling price driven by rising raw materials input costs and growing market demand. Volumes rose year-over-year, in part due to a surge in demand in the third quarter as a result of steel products supply disruptions across Europe caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On a sequential basis, fourth quarter volumes declined compared to the third quarter as a result of market stabilization attributed to customers utilizing inventory built up during the fluctuating price environments from the current year. Volumes in 2022 also benefited from a full year of increased capacity from our third rolling line in Poland, which was commissioned in late 2021 and contributed an incremental $321.7 million to 2022 net sales. Also contributing to the increase in net sales in 2022 compared to 2021 were $27.3 million of net sales from the acquired Tensar operations. Net sales in 2022 were impacted by an unfavorable foreign currency translation adjustment of $193.6 million primarily due to the increase in the average value of the U.S. dollar relative to the Polish zloty in 2022, compared to favorable foreign currency translation adjustments of $36.9 million during 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA in 2022 increased $197.8 million, or 133%, compared to 2021, primarily driven by a $178 per ton, or 70%, expansion in steel products metal margin. Increased demand for steel products caused the increase in average selling price of steel products described above to outpace the rising costs of ferrous scrap utilized per ton. Overall, the benefit from average
selling price increases throughout 2022 exceeded the impact of the 40% increase in Europe segment cost of goods sold year-over-year, which was driven by higher volumes and impacts of inflation on energy and alloys. Our Europe segment continues to face an environment of rising energy costs, mitigated in part by our electricity commodity derivative and natural gas commitments. Our electricity commodity derivative resulted in a $21.7 million realized gain in 2022, recorded as a reduction to cost of goods sold, compared to a $2.4 million realized gain in 2021. See Note 11, Derivatives, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further information on the electricity commodity derivative. Adjusted EBITDA in 2022 was impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate impacts of $39.9 million, compared to favorable foreign currency translation adjustments of $5.1 million during 2021.
Corporate and Other
Corporate and Other adjusted EBITDA loss in 2022 increased by $13.5 million compared to 2021. The year-over-year increase was driven in part by $8.7 million of acquisition-related costs in 2022, with no such costs in 2021, coupled with a $9.4 million year-over-year increase in labor-related expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash flows from operating activities are our principal sources of liquidity and result primarily from sales of raw materials, steel products, downstream products and related materials and services, as described in Part I, Item 1, Business, of this Annual Report. Historically, our North America operations have generated the majority of our cash. At August 31, 2022, cash and cash equivalents of $36.3 million were held by our non-U.S. subsidiaries. We use futures or forward contracts to mitigate the risks from fluctuations in metal commodity prices, foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates and natural gas, electricity and other energy commodity prices. See Note 11, Derivatives, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further information.
We have a diverse and generally stable customer base, and regularly maintain a substantial amount of accounts receivable. We actively monitor our accounts receivable and, based on market conditions and customers' financial condition, record allowances when we believe accounts are uncollectible. We use credit insurance internationally to mitigate the risk of customer insolvency. We estimate that the amount of credit-insured receivables (and those covered by export letters of credit) was approximately 16% of total receivables at August 31, 2022.
The table below reflects our sources, facilities and availability of liquidity as of August 31, 2022. See Note 9, Credit Arrangements, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
__________________________________
(1) We believe we have access to additional financing and refinancing, if needed, although we can make no assurances as to the form or terms of such financing.
We continually review our capital resources to determine whether we can meet our short and long-term goals. We anticipate our current cash balances, cash flows from operations and available sources of liquidity will be sufficient to maintain operations, make necessary capital expenditures, repay current maturities of long-term debt, including our $330.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.875% Senior Notes due in May 2023, pay dividends and opportunistically repurchase shares for at least the next twelve months. Additionally, we expect our long-term liquidity position will be sufficient to meet our long-term liquidity needs with cash flows from operations and financing arrangements. However, in the event of changes in business conditions or other developments, including a sustained market deterioration, unanticipated regulatory developments, significant acquisitions, competitive pressures, or to the extent our liquidity needs prove to be greater than expected or cash generated from operations is less than anticipated, we may need additional liquidity. To the extent we elect to finance our long-term liquidity needs, we believe that the potential financing capital available to us in the future is sufficient.
We estimate that our 2023 capital spending will range from $450 million to $500 million. We regularly assess our capital spending based on current and expected results and the amount is subject to change.
As of August 31, 2022 and 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that may have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
2022 Compared to 2021
Operating Activities
Net cash flows from operating activities were $700.3 million and $228.5 million in 2022 and 2021, respectively. This $471.8 million increase in net cash flows from operating activities was primarily driven by an increase in net earnings of $804.4 million, or $537.8 million after excluding the $266.6 million increase in net gain on disposal of assets. See Note 3, Changes in Business, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on the sale of the Rancho Cucamonga facilities that resulted in the majority of the increase in net gain on disposal of assets year-over-year. Also contributing to the increase in net cash flows from operating activities was a $126.0 million year-over-year increase in deferred income taxes, which represents a non-cash charge to the income statement. See Note 13, Income Tax, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on the change in deferred taxes. These increases in net cash flows from operating activities were partially offset by a $208.1 million year-over-year net increase in cash used by operating assets and liabilities. Accounts payable increased significantly year-over-year in 2021 compared to a slight decrease in 2022, primarily due to the rising cost of scrap at the end of 2021, which stabilized near the end of 2022. This contributed to a year-over-year $190.9 million reduction in cash from accounts payable, accrued expenses and other payables, offset, in part, by a corresponding $61.1 million reduction in cash used to fund inventory purchases. Increased sales year-over-year also contributed to a net increase of $29.6 million of cash used by accounts receivable. The remaining $48.8 million increase in cash used by other operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to increased prices of production inputs. Operating working capital days, which represents the number of days to convert accounts receivable and inventory, less accounts payable, into net sales, increased eight days year-over-year.
Investing Activities
Net cash flows used by investing activities were $684.7 million and $162.1 million in 2022 and 2021, respectively, an increase of $522.6 million. Such increase was primarily impacted by the acquisition of Tensar for a cash purchase price of approximately $550 million, net of cash acquired, as well as increased capital expenditures of $265.8 million, mostly from the construction of our third micro mill. See Note 2, Acquisition, in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information about the acquisition. These increases in cash outflows were offset, in part, by gross proceeds of $313.0 million from the sale of the Rancho Cucamonga facilities.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows from financing activities were $165.3 million in 2022, compared to net cash flows used by financing activities of $109.4 million in 2021. The $274.7 million increase in net cash flows from financing activities was a result of many actions, including net proceeds from long-term debt of $414.8 million during 2022, compared to net long-term debt repayments of $59.2 million during 2021. Net borrowings under our accounts receivable facilities were $6.3 million during 2022 compared to $26.7 million during 2021, a decrease of $20.4 million. See Note 9, Credit Arrangements in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information regarding our credit arrangements and 2022 debt proceeds and repayments. Partially offsetting these cash flows from financing activities was $161.9 million of treasury stock repurchased under the share repurchase program in 2022, with no such activity in 2021, $10.0 million in increased dividend payments and a $6.3 million increase attributable to tax withholdings
related to share settlements, net of purchase plans. See Note 16, Capital Stock in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on the share repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our material cash commitments from known contractual and other obligations primarily consist of obligations for long-term debt and related interest, leases for properties and equipment and purchase obligations as part of normal operations. See Note 9, Credit Arrangements, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information regarding scheduled maturities of our long-term debt. See Note 8, Leases, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information on leases. Interest payable on our long-term debt was $64.7 million due in the twelve months following August 31, 2022 and $433.7 million due thereafter. Additionally, the Company has a U.S. federal repatriation tax obligation resulting from the repatriation tax provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ("TCJA"), of which $2.2 million was due in the twelve months following August 31, 2022 and $16.6 million due thereafter.
As of August 31, 2022, our undiscounted purchase obligations were approximately $802.0 million due in the next twelve months and $138.9 million due thereafter under purchase orders and "take or pay" arrangements. These purchase obligations include all enforceable, legally binding agreements to purchase goods or services that specify all significant terms, regardless of the duration of the agreement, and exclude agreements with variable terms for which we are unable to estimate the minimum amounts. The "take or pay" arrangements are multi-year commitments with minimum annual purchase requirements and are entered into primarily for purchases of commodities used in operations such as electrodes and natural gas.
Of the purchase obligations due within the twelve months following August 31, 2022, approximately 29% were for the construction of our third micro mill, 22% were for consumable production inputs, such as alloys, 20% were for commodities and 10% were for capital expenditures on operating machinery and equipment. Of the purchase obligations due thereafter, 77% are for commodities and 7% are for the construction of our third micro mill. The remainder of the purchase obligations are for goods and services in the normal course of business.
We provide certain eligible employees benefits pursuant to our nonqualified Benefit Restoration Plan ("BRP") equal to amounts that would have been available under our tax qualified plans under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended ("ERISA"), but for limitations of ERISA, tax laws and regulations. We did not include estimated payments related to the BRP in the above description of contractual obligations and commitments. Refer to Note 15, Employees' Retirement Plans, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on the BRP.
Other Commercial Commitments
We maintain stand-by letters of credit to provide support for certain transactions that governmental agencies, our insurance providers and suppliers require. At August 31, 2022, we had committed $21.6 million under these arrangements, of which $1.4 million reduced availability under the Revolver (as defined in Note 9, Credit Arrangements, in Item 8 of this Annual Report).
CONTINGENCIES
In the ordinary course of conducting our business, we become involved in litigation, administrative proceedings and governmental investigations, including environmental matters. We may incur settlements, fines, penalties or judgments because of some of these matters. Liabilities and costs associated with litigation-related loss contingencies require estimates and judgments based on our knowledge of the facts and circumstances surrounding each matter and the advice of our legal counsel. We record liabilities for litigation-related losses when a loss is probable and we can reasonably estimate the amount of the loss. We evaluate the measurement of recorded liabilities each reporting period based on the current facts and circumstances specific to each matter. The ultimate losses incurred upon final resolution of litigation-related loss contingencies may differ materially from the estimated liability recorded at a particular balance sheet date. Changes in estimates are recorded in earnings in the period in which such changes occur. We do not believe that any currently pending legal proceedings to which we are a party will have a material adverse effect, individually or in the aggregate, on our results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. See Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information.
Environmental and Other Matters
The information set forth in Note 18, Commitments and Contingencies, in Item 8 of this Annual Report is hereby incorporated by reference.
General
We are subject to federal, state and local pollution control laws and regulations in all locations where we have operating facilities. We anticipate that compliance with these laws and regulations will involve continuing capital expenditures and operating costs.
Metals recycling was our original business, and it has been one of our core businesses for over a century. In the present era of conservation of natural resources and ecological concerns, we are committed to sound ecological and business conduct. Certain governmental regulations regarding environmental concerns, however well-intentioned, may expose us and our industry to potentially significant risks. We believe that recycled materials are commodities that are diverted by recyclers, such as us, from the solid waste streams because of their inherent value. They are identified, purchased, sorted, processed and sold in accordance with carefully established industry specifications.
We incurred environmental expenses of approximately $44.2 million, $49.8 million and $46.6 million for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The expenses included the cost of disposal, environmental personnel at various divisions, permit and license fees, accruals and payments for studies, tests, assessments, remediation, consultant fees, baghouse dust removal and various other expenses. In addition, during 2022, we spent approximately $6.9 million in capital expenditures related to costs directly associated with environmental compliance. Our accrued environmental liabilities were $5.3 million and $7.1 million as of August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, of which $2.0 million and $2.3 million, respectively, were classified as other noncurrent liabilities.
Solid and Hazardous Waste
We generate wastes, including hazardous wastes, that are subject to the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and comparable state and local statutes where we operate. These statutes, regulations and laws may limit our disposal options with respect to certain wastes.
We currently own or lease, and in the past we have owned or leased, properties that have been used in our operations. Although we have used operating and disposal practices that were industry standard at the time, wastes may have been disposed of or released on or under the properties or on or under locations where such wastes have been taken for disposal in a manner that is now understood to pose a contamination threat. We are currently involved in the investigation and remediation of several such properties, and we have been named as a PRP at a number of contaminated sites, none of which involve real estate we ever owned or upon which we have ever conducted operations.
State and federal laws applicable to wastes and contaminated properties have gradually become more strict over time. There is no guarantee that the EPA or individual states will not adopt more stringent requirements for the handling of, or make changes to the exemptions upon which we rely for, the wastes that we generate. Similarly, some materials which are not currently classified as waste may be deemed solid or hazardous waste in the future. Under new laws, we could be required to remediate properties impacted by previously disposed wastes. Any such change could result in an increase in our costs to manage and dispose of waste which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of our operations and financial condition.
Superfund
The EPA, or an equivalent state agency, has notified us that we are considered a PRP at several sites, none of which involve real estate we ever owned or upon which we have ever conducted operations. We may be obligated under CERCLA, or similar state statutes, to conduct remedial investigation, feasibility studies, remediation and/or removal of alleged releases of hazardous substances or to reimburse the EPA or third parties for such activities and pay costs for associated damages to natural resources. We are involved in litigation or administrative proceedings with regard to several of these sites in which we are contesting, or at the appropriate time may contest, our liability. In addition, we have received information requests with regard to other sites which may be under consideration by the EPA as potential CERCLA sites. Because of various factors, including the ambiguity of the regulations, the difficulty of identifying the responsible parties for any particular site, the complexity of determining the relative liability among them, the uncertainty as to the most desirable remediation techniques and the amount of damages and cleanup costs, and the extended time periods over which such costs may be incurred, we cannot reasonably estimate our ultimate costs of compliance with CERCLA. Based on currently available information, which is in many cases preliminary and incomplete, we had immaterial amounts accrued as of both August 31, 2022 and 2021, in connection with CERCLA sites. We have accrued for these liabilities based upon our best estimates. The amounts paid and the expenses incurred on these sites for 2022, 2021 and 2020 were not material. Historically, the amounts that we have ultimately paid for such remediation activities have not been material.
Management believes that adequate provisions have been made in the Company's consolidated financial statements for the potential impact of these contingencies, and that the outcomes of the suits and proceedings described above, and other miscellaneous litigation and proceedings now pending, will not have a material adverse effect on the business, results of operations or financial condition of the Company.
Clean Water Regulation
The Clean Water Act ("CWA") imposes restrictions and strict controls regarding the discharge of wastes into waters of the U.S., a term broadly defined, or into publicly owned treatment works. These controls have become more stringent over time, and it is probable that additional restrictions will be imposed in the future. Permits must generally be obtained to discharge pollutants into federal waters or into publicly owned treatment works and comparable permits may be required at the state level. The CWA and many state statutes provide for civil, criminal and administrative penalties for unauthorized discharges of pollutants. In addition, the EPA's regulations and comparable state statutes may require us to obtain permits to discharge storm water runoff. In the event of an unauthorized discharge or non-compliance with permit requirements, we may be liable for penalties, costs and injunctive relief.
Clean Air Act
Our operations are subject to regulations at the federal, state and local level for the control of emissions from sources of air pollution. New and modified sources of air pollutants are often required to obtain permits prior to commencing construction, modification or operations. Major sources of air pollutants are subject to more stringent requirements, including the potential need for additional permits and to increase scrutiny in the context of enforcement. The EPA has been implementing its stationary emission control program through expanded enforcement of the New Source Review Program. Under this program, new or modified sources may be required to construct emission sources using what is referred to as the Best Available Control Technology, or in any areas that are not meeting NAAQS, using methods that satisfy requirements for the Lowest Achievable Emission Rate. Additionally, the EPA has implemented, and is continuing to implement, new, more stringent standards for NAAQS, including fine particulate matter. Compliance with new standards could require additional expenditures.
Climate Change
The potential impacts of climate change on the Company’s business and results of operations and potential future climate change regulations in the jurisdictions in which the Company operates are highly uncertain. See the risk factors entitled “Increased regulation associated with climate change could impose significant additional costs on both our steelmaking and metals recycling operations” and "Physical impacts of climate change could have a material adverse effect on our costs and operations" in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, of this Annual Report.
DIVIDENDS
We paid quarterly dividends in 2022 at the rate of $0.14 per share of CMC common stock, compared to quarterly dividends paid in 2021 at the rate of $0.12 per share of CMC common stock. On October 11, 2022, the Board of Directors declared CMC's 232nd quarterly cash dividend. The dividend was declared at the rate of $0.16 per share of CMC common stock and is payable on November 10, 2022 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on October 27, 2022.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preceding discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent liabilities. We evaluate the appropriateness of these estimates and assumptions, including those related to revenue recognition, income taxes, inventory cost, acquisitions, goodwill and other intangible assets, long-lived assets, derivative instruments and contingencies, on an ongoing basis. Estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Accordingly, actual results in future periods could differ materially from these estimates. Judgments and estimates related to critical accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements include the following.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from contracts where the Company provides fabricated rebar and installation services is recognized over time using an input method based on costs incurred compared to total estimated costs. Revenue from contracts where the Company does not provide installation services is recognized over time using an output method based on tons shipped compared to total estimated tons. Significant judgment is required to evaluate total estimated costs used in the input method and total estimated tons in the output method. If total estimated costs on any contract are greater than the net contract revenues, the Company recognizes the entire estimated loss in the period the loss becomes known. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimates related to net contract revenues, costs to complete or total planned quantity is recorded in the period in which such revisions are identified. The Company does not exercise significant judgment in determining the transaction price. See Note 5, Revenue Recognition, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for further details.
Income Taxes
We periodically assess the likelihood of realizing our deferred tax assets and maintain a valuation allowance to reduce certain deferred tax assets to amounts that we believe are more likely than not to be realized. We base our judgment of the recoverability of our deferred tax assets primarily on historical earnings, our estimate of current and expected future earnings, prudent and feasible tax planning strategies and current and future ownership changes. At August 31, 2022 and 2021, we had a valuation allowance of $268.5 million and $278.1 million, respectively, against our deferred tax assets. Of these amounts, $8.4 million and $7.7 million at August 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, relate to net operating loss and credit carryforwards in certain state jurisdictions that are subject to estimation. The remaining valuation allowance primarily relates to net operating loss carryforwards in certain foreign jurisdictions, which the Company does not expect to realize.
Inventory Cost
We state inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value, which is defined as estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation. Adjustments to inventory may be due to changes in price levels, obsolescence, damage, physical deterioration and other causes. Any adjustments required to reduce the carrying value of inventory to net realizable value are recorded as a charge to cost of goods sold. Based on our review of inventories, obsolete or slow-moving inventories are not significant as of August 31, 2022 and current market conditions are favorable in our end-use markets.
Acquisitions
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. The fair value is estimated by the Company using valuation techniques and Level 3 inputs, including expected future cash flows and discount rates. The excess of purchase price over the fair value amounts assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, is recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. See Note 2, Acquisition, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information about the Tensar acquisition.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually as of the first day of the Company’s fourth quarter, or more frequently whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level, which represents an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. When assessing the recoverability of goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets, the Company may first assess qualitative factors in determining whether it is more likely than not that the respective fair value is less than its carrying amount. The qualitative evaluation is an assessment of multiple factors, including the current operating environment, financial performance and market considerations. The Company may elect to bypass this qualitative assessment for some or all of its reporting units or other indefinite lived intangible assets and perform a quantitative test, based on management's judgment. If the Company chooses to bypass the qualitative assessment, it performs a quantitative test by comparing the fair value of the reporting units or indefinite lived intangible assets to their respective carrying amounts and records an impairment charge if the carrying amount exceeds the fair value; however, the loss recognized, if any, will not exceed the total amount of the intangible asset or the goodwill allocated to a reporting unit.
When assessing the recoverability of goodwill using a quantitative approach we use an income and a market approach to calculate the fair value of the reporting unit. To calculate the fair value of a reporting unit using the income approach,
management uses a discounted cash flow model, which includes a number of significant assumptions and estimates regarding future cash flows such as discount rates, volumes, prices, capital expenditures and the impact of current market conditions. The market approach estimates fair value based on market multiples of earnings derived from comparable publicly traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the reporting unit. The estimates used during a quantitative approach to test goodwill could be materially impacted by adverse changes in market conditions.
For 2022 and 2021, the annual goodwill impairment analyses did not result in impairment charges. As of August 31, 2022, the Company had goodwill of $249.0 million, of which $183.7 million resulted from the Tensar acquisition and $56.9 million relates to a reporting unit within the North America operating segment. In 2022, other than the reporting unit with $56.9 million of goodwill within the North America operating segment, management tested all reporting units using a qualitative approach and determined it was more likely than not that their fair values exceeded the respective carrying values. The reporting unit with $56.9 million of goodwill in the North America operating segment was tested using a quantitative approach and the resulting fair value exceeded its carrying value by 18%, which the Company believes is substantially in excess of carrying value. An increase or decrease of 1% to the discount rate or terminal growth rate would not result in an impairment charge for this reporting unit.
As of August 31, 2022, the Company had indefinite lived intangible assets of $56.0 million, all of which resulted from the Tensar acquisition. In 2022, the indefinite lived intangible assets were tested for impairment using a qualitative approach. Based on the Company’s annual impairment testing of the indefinite lived intangible assets, we concluded it is more likely than not that their fair values exceeded the respective carrying values. Based on the results of impairment tests performed in 2022, management does not believe that it is reasonably likely that our reporting units or indefinite lived intangible assets will fail their respective impairment tests in the near term. See Note 7, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of property, plant and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets whenever a change in circumstances indicates that the net carrying value may not be recoverable from the undiscounted future cash flows from operations. Events or circumstances that could trigger an impairment review of a long-lived asset or asset group include, but are not limited to: (i) a significant decrease in the market price of the asset, (ii) a significant adverse change in the extent or manner that the asset is used or in its physical condition, (iii) a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate that could affect the value of the asset, (iv) an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of original expectation for the acquisition or construction of the asset, (v) a current period operating or cash flow loss combined with a history of operating or cash flow losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset and (vi) a more-likely-than-not expectation that the asset will be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. If an impairment exists, the net carrying values are reduced to fair values. Our operations are capital intensive. The estimates of undiscounted future cash flows used during an impairment review of a long-lived asset or asset group require judgments and assumptions of future cash flows that are expected to arise as a direct result of the use and eventual disposition of the asset or asset group. If these assets were for sale, our estimates of their values could be significantly different because of market conditions, specific transaction terms and a buyer's perspective on future cash flows. During 2022, there were no events or circumstances that triggered an impairment review.
Derivative Financial Instruments
Our global operations and product lines expose us to risks from fluctuations in metal commodity prices, foreign currency exchange rates, interest rates and natural gas, electricity and other energy prices. To limit the impact of these exposures, we enter into derivative instruments. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes. We evaluate the fair value of our derivative financial instruments using an established fair value hierarchy as stated in Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Item 8 of this Annual Report. One derivative instrument is a commodity derivative for which the fair value estimate is based on an internally developed discounted cash flow model primarily utilizing Level 3 unobservable inputs for which there is little or no market data. The company determined the Level 3 fair value inputs as provided for under ASC 820, consisting of information obtained from relevant published indexes and external sources along with management’s own assumptions. Fluctuations in the information used to forecast future energy rates may cause volatility in the fair value estimate and in the unrealized gains and losses in other comprehensive income. See Note 12, Fair Value, in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information on the Level 3 commodity derivative.
Contingencies
In the ordinary course of conducting our business, we become involved in litigation, administrative proceedings and governmental investigations, including environmental matters. We may incur settlements, fines, penalties or judgments in connection with some of these matters. While we are unable to estimate the ultimate dollar amount of exposure or loss in connection with these matters, we make accruals when a loss is probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. The amounts we accrue could vary substantially from amounts we pay due to several factors including the following: evolving remediation technology, changing regulations, possible third-party contributions, the inherent uncertainties of the estimation process and the uncertainties involved in litigation. We believe that we have adequately provided for these contingencies in our consolidated financial statements. We also believe that the outcomes will not materially affect our results of operations, our financial position or our cash flows.
Other Accounting Policies and New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report contains "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the federal securities laws with respect to general economic conditions, key macro-economic drivers that impact our business, the impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the effects of ongoing trade actions, the effects of continued pressure on the liquidity of our customers, potential synergies and organic growth provided by acquisitions and strategic investments, demand for our products, metal margins, the effect of COVID-19 and related governmental and economic responses thereto, the ability to operate our steel mills at full capacity, future availability and cost of supplies of raw materials and energy for our operations, share repurchases, legal proceedings, construction activity, international trade, capital expenditures, tax credits, our liquidity and our ability to satisfy future liquidity requirements, estimated contractual obligations, the expected capabilities and benefits of new facilities, the timeline for execution of our growth plan, and our expectations or beliefs concerning future events. The statements in this report that are not historical statements, are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements can generally be identified by phrases such as we or our management "expects," "anticipates," "believes," "estimates," "future," "intends," "may," "plans to," "ought," "could," "will," "should," "likely," "appears," "projects," "forecasts," "outlook" or other similar words or phrases, as well as by discussions of strategy, plans, or intentions.
Our forward-looking statements are based on management's expectations and beliefs as of the time this Annual Report is filed with the SEC or, with respect to any document incorporated by reference, as of the time such document was prepared. Although we believe that our expectations are reasonable, we can give no assurance that these expectations will prove to have been correct, and actual results may vary materially. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update, amend or clarify any forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events, new information or circumstances or any other changes. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations include those described in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors of this Annual Report as well as the following:
•changes in economic conditions which affect demand for our products or construction activity generally, and the impact of such changes on the highly cyclical steel industry;
•rapid and significant changes in the price of metals, potentially impairing our inventory values due to declines in commodity prices or reducing the profitability of our downstream contracts due to rising commodity pricing;
•impacts from COVID-19 on the economy, demand for our products, global supply chain and on our operations, including the responses of governmental authorities to contain COVID-19 and the impact of various COVID-19 vaccines;
•excess capacity in our industry, particularly in China, and product availability from competing steel mills and other steel suppliers including import quantities and pricing;
•the impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine on the global economy, energy supplies and raw materials, which is uncertain, but may prove to negatively impact our business and operations;
•increased attention to environmental, social and governance ("ESG") matters, including any targets or other ESG or environmental justice initiatives;
•compliance with and changes in existing and future laws, regulations and other legal requirements and judicial decisions that govern our business, including increased environmental regulations associated with climate change and greenhouse gas emissions;
•involvement in various environmental matters that may result in fines, penalties or judgments;
•evolving remediation technology, changing regulations, possible third-party contributions, the inherent uncertainties of the estimation process and other factors that may impact amounts accrued for environmental liabilities;
•potential limitations in our or our customers' abilities to access credit and non-compliance of their contractual obligations, including payment obligations;
•activity in repurchasing shares of our common stock under our repurchase program;
•financial covenants and restrictions on the operation of our business contained in agreements governing our debt;
•our ability to successfully identify, consummate and integrate acquisitions and realize any or all of the anticipated synergies or other benefits of acquisitions;
•the effects that acquisitions may have on our financial leverage;
•risks associated with acquisitions generally, such as the inability to obtain, or delays in obtaining, required approvals under applicable antitrust legislation and other regulatory and third party consents and approvals;
•operating and startup risks, as well as market risks associated with the commissioning of new projects could prevent us from realizing anticipated benefits and could result in a loss of all or a substantial part of our investments;
•lower than expected future levels of revenues and higher than expected future costs;
•failure or inability to implement growth strategies in a timely manner;
•impact of goodwill or other indefinite lived intangible asset impairment charges;
•impact of long-lived asset impairment charges;
•currency fluctuations;
•global factors, such as trade measures, military conflicts and political uncertainties, including changes to current trade regulations, such as Section 232 trade tariffs and quotas, tax legislation and other regulations which might adversely impact our business;
•availability and pricing of electricity, electrodes and natural gas for mill operations;
•ability to hire and retain key executives and other employees;
•competition from other materials or from competitors that have a lower cost structure or access to greater financial resources;
•information technology interruptions and breaches in security;
•ability to make necessary capital expenditures;
•availability and pricing of raw materials and other items over which we exert little influence, including scrap metal, energy and insurance;
•unexpected equipment failures;
•losses or limited potential gains due to hedging transactions;
•litigation claims and settlements, court decisions, regulatory rulings and legal compliance risks;
•risk of injury or death to employees, customers or other visitors to our operations; and
•civil unrest, protests and riots.
You should refer to the "Risk Factors" disclosed in our periodic and current reports filed with the SEC for information regarding additional risks which would cause actual results to be significantly different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other important factors that could cause actual results, performance or our achievements, or industry results, to differ materially from historical results, any future results, or performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Accordingly, readers of this Annual Report are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements.