Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Capitalworks Emerging Markets Acquisition Corp,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Capitalworks Emerging Markets Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our or our management team’s expectations, hopes, beliefs, intentions or strategies regarding the future. In addition, any statements that refer to projections, forecasts or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intends,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements, but the absence of these words does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking. Factors that might cause or contribute to such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those set forth in the Risk Factors section of this Annual Report. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Initial Business Combination”). Our sponsor is CEMAC Sponsor LP, a Cayman Islands exempted limited partnership (the “Sponsor”).
The registration statement for our initial public offering (the “IPO” or the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on November 30, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On December 3, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 units (the “Units”). The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. The underwriters had a 45-day option from the Effective Date to purchase up to an additional 3,000,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any. On December 3, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option (the “Over-Allotment”) and purchased an additional 3,000,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) generating additional gross proceeds of $30,000,000. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class A Ordinary Shares” or “Public Shares”) and one-half of one redeemable warrant, with each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one Class A Ordinary Share for $11.50 per share (the “Public Warrants”).
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of an aggregate of 10,500,000 warrants (the “IPO Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $10,500,000. Also, in connection with the exercise of the Over-Allotment, the Sponsor purchased an additional 1,200,000 warrants (the “Over-Allotment Private Placement Warrants” and together with the IPO Private Placement Warrants, the “Private Placement Warrants” and the Private Placement Warrants together with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”) at a purchase price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $1,200,000.
Following the closing of the IPO on December 3, 2021, $234,600,000 ($10.20 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO (including the Over-Allotment Units) and the sale of the IPO Private Placement Warrants was deposited into a trust account (the “Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, which may be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account.
As of March 31, 2022, there was $234,616,409 in securities held in the Trust Account, which includes interest income of $16,409. As of March 31, 2022, $969,261 of cash was held outside the Trust Account, available for working capital needs. We are a Cayman Islands exempted company and are presently not subject to income taxes or income tax filing requirements in the Cayman Islands or the United States.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO (including the Over-Allotment) and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be generally applied toward consummating an Initial Business Combination (less deferred underwriting commissions). The Company’s Initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the value of the Trust Account (excluding the amount of any deferred underwriting discount held in trust and taxes payable on the income earned on the Trust Account). However, the Company will only complete an Initial Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the issued and outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to successfully effect an Initial Business Combination.
We will have until March 3, 2023 to consummate our Initial Business Combination, with an automatic three-month extension if we have signed a definitive agreement with respect to our Initial Business Combination within such 15-month period. If we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate our Initial Business Combination within 15 months and are not entitled to an automatic extension, we may, by resolution of our board if requested by the Sponsor, extend the period of time to consummate our Initial Business Combination by an additional three months (for a total of up to 18 months to complete our Initial Business Combination), subject to the Sponsor depositing additional funds into the Trust Account as set out below. In connection with an automatic or paid extension as described above, public shareholders will not be offered the opportunity to vote on or redeem their shares. Pursuant to the terms of our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association and the trust agreement entered into between us and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company on November 30, 2021, in order to extend the time available for us to consummate our Initial Business Combination in connection with a paid extension, the Sponsor or its affiliates or designees, upon ten days’ advance notice prior to the applicable deadline, must deposit into the Trust Account $2,300,000 ($0.10 per share in either case), on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline. Any such payments would be made in the form of a loan. Any such loans will be non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation
of our Initial Business Combination. If we complete our Initial Business Combination, we would, at the option of the Sponsor, repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us or convert a portion or all of the total loan amount into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, which warrants will be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. If we do not complete our Initial Business Combination, we would not repay such loans. Furthermore, the letter agreement with our initial shareholders contains a provision pursuant to which the Sponsor has agreed to waive its right to be repaid for such loans out of the funds held in the Trust Account in the event that we do not complete our Initial Business Combination. The Sponsor and its affiliates or designees are not obligated to fund the Trust Account to extend the time for us to complete our Initial Business Combination. However, if we have not completed our Initial Business Combination within the applicable time period, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay liquidation expenses), divided by the number of then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Going Concern
As of March 31, 2022, we had approximately $969,000 in cash and working capital of $1.3 million.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide Working Capital Loans to us. As of March 31, 2022, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, it is possible that the $969,261 in cash held outside the Trust Account on March 31, 2022 might not be sufficient to allow the Company to operate for at least 12 months from the date of this Annual Report, assuming that an Initial Business Combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of its Initial Business Combination, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Initial Business Combination.
The Company can raise additional capital through Working Capital Loans from the Sponsor, certain of the Company’s officers and directors, or through loans from third parties. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of its business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of these financial statements.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of this Annual Report. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
As of March 31, 2022, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from April 20, 2021 (inception) through March 31, 2022 relates to our formation and the IPO and, subsequent to the closing of the IPO, identifying a target company for an Initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the IPO. We incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from April 20, 2021 (inception) to March 31, 2022, we had net income of $19,258,401, which consisted primarily of formation and operating costs amounting to $334,046, administrative fees of $80,000 and transaction costs allocable to derivative liabilities amounting to $799,766 offset by interest income earned on cash and marketable securities held in Trust Account amounting to $16,409, and change in fair value of the derivative warrant liability and the forward purchase agreement liability of $20,530,500 and $(74,696), respectively.
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
As of March 31, 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
General and Administrative Services
Commencing on the date the Units were first listed on Nasdaq, the Company has agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $20,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support for up to 15 months (or up to 18 months if the period of time to consummate a business combination is extended). Upon completion of the Initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. During the period ended March 31, 2022, the Company incurred and paid $80,000 of expenses.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans or Extension Loan (and any shares of ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans or Extension Loan and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A Ordinary Shares). The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to completion of a Business Combination and rights to require the Company to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. However, the registration rights agreement provides that the Company will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until the securities covered thereby are released from their lock-up restrictions. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of IPO to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On December 3, 2021, the underwriters purchased an additional 3,000,000 Units pursuant to the exercise of the over-allotment option. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating additional gross proceeds to the Company of $30,000,000.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $4,600,000, upon the closing of the IPO. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,050,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the Class A Ordinary Share sold as part of the Units in the IPO contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Initial Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require ordinary shares subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity.
The Class A Ordinary Shares are subject to SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99. If it is probable that the equity instrument will become redeemable, the Company has the option to either accrete changes in the redemption value over the period from the date of issuance (or from the date that it becomes probable that the instrument will become redeemable, if later) to the earliest redemption date of the instrument or to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying amount of the instrument to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO and the Over-Allotment, the Company recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. The remeasurement associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from net loss per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value. Net income per share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing interest income earned and realized gains or losses on the Trust Account for the period from April 20, 2021 (inception) through March 31, 2022, by the weighted average number of Class A redeemable ordinary shares outstanding since original issuance. The Company has not considered the effect of the Public Warrants or the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 23,200,000 of the Company’s Class A Ordinary Shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their exercise is contingent upon future events. Net income per share, basic and diluted, for Class A and Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net income, adjusted for income or loss attributable to Class A redeemable ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class A and Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Class A and Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares includes the Founder Shares as these shares do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income or losses of the Trust Account. At March 31, 2022, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of our company. As a result, diluted income per share is the same as basic income per share for the period presented.
Warrants
The Company accounts for the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the IPO and the Private Placement in accordance with the guidance contained in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” whereby under that provision, the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrant instrument as a liability at fair value and adjust the instrument to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value at issuance was calculated using a Monte Carlo simulation model to value the Public Warrants and a modified Black-Scholes model to value the Private Placement Warrants. The valuation models utilize inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period. Upon issuance of the Private Warrants, the Company recorded a charge of $1,532,700 for the excess fair value of private warrant liabilities over the proceeds received.
Forward Purchase Agreement
The Company entered into a Forward Purchase Agreement (a “Forward Purchase Agreement”) with Camber Base, LLC, (“Camber”) which provides for the purchase of up to $20,000,000 of units, with each unit consisting of one Class A Ordinary Share (the “Forward Purchase Shares”) and one-half of one redeemable warrant (the “Forward Purchase Warrants”) to purchase one Class A Ordinary Share, at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, for a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, in a private placement to occur in connection with the closing of a Business Combination.
The Forward Purchase Warrants will have the same terms as the Public Warrants, and the Forward Purchase Shares will be identical to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold in the IPO, except the Forward Purchase Shares will be subject to transfer restrictions and certain registration rights.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020 06, “Debt -Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470 20) and Derivatives and Hedging --Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815 40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020 06”)”, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current US GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 upon inception. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.