ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report, including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We operate a global network of professionally run content houses, each of which has its own brand, influencer cohort and production capabilities. Our Company offers management, production and deal-making services to our handpicked influencers, a management division for individual influencer clients, and an investment arm for joint ventures and acquisitions for companies in the social media influencer space. Our management team consists of successful entrepreneurs with financial, legal, marketing, and digital content creation expertise.
Through our subsidiary, West of Hudson Group, Inc. (“WOHG”), we currently generate revenues primarily from talent management of social media influencers and for paid promotion by companies looking to utilize such social media influencers to promote their products or services. We solicit companies for potential marketing collaborations and cultivated content creation, work with the influencers and the marketing entity to negotiate and formalize a brand deal and then execute the deal and receive a certain percentage from the deal. In addition to the in-house brand deals, we generate income by providing talent management and brand partnership deals to influencers.
Recent Developments
FinTekk/Rick Ware Racing Joint Services Agreement
On July 12, 2021, we entered into a Joint Services Agreement (the “Joint Services Agreement”) with FinTekk AP, LLC (“FinTekk”), and Rick Ware Racing, LLC (“RWR”). FinTekk and RWR are professional motorsports racing and marketing companies providing services focused specifically in the NASCAR Cup Series, NASCAR Xfinity Series, the IndyCar Racing Series, and the IMSA Sports Car Championship Series. Pursuant to the Joint Services Agreement, FinTekk and RWR agreed to provide certain services to the Company, and the Company agreed to provide certain services to RWR.
In general, FinTekk agreed to provide the Company with marketing and branding consulting services utilizing the RWR racing platform, and to promote the Company as the primary brand for the NASCAR race events in which RWR participates in conjunction with the RWR platform.
RWR agreed to provide racing car drivers as well as NASCAR and development team drivers and athletes currently competing in motor racing; and RWR agreed to engage and integrate its social media team with the Company team members to collaborate, promote and market the Company to the racing fan bases of NASCAR and IndyCar through the use of each other’s social and digital media platforms.
The Company agreed to engage and integrate its social media/influencer member network and production teams with RWR team members to collaborate, promote and market RWR racing efforts and racing and driver story lines through various media platforms operated or familiar to the Company.
The respective services of the parties under the Joint Services Agreement applied with respect to 11 races that occurred from July 18, 2021 to September 26, 2021 (the “Events”); and the compensation under the Agreement for the respective services was payable with respect to each of the Events, as follows:
(i) In return for the provision by FinTekk of its services, for each Event the Company agreed to issue FinTekk 51,146 shares of the Company’s common stock.
(ii) In return for the provision by RWR of its services, for each Event the Company agreed to pay RWR $113,636.
(iii) In return for the provision by the Company of its services, for each Event RWR agreed to pay the Company $90,909.
Conversion of Ben-Yohanan Note
On February 2, 2021, the Company and Amir Ben-Yohanan, its Chief Executive Officer, entered into a promissory note in the total principal amount of $2,400,000 (the “Note”). The Note bears simple interest at a rate of 8% per annum, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest of the Note at any time without penalty.
Pursuant to the terms of the Note, $1,000,000 of the principal amount and accrued interest of the Note would automatically be converted into a number of restricted (non-Regulation A) shares of the Company common stock equal to (i) $1,000,000 divided by (ii) the initial public offering price per share of Company common stock in the Company’s Regulation A offering (the “Conversion”).
On July 9, 2021, the Conversion occurred, and Mr. Ben-Yohanan was issued 250,000 shares of common stock as a result of $1,000,000 in principal and interest due on the Note converting into shares of common stock at $4.00 per share, which is the initial public offering price per share of the common stock in the Company’s offering pursuant to Regulation A.
As of December 31, 2021, there was $1,269,864 in principal and $16,978 accrued interest outstanding on the Note, which will became payable by the Company commencing on February 2, 2022 as required to amortize the Note and the outstanding indebtedness over the following 24 months. The final maturity date of the Note is February 2, 2024.
Rui Wu - Note Purchase Agreement, Convertible Promissory Note, Warrant, and Security Agreement
On August 27, 2021, the Company entered into a note purchase agreement (the “Rui Wu Note Purchase Agreement”) with Rui Wu, an individual, with an effective date of August 26, 2021, pursuant to which the Company issued a convertible promissory note to Mr. Wu in the aggregate principal amount of $550,000 for a purchase price of $500,000, reflecting a $50,000 original issue discount (the “Rui Wu Note”) and, in connection therewith, issued to Mr. Wu a warrant to purchase 37,500 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share, subject to adjustment (the “Rui Wu Warrant”). In addition, in connection with the Rui Wu Note Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a Security Agreement with Rui Wu, pursuant to which the Company’s obligations under the Rui Wu Note were secured by a first priority lien and security interest on all of the assets of the Company (the “Rui Wu Security Agreement”). While each of the Rui Wu Warrant, Security Agreement, Note, and Note Purchase Agreement have an effective date and/or effective issue date of August 26, 2021, each was entered into and/or issued on August 27, 2021.
The Rui Wu Note has a maturity date of August 26, 2022 and bears interest at 10% per year. No payments of the principal amount or interest are due prior to the maturity date other than as specifically set forth in the Rui Wu Note, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest at any time without penalty.
The Rui Wu Note (and the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest) is convertible into shares of Company common stock at any time following August 26, 2021 until the note is repaid. The conversion price per share of common stock shall initially mean the lesser of (i) $1.00 or (ii) 75% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price of the common stock during the 20 Trading Days (as defined in the Rui Wu Note) immediately preceding the date of the respective conversion. The conversion price is subject to customary adjustments for any stock splits, etc., which occur following the determination of the conversion price.
The Rui Wu Note contains customary events of default, including, but not limited to:
● if the Company fails to pay the then-outstanding principal amount and accrued interest on the Rui Wu Note on any date any such amounts become due and payable, and any such failure is not cured within three business days of written notice thereof by Mr. Wu; or
● the Company fails to remain compliant with the Depository Trust Company (“DTC”), thus incurring a “chilled” status with DTC; or
● any trading suspension is imposed by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) under Section 12(j) or 12(k) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”); or
● the occurrence of any delisting of the Company common stock from any securities exchange on which the Company common stock is listed or suspension of trading of the Company common stock on the OTC Markets.
If an event of default has occurred and is continuing, Mr. Wu may declare all or any portion of the then-outstanding principal amount of the Rui Wu Note, together with all accrued and unpaid interest thereon, due and payable, and the Rui Wu Note shall thereupon become immediately due and payable in cash and Mr. Wu will also have the right to pursue any other remedies that Mr. Wu may have under applicable law. In the event that any amount due under the Rui Wu Note is not paid as and when due, such amounts shall accrue interest at the rate of 18% per year, simple interest, non-compounding, until paid.
The $50,000 original issue discount, the fair value of 125,000 warrants issued, and the conversion features were recorded as debt discounts and amortized over the term of the note. Therefore, the total debt discount at the inception date of this convertible promissory note were recorded at $550,000. For the excess amount of derivative liability, the Company recorded accretion expense of $514,850 at the inception date of this note.
The balance of the Riu Wu Note as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $550,000 and $0, respectively.
Chris Etherington - Note Purchase Agreement, Convertible Promissory Note, Warrant, and Security Agreement
On August 27, 2021, the Company entered into a note purchase agreement (the “Chris Etherington Note Purchase Agreement”) with Chris Etherington with an effective date of August 26, 2021, pursuant to which, on the same date, the Company issued a convertible promissory note to Mr. Etherington in the aggregate principal amount of $165,000 for a purchase price of $150,000, reflecting a $15,000 original issue discount (the “Chris Etherington Note”) and, in connection therewith, issued to Mr. Etherington a warrant to purchase 37,500 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $2.00 per share, subject to adjustment (the “Chris Etherington Warrant”). In addition, in connection with the Chris Etherington Note Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a Security Agreement with Mr. Etherington, pursuant to which the Company’s obligations under the Chris Etherington Note were secured by a first priority lien and security interest on all of the assets of the Company (the “Chris Etherington Security Agreement”). While each of the Chris Etherington Warrant, Security Agreement, Note, and Note Purchase Agreement have an effective date and/or effective issue date of August 26, 2021, each was entered into and/or issued on August 27, 2021.
The Chris Etherington Note has a maturity date of August 26, 2022 and bears interest at 10% per year. No payments of the principal amount or interest are due prior to the maturity date other than as specifically set forth in the Chris Etherington Note, and the Company may prepay all or any portion of the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest at any time without penalty.
The Chris Etherington Note (and the principal amount and any accrued and unpaid interest) is convertible into shares of Company common stock at any time following August 26, 2021 until the note is repaid. The conversion price per share of common stock shall initially mean the lesser of (i) $1.00 or (ii) 75% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price of the common stock during the 20 Trading Days (as defined in the Chris Etherington Note) immediately preceding the date of the respective conversion. The conversion price is subject to customary adjustments for any stock splits, etc. which occur following the determination of the conversion price.
The Chris Etherington Note contains customary events of default, including, but not limited to:
● if the Company fails to pay the then-outstanding principal amount and accrued interest on the Chris Etherington Note on any date any such amounts become due and payable, and any such failure is not cured within three business days of written notice thereof by Mr. Etherington; or
● the Company fails to remain compliant with the DTC, thus incurring a “chilled” status with DTC; or
● any trading suspension is imposed by the SEC under Section 12(j) or Section 12(k) of the Exchange Act; or
● the occurrence of any delisting of the Company common stock from any securities exchange on which the Company common stock is listed or suspension of trading of the Company common stock on the OTC Markets.
If an event of default has occurred and is continuing, Mr. Etherington may declare all or any portion of the then-outstanding principal amount of the Chris Etherington Note, together with all accrued and unpaid interest thereon, due and payable, and the Chris Etherington Note shall thereupon become immediately due and payable in cash and Mr. Etherington will also have the right to pursue any other remedies that Mr. Etherington may have under applicable law. In the event that any amount due under the Chris Etherington Note is not paid as and when due, such amounts shall accrue interest at the rate of 18% per year, simple interest, non-compounding, until paid.
The $15,000 original issue discount, the fair value of 37,500 warrants issued, and the conversion features were recorded as debt discounts and amortized over the term of the note. Therefore, the total debt discount at the inception date of this convertible promissory note were recorded at $165,000. For the excess amount of derivative liability, the Company recorded accretion expense of $160,538 at the inception date of this note.
The balance of the Chris Etherington Note as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $165,000 and $0, respectively.
Termination of Offering
On August 31, 2021, the Company decided to terminate its Regulation A+ offering. Prior to terminating the Regulation A+ offering, the Company sold 257,625 shares in the offering at $4.00 per share, yielding gross proceeds of approximately $1,030,500 and net proceeds of $845,290.
Closing of Dobre Brothers House
On September 1, 2021, the Company officially closed one of its Clubhouse locations - Dobre Brothers House - located in Beverly Hills, CA. The Company terminated its lease agreement for the Dobre Brothers House effective September 1, 2021. At the time of the termination of this lease, the Company had a month-to-month tenancy at this location, as contemplated under the lease after the expiration of the initial term of the lease on July 31, 2021. The Company did not incur any termination penalties as a result of terminating the lease.
The Dobre Brothers House hosted Darius, Cyrus, Marcus and Lucas Dobre (collectively, the “Dobre Brothers”). The Dobre Brothers were prominent influencers in the Company’s roster, with a total follower reach of approximately 115 million. As a result of the closing of the Dobre Brothers House, the Dobre Brothers will no longer be required to provide promotion and marketing social media posts on our behalf as part of the terms of their living arrangements in the Dobre Brothers House. As such, the Company will exclude Dobre Brothers followers from the Company’s calculations of its own follower reach going forward. Nonetheless, the Company has continued to have a working relationship with the Dobre Brothers since the closing of the Dobre Brothers House, and intends to maintain a working relationship with the Dobre Brothers going forward.
Closing of LA Content House
On November 12, 2021, following approval and ratification of a resolution by the board of directors and a determination that the action is in the Company’s best interests, the Company closed its content creation house located at 1024 Summit Drive, Beverly Hills, California 90210. The Company will operate the business previously conducted at the House on a solely remote/virtual basis.
Kaplun Appointment as Chief Financial Officer, Kaplun Executive Employment Agreement & Kaplun Restricted Stock Award
On October 7, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors appointed Dmitry Kaplun as the Company’s Chief Financial Officer. In connection with Mr. Kaplun’s appointment, the Company and Mr. Kaplun entered into an executive employment agreement dated as of October 7, 2021 (the “Employment Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Employment Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Mr. Kaplun an annual base salary of $280,000. In addition, the Company agreed to grant to Mr. Kaplun on the effective date of the Employment Agreement and on each anniversary thereof a number of restricted shares of common stock equal to (i) $100,000, divided by (ii) the lesser of (A) $1.70 (as the same may be adjusted) and (B) 80% of the VWAP as of the grant date. Each restricted stock grant will vest ratably over the calendar year following the grant date, vesting as to 25% of the number of shares of common stock in the restricted stock grant at the end of each calendar quarter of such year, as provided in the Employment Agreement. Mr. Kaplun will also be paid discretionary annual bonuses if and when declared by the Board.
The Employment Agreement has an initial term ending on the earlier of (i) the first anniversary of the effective date of the Employment Agreement, and (ii) the time of the termination of Mr. Kaplun’s employment. in accordance with the provisions herein. The initial term and any renewal term will automatically be extended for one or more additional terms of one year each, unless either the Company or Mr. Kaplun provides notice to the other party at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the then-current term.
The Company may terminate Mr. Kaplun’s employment at any time, with or without Cause (as defined in the Employment Agreement), subject to the terms and conditions of the Employment Agreement. In the event that the Company terminates Mr. Kaplun’s employment with Cause, subject to the terms of the Employment Agreement, (i) the Company will pay to Mr. Kaplun unpaid base salary and benefits then owed or accrued, and any unreimbursed expenses; and (ii) any unvested portion of the restricted stock grants and any other equity granted to Mr. Kaplun will immediately be forfeited as of the termination date.
In the event that the Company terminates Mr. Kaplun’s employment without Cause, subject to the terms and conditions of the Employment Agreement, (i) the Company will pay to Mr. Kaplun any base salary, bonuses, and benefits then owed or accrued, and any unreimbursed expenses; (ii) the Company will pay to Mr. Kaplun, in one lump sum, an amount equal to the base salary that would have been paid to Mr. Kaplun for a three-month period; and (iii) any equity grant already made to Mr. Kaplun will, to the extent not already vested, be deemed automatically vested.
Mr. Kaplun may resign at any time, with or without Good Reason (as defined in the Employment Agreement). In the event that Mr. Kaplun resigns with Good Reason, the Company will pay to Mr. Kaplun the amounts, and Mr. Kaplun will, subject to the terms of the Employment Agreement, be entitled to such benefits (including without limitation any vesting of unvested shares under any equity grant), that would have been payable to Mr. Kaplun or which Mr. Kaplun would have received had Mr. Kaplun’s employment been terminated by the Company without Cause.
In the event that Mr. Kaplun resigns without Good Reason, the Company will pay to Mr. Kaplun the amounts, and Mr. Kaplun will be entitled, subject to the terms of the Employment Agreement, to such benefits (including without limitation any vesting of unvested shares under any equity grant), that would have been payable to Mr. Kaplun or which Mr. Kaplun would have received had Mr. Kaplun’s employment been terminated by the Company with Cause.
The Employment Agreement contains customary representations and warranties of the parties, and customary provisions relating to confidentiality obligations, indemnification, and miscellaneous provisions.
Pursuant to the terms of the Employment Agreement, the Board granted Mr. Kaplun 58,824 shares of restricted common stock on October 7, 2021. 25% of the shares vest on each of the three-month, six-month, nine-month and 12-month anniversaries of the grant date.
Young and Yu Resignations
On October 8, 2021, each of Christian Young, the Company’s then-President, Secretary and Director, and Simon Yu, the Company’s then-Chief Operating Officer and Director, resigned from all officer and director positions with the Company, effective immediately.
Musina Board Appointment
On October 12, 2021, the Board appointed Massimiliano Musina to serve as a member of the Company’s Board of Directors. In connection with Mr. Musina’s appointment, the Company and Mr. Musina entered into an Independent Director Agreement dated October 12, 2021 (the “Director Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Director Agreement, the Company agreed to issue to Mr. Musina each quarter a number of shares of common stock having a fair market value of $25,000, in exchange for Mr. Musina’s service as a member of the Company’s Board of Directors.
Equity Purchase Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement
On November 2, 2021, the Company entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Peak One Opportunity Fund, L.P. (“Investor”), dated as of October 29, 2021, pursuant to which the Company has the right, but not the obligation, to direct Investor, to purchase up to $15,000,000.00 (the “Maximum Commitment Amount”) in shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Common Stock”), in multiple tranches (the “Put Shares”). Further, under the Equity Purchase Agreement and subject to the Maximum Commitment Amount, the Company has the right, but not the obligation, to submit a Put Notice (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement) from time to time to Investor (i) in a minimum amount not less than $20,000.00 and (ii) in a maximum amount up to the lesser of (a) $400,000.00 or (b) 250% of the Average Daily Trading Value (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement).
In exchange for Investor entering into the Equity Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed, among other things, to (A) issue Investor and Peak One Investments, LLC, an aggregate of 70,000 shares of Common Stock (the “Commitment Shares”), and (B) file a registration statement registering the Common Stock issued as Commitment Shares and issuable to Investor under the Equity Purchase Agreement for resale (the “Registration Statement”) with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 60 calendar days of the Equity Purchase Agreement, as more specifically set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement.
The obligation of Investor to purchase the Company’s Common Stock shall begin on the date of the Equity Purchase Agreement, and ending on the earlier of (i) the date on which Investor shall have purchased Common Stock pursuant to the Equity Purchase Agreement equal to the Maximum Commitment Amount, (ii) twenty four (24) months after the date of the Equity Purchase Agreement, (iii) written notice of termination by the Company to Investor (which shall not occur during any Valuation Period or at any time that Investor holds any of the Put Shares), (iv) the Registration Statement is no longer effective after the initial effective date of the Registration Statement, or (v) the date that the Company commences a voluntary case or any person commences a proceeding against the Company, a custodian is appointed for the Company or for all or substantially all of its property or the Company makes a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors (the “Commitment Period”).
During the Commitment Period, the purchase price to be paid by Investor for the Common Stock under the Equity Purchase Agreement shall be 95% of the Market Price, which is defined as the lesser of the (i) closing bid price of the Common Stock on the trading day immediately preceding the respective Put Date (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement), or (ii) lowest closing bid price of the Common Stock during the Valuation Period (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement), in each case as reported by Bloomberg Finance L.P or other reputable source designated by Investor.
The number of Put Shares to be purchased by the Investor shall not exceed the number of such shares that, when aggregated with all other shares of Common Stock then owned by the Investor beneficially or deemed beneficially owned by the Investor, would result in the Investor owning more than the Beneficial Ownership Limitation as determined in accordance with Section 16 of the Exchange Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The “Beneficial Ownership Limitation” shall be 4.99% of the number of shares of the Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to the issuance of shares of Common Stock issuable pursuant to a Put Notice.
The Equity Purchase Agreement and the Registration Rights Agreement contain customary representations, warranties, agreements and conditions to completing future sale transactions, indemnification rights and obligations of the parties. Among other things, Investor represented to the Company, that it is an “accredited investor” (as such term is defined in Rule 501(a) of Regulation D under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”)), and the Company sold the securities in reliance upon an exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act and Regulation D promulgated thereunder.
The foregoing descriptions of the Equity Purchase Agreement and the Registration Rights Agreement are qualified in their entirety by reference to the full text of such agreements, copies of which are attached as Exhibit 10.21 and 10.22 to the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part. The representations, warranties and covenants contained in such agreements were made only for purposes of such agreements and as of specific dates, were solely for the benefit of the parties to such agreements and may be subject to limitations agreed upon by the contracting parties.
Results of Operations
For the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Period from January 2, 2020 (Inception) to December 31, 2020
Net Revenues
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $4,253,765 and $1,010,405, respectively. The increase was due to the generation of revenue since the second quarter in 2020 and the increase of brand deals and agency deals and revenue from Tinder Blog in 2021. Alden Reiman has joined Clubhouse Media as a consultant via his company The Reinman Agency and contributed to the increase of the revenue for the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $3,470,862 and $579,855, respectively. The cost of sales were mainly commissions paid to social influencers for their performance according to the management agreement. The increase was due to the generation of revenue since the second quarter in 2020 and the increase of brand deals and agency deals and revenue from Tinder Blog in 2021 . Alden Reiman has joined Clubhouse Media as a consultant via his company The Reinman Agency and contributed to the increases in the cost of goods sold via Higher revenue for the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $782,903 and $430,550, respectively. The gross profit percentage was 18.4% and 42.6% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 were $15,514,420 and $2,725,105, respectively. The variances were as follows: (i) an increase in rent and utilities expense of $763,161; (ii) an increase in consultant fees of $1,438,565; (iii) an increase in sales and marketing expenses of $774,529; (iv) an increase in legal fees of $742,946; (v) an increase in office expense of $89,285; (vi) an decrease of production expense of $(13,905), (vii) an increase of meals and travel expense of $238,182; (viii) an increase of director and executive expenses of $709,996; (ix) an increase in accounting and audit fees of $109,918, and (x) an increase in payroll of $1,209,924. The overall increase in general and administrative expenses resulted from the commencement of our operations since 2020 and incurred more expenses from the expansion of operations, payroll expenses, and professional fees incurred as a public company.
Non-cash operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 were $7,074,978 and $442,549, respectively.
Non-cash operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $41,833 from depreciation and amortization expenses, and (ii) stock-based compensation of $6,602,953. Non-cash operating expenses for the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 were $442,549 including (i) depreciation of $14,945; (ii) amortization of debt discounts of $26,993; (iii) stock-based compensation of $160,611; and (iv) impairment of goodwill of $240,000.
Other (Income) Expenses
Other (income) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $7,514,139 and $283,166, respectively. Other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included (i) change in fair value derivative liability of $(1,029,530), (ii) interest expense of $8,088,037; and (iii) extinguishment of debt with related party for $293,538, and extinguishment of debt for $163,466. The change in derivative liability is the non-cash change in the fair value and relates to our derivative instruments. Interest expense of $8,088,037 was mostly comprised of non-cash interest of $15,920 from imputed interest, $5,932,883 from amortization of debt discounts, $245,199 from accretion expense - excess derivative liability, and $550,285 interest accrued to convertible promissory note holders.
Net Loss
Net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $22,245,656 and $2,577,721, respectively, for the reasons discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7,970,357. This amount was primarily related to a net loss of $22,245,656 and non-cash expense of change in fair value of derivative liability of $1,029,529 and offset by non-cash expenses of $12,700,055 including (i) depreciation and amortization of $41,833; (ii) imputed interest of $15,920; (iii) stock-based compensation of $7,033,145; (iv) amortization of debt discounts of $5,932,883; (v) non-cash interest expense in excess of derivative liability of $245,199; (vi) net working capital increase of $1,575,243; (vii) loss in extinguishment of related party debt of $297,138, and (viii) loss in extinguishment of debt of $163,466.
Net cash used in operating activities for the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $1,967,551. This amount was primarily related to a net loss of $2,577,721 and (i) net working capital increase of $88,621; and offset by (ii) non-cash expenses of $698,791 including (iii) depreciation and amortization of $41,938; (iv) imputed interest of $87,213; (v) stock-based compensation of $160,611; (vi) impairment of goodwill of $240,000; (vii) non-cash interest expense in excess of derivative liability of $108,000; and (viii) change in fair value of derivative liability of $61,029.
Investment Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $424,760. The Company purchased $33,900 in property, plant, and equipment and $390,936 in internal used software.
Net cash used in investing activities for the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $319,737. The 2020 amount related to the cash paid in the public shell company of $240,00 and acquisition of $79,737 of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8,656,864. The amount was related to proceeds from our chief executive officer and chairman of the Board of $244,803 and repayment to our chief executive officer and chairman of the Board of $137,500 and proceeds from borrowing from convertible notes payable of $8,041,501 and repayments of $455,000 to convertible notes payable holders. The Company also issued for cash at a net proceeds of $963,061 from Regulation A offering and ELOC.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 was $2,325,062. The 2020 amount related to proceeds from our chief executive officer and chairman of the Board of $2,162,562 and convertible notes payable of $162,500.
Equity Purchase Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement
On November 2, 2021, the Company entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement and Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Peak One Opportunity Fund, L.P. (“Investor”), dated as of October 29, 2021, pursuant to which the Company shall have the right, but not the obligation, to direct Investor, to purchase up to $15,000,000 (the “Maximum Commitment Amount”) in shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Common Stock”), in multiple tranches (the “Put Shares”). Further, under the Equity Purchase Agreement and subject to the Maximum Commitment Amount, the Company has the right, but not the obligation, to submit a Put Notice (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement) from time to time to Investor (i) in a minimum amount not less than $20,000 and (ii) in a maximum amount up to the lesser of (a) $400,000.00 or (b) 250% of the Average Daily Trading Value (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement).
In exchange for Investor entering into the Equity Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed, among other things, to (A) issue Investor and Peak One Investments, LLC, an aggregate of 70,000 shares of Common Stock (the “Commitment Shares”), and (B) file a registration statement registering the Common Stock issued as Commitment Shares and issuable to Investor under the Equity Purchase Agreement for resale (the “Registration Statement”) with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 60 calendar days of the Equity Purchase Agreement, as more specifically set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement.
The obligation of Investor to purchase the Company’s Common Stock shall begin on the date of the Equity Purchase Agreement, and ending on the earlier of (i) the date on which Investor shall have purchased Common Stock pursuant to the Equity Purchase Agreement equal to the Maximum Commitment Amount, (ii) twenty four (24) months after the date of the Equity Purchase Agreement, (iii) written notice of termination by the Company to Investor (which shall not occur during any Valuation Period or at any time that Investor holds any of the Put Shares), (iv) the Registration Statement is no longer effective after the initial effective date of the Registration Statement, or (v) the date that the Company commences a voluntary case or any person commences a proceeding against the Company, a custodian is appointed for the Company or for all or substantially all of its property or the Company makes a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors (the “Commitment Period”).
During the Commitment Period, the purchase price to be paid by Investor for the Common Stock under the Equity Purchase Agreement shall be 95% of the Market Price, which is defined as the lesser of the (i) closing bid price of the Common Stock on the trading day immediately preceding the respective Put Date (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement), or (ii) lowest closing bid price of the Common Stock during the Valuation Period (as defined in the Equity Purchase Agreement), in each case as reported by Bloomberg Finance L.P or other reputable source designated by Investor.
The number of Put Shares to be purchased by the Investor shall not exceed the number of such shares that, when aggregated with all other shares of Common Stock then owned by the Investor beneficially or deemed beneficially owned by the Investor, would result in the Investor owning more than the Beneficial Ownership Limitation as determined in accordance with Section 16 of the Exchange Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The “Beneficial Ownership Limitation” shall be 4.99% of the number of shares of the Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to the issuance of shares of Common Stock issuable pursuant to a Put Notice.
In accordance with that certain Registration Rights Agreement, the Selling Securityholders are entitled to certain rights with respect to the registration of the Put Shares and Commitment Shares issued in connection with the Equity Purchase Agreement (the “Registrable Securities”). Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the Company must (i) file the Registration Statement within sixty calendar days from the date of the Registration Rights Agreement, (ii) use reasonable efforts to cause the Registration Statement to be declared effective under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), as promptly as possible after the filing thereof, but in any event no later than the 90th calendar day following the date of the Registration Rights Agreement, and (iii) use its reasonable efforts to keep such Registration Statement continuously effective under the Securities Act until all of the Commitment Shares and Purchase Shares have been sold thereunder or pursuant to Rule 144. The Company must also take such action as is necessary to register and/or qualify the Registrable Securities under such other securities or blue sky laws of all applicable jurisdictions in the United States.
Effects of Coronavirus on the Company
Due to the digital/remote nature of our business, the coronavirus would have only a limited effect on our operations.
Going Concern
We adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, which requires that management evaluate whether there are relevant conditions and events that, in the aggregate, raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern and to meet its obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern. While the Company is attempting to generate additional revenues, the Company’s cash position may not be significant enough to support the Company’s daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by way of a public or private offering. Management believes that the actions presently being taken to further implement its business plan and generate revenues provide the opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy to generate revenues and in its ability to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to further implement its business plan and generate revenues. We will require additional cash funding to fund operations. Therefore, we concluded there was substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
To fund further operations, we will need to raise additional capital. We may obtain additional financing in the future through the issuance of its common stock, or through other equity or debt financings. Our ability to continue as a going concern or meet the minimum liquidity requirements in the future is dependent on its ability to raise significant additional capital, of which there can be no assurance. If the necessary financing is not obtained or achieved, we will likely be required to reduce its planned expenditures, which could have an adverse impact on the results of operations, financial condition and our ability to achieve its strategic objective. There can be no assurance that financing will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. The financial statements contain no adjustments for the outcome of these uncertainties. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and have a material adverse effect on our future financial results, financial position and cash flows.
Convertible Promissory Notes
For a detailed description of convertible promissory notes of the Company, see “Description of Business- Convertible Promissory Notes.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Act reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), management makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and assumptions made by management include, but are not limited to, revenue recognition, the allowance for bad debt, useful life of fixed assets, income taxes and unrecognized tax benefits, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, and assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-lived assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Reverse Merger Accounting
The Merger was accounted for as a reverse-merger and recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. WOHG was the acquirer for financial reporting purposes and Clubhouse Media Group, Inc. was the acquired company. Consequently, the assets and liabilities and the operations that are reflected in the historical financial statements prior to the Merger will be those of WOHG and will be recorded at the historical cost basis of WOHG since its inception on January 2, 2020. The consolidated financial statements after completion of the Merger include the assets and liabilities of the Company and WOHG, historical operations of WOHG since its inception on January 2, 2020 to the closing date of the merger, and operations of the Company from the closing date of the Merger. Common stock and the corresponding capital amounts of the Company pre-merger have been retroactively restated as capital stock shares reflecting the exchange ratio in the Merger. In conjunction with the Merger, WOHG received no cash and assumed no liabilities from Clubhouse Media Group, Inc. All members of the Company’s executive management are from WOHG.
Lease
On January 2, 2020, the Company adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases, or ASC 842, using the modified retrospective transition method with a cumulative effect adjustment to accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019, and accordingly, modified its policy on accounting for leases as stated below.
As described under “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements,” below, the primary impact of adopting ASC 842 for the Company was the recognition in the consolidated balance sheet of certain lease-related assets and liabilities for operating leases with terms longer than 12 months. The Company elected to use the short-term exception and does not records assets/liabilities for short term leases as of September 30, 2021.
The Company’s leases primarily consist of facility leases which are classified as operating leases. The Company assesses whether an arrangement contains a lease at inception. The Company recognizes a lease liability to make contractual payments under all leases with terms greater than twelve months and a corresponding right-of-use asset, representing its right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments over the lease term using the collateralized incremental borrowing rate since the implicit rate is unknown. Options to extend or terminate a lease are included in the lease term when it is reasonably certain that the Company will exercise such an option. The right-of-use asset is initially measured as the contractual lease liability plus any initial direct costs and prepaid lease payments made, less any lease incentives. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Leased right-of-use assets are subject to impairment testing as a long-lived asset at the asset-group level. The Company monitors its long-lived assets for indicators of impairment. As the Company’s leased right-of-use assets primarily relate to facility leases, early abandonment of all or part of facility as part of a restructuring plan is typically an indicator of impairment. If impairment indicators are present, the Company tests whether the carrying amount of the leased right-of-use asset is recoverable including consideration of sublease income, and if not recoverable, measures impairment loss for the right-of-use asset or asset group.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014 the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which supersedes all existing revenue recognition requirements, including most industry specific guidance. This new standard requires a company to recognize revenues when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive for those goods or services. The FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASU No. 2014-09 that have the same effective date and transition date: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations; ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing; ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients; and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company adopted these amendments with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the new revenue standards).
Under the new revenue standards, the Company recognizes revenues when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which it expects to receive in exchange for those goods. The Company recognizes revenues following the five-step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. The Company recognized revenue from providing temporary and permanent staffing solutions and sale of consumer products.
Managed Services Revenue
The Company generates revenue from its managed services when a marketer (typically a brand, agency or partner) pays the Company to provide custom content, influencer marketing, amplification or other campaign management services (“Managed Services”).
The Company maintains separate arrangements with each marketer and content creator either in the form of a master agreement or terms of service, which specify the terms of the relationship and access to its platforms, or by statement of work, which specifies the price and the services to be performed, along with other terms. The transaction price is determined based on the fixed fee stated in the statement of work and does not contain variable consideration. Marketers who contract with the Company to manage their advertising campaigns or custom content requests may prepay for services or request credit terms. The agreement typically provides for either a non-refundable deposit, or a cancellation fee if the agreement is canceled by the customer prior to completion of services. Billings in advance of completed services are recorded as a contract liability until earned. The Company assesses collectability based on a number of factors, including the creditworthiness of the customer and payment and transaction history.
For Managed Services Revenue, the Company enters into an agreement to provide services that may include multiple distinct performance obligations in the form of: (i) an integrated marketing campaign to provide influencer marketing services, which may include the provision of blogs, tweets, photos or videos shared through social network offerings and content promotion, such as click-through advertisements appearing in websites and social media channels; and (ii) custom content items, such as a research or news article, informational material or videos. Marketers typically purchase influencer marketing services for the purpose of providing public awareness or advertising buzz regarding the marketer’s brand and they purchase custom content for internal and external use. The Company may provide one type or a combination of all types of these performance obligations on a statement of work for a lump sum fee. The Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation in the contract at inception based on its relative standalone selling price. These performance obligations are to be provided over a stated period that generally ranges from one day to one year. Revenue is accounted for when the performance obligation has been satisfied depending on the type of service provided. The Company views its obligation to deliver influencer marketing services, including management services, as a single performance obligation that is satisfied at the time the customer receives the benefits from the services.
Based on the Company’s evaluations, revenue from Managed Services is reported on a gross basis because the Company has the primary obligation to fulfill the performance obligations and it creates, reviews and controls the services. The Company takes on the risk of payment to any third-party creators and it establishes the contract price directly with its customers based on the services requested in the statement of work. The contract liabilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $337,500 and $73,648, respectively.
Subscription-Based Revenue
The Company recognize subscription-based revenue through its social media website at Honeydrip.com, which allow customers to visit the creators personal page over the contract period without taking possession of the products or deliverables, are provided on either a subscription or consumption basis. Revenue provided on a subscription basis is recognized ratably over the contract period and revenue provided on a consumption basis is recognized when the subscriber paid and received their access to the content.
Software Development Costs
We apply ASC 350-40, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal Use Software, in review of certain system projects. These system projects generally relate to software we do not intend to sell or otherwise market. In addition, we apply this guidance to our review of development projects related to software used exclusively for our SaaS subscription offerings. In these reviews, all costs incurred during the preliminary project stages are expensed as incurred. Once the projects have been committed to and it is probable that the projects will meet functional requirements, costs are capitalized. These capitalized software costs are amortized on a project-by-project basis over the expected economic life of the underlying product on a straight-line basis, which is typically two to three years. Amortization commences when the software is available for its intended use. Amounts capitalized related to development of internal use software are included in property and equipment, net, on our Consolidated Balance sheets and related depreciation is recorded as a component of amortization of intangible assets and depreciation in our consolidated statements of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we capitalized approximately $390,936 and $0, respectively, related to internal use software and recorded $10,791 and $0 in related amortization expense, respectively. Unamortized costs of capitalized internal use software totaled $458,033 and $0 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Goodwill Impairment
We test goodwill at least annually for impairment at the reporting unit level. We recognize an impairment charge if the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. When a portion of a reporting unit is disposed, goodwill is allocated to the gain or loss on disposition based on the relative fair values of the business or businesses disposed and the portion of the reporting unit that will be retained.
For other intangible assets that are not deemed indefinite-lived, cost is generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the asset’s estimated economic life, except for individually significant customer-related intangible assets that are amortized in relation to total related sales. Amortizable intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. In these circumstances, they are tested for impairment based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, written down to estimated fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. The Company impaired $0 and $240,000 of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from January 2, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets, which include property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
Recoverability of long-lived assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined using the asset’s expected future discounted cash flows or market value, if readily determinable. Based on its review, the Company believes that, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was no impairment loss of its long-lived assets.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, the Company generally considers all expected future events other than enactments of changes in the tax law. For deferred tax assets, management evaluates the probability of realizing the future benefits of such assets. The Company establishes valuation allowances for its deferred tax assets when evidence suggests it is unlikely that the assets will be fully realized.
The Company recognizes the tax effects of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits as of the reporting date and then only in an amount more likely than not to be sustained upon review by the tax authorities. Income tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. The Company classifies potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) as income tax expense.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The carrying value of cash, accounts receivable, other receivable, note receivable, other current assets, accounts payable, and accrued expenses, if applicable, approximate their fair values based on the short-term maturity of these instruments. The carrying amounts of debt were also estimated to approximate fair value.
The Company utilizes the methods of fair value (“FV”) measurement as described in ASC 820 to value its financial assets and liabilities. As defined in ASC 820, FV is based on the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In order to increase consistency and comparability in FV measurements, ASC 820 establishes a FV hierarchy that prioritizes observable and unobservable inputs used to measure FV into three broad levels, which are described below:
Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for assets or liabilities. The FV hierarchy gives the highest priority to Level 1 inputs.
Level 2: Observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available. The FV hierarchy gives the lowest priority to Level 3 inputs.
The Company used Level 3 inputs for its valuation methodology for the derivative liabilities for conversion feature of the convertible notes in determining the fair value the weighted-average Binomial option pricing model following assumption inputs. The fair value of derivative liability as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $513,959 and $304,490, respectively.
Stock based Compensation
Stock based compensation cost to employees is measured at the date of grant, based on the calculated fair value of the stock-based award, and will be recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the award). Share-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable.
Derivative instruments
The fair value of derivative instruments is recorded and shown separately under liabilities. Changes in the fair value of derivatives liability are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations under other (income) expense.
Our Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company uses binomial option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Related Parties
The Company follows subtopic 850-10 of the FASB ASC for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions. Pursuant to Section 850-10-20 related parties include:
a. affiliates of the Company;
b. entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the FV option under the FV Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity;
c. trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management;
d. principal owners of the Company;
e. management of the Company;
f. other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and
g. other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
The financial statements shall include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of financial statements is not required in those statements.
The disclosures shall include: a. the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b. a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which income statements are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c. the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which income statements are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d. amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 requires companies to measure credit losses utilizing a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires a consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including those interim periods within those fiscal years. We did not expect the adoption of this guidance have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
On October 1, 2020, we early adopted ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (ASU 2019-12), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes. This guidance was effective beginning January 1, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this new standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (ASU 2020-06), which simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models available for convertible debt instruments. This guidance also eliminates the treasury stock method to calculate diluted earnings per share for convertible instruments and requires the use of the if-converted method. This guidance will be effective for us in the first quarter of 2022 on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the timing, method of adoption and overall impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.