Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company's audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect the Company’s plans, estimates and beliefs. The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere particularly in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
The Company provides its clients newly innovative and highly differentiated financial payment products in order to support and increase their customer acquisition, customer retention and organic customer spend. The Company’s clients consist primarily of leading international and domestic banks and other payment card issuers primarily within the United States (“U.S.”), Europe, Asia, Latin America, Canada, and the Middle East. The Company is a world-class platform for next generation payment technology, security, and Cryptocurrency solutions. For two decades, through its combination of large-scale, advanced manufacturing capabilities and deep technological expertise, the Company has driven key Payments Industry innovations in materials science, Metal Form Factor design, dual interface functionality, and security. The distinct value proposition of the Company’s products have resulted in widespread adoption by major banks, financial institutions and leading FinTech innovators to support their acquisition and retention of consumer and business card customers. The Company maintains trusted, highly-embedded and long-term customer relationships with an expanding set of global issuers. These same fundamental strengths have now enabled the Company to enter the digital asset revolution through the launch of its Arculus platform, which commenced in the third quarter of 2021 with the Arculus Key card and companion Arculus Wallet mobile application.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during 2020 and continuing in 2021, the Company established policies and protocols to address safety considerations. The Company is in frequent dialogue with key stakeholders to assess health and safety conditions across all of its facilities and to have robust procedures in place to protect the well-being of its employees, such as controls for building access, strict physical distancing measures and enhanced cleaning processes. The Company’s systems and infrastructure have continued to support its business operations. The Company has maintained regular and active communication across senior management, and has ongoing dialogues with its vendors to ensure they continue to meet the Company’s criteria for business continuity.
The resurgence in the spread of COVID-19 toward the end of 2020 and into 2021 has created greater uncertainty regarding the economic outlook for the near term, even as vaccines were distributed on a large scale in an effort to control the pandemic. While governments and central banks continued to be aggressive in providing fiscal and monetary stimulus, the global economic recovery remains fragile. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to affect the Company’s business, financial condition, liquidity and the Company’s operating results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Net Sales
Net sales reflect the Company’s revenue generated primarily from the sale of its products. Product sales primarily include the design and manufacturing of metal cards, including contact and dual interface cards. The Company also generates revenue from the sale of Prelams (which are used by makers of plastic payment and other cards). Net sales include the effect of discounts and allowances which consist primarily of volume-based rebates.
Cost of Sales
The Company’s cost of sales includes the direct and indirect costs related to manufacturing products and providing related services. Product costs include the cost of raw materials and supplies, including various metals, EMV® chips, holograms, adhesives, magnetic stripes, and NFC assemblies; the cost of labor; equipment and facilities; operational overhead; depreciation and amortization; leases and rental charges; shipping and handling; and freight and insurance costs. Cost of sales can be impacted by many factors, including volume, operational efficiencies, procurement costs, and promotional activity.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The Company’s gross profit represents its net sales less cost of sales, and its gross margin represents gross profit as a percentage of its net sales.
Operating Expenses
The Company’s operating expenses primarily comprised selling, general, and administrative expenses, which generally consist of personnel-related expenses for its corporate, executive, finance, information technology, research and development and other administrative function, and expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, as well as expenses for facilities, depreciation, amortization, travel, sales and marketing.
The Company expects its operating expenses to increase as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
Income from operations consists of the Company’s gross profit less its operating expenses. Operating margin is income from the Company’s operations as a percentage of its net sales.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense consists primarily of change in fair value of warrant liability, earnout consideration and interest expense net of any interest income.
Net Income
Net income consists of the Company’s income from operations, less other expenses and income tax provisions or benefits.
Factors Affecting the Company’s Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges. Please see the factors discussed elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional information.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table presents the Company’s results of operations for the periods indicated:
Net Sales
The Company’s net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $7.4 million, or 3%, to $267.9 million compared to $260.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was due to higher growing demand for its products throughout the year ended December 31, 2021 as we continue to emerge from the adverse impact from the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net sales was due to a 2% increase in domestic sales and a 6% increase in international sales.
Domestic: The Company’s domestic net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $4.5 million, or 2%, to $218.4 million compared to $214.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to higher
demand for the Company's products primarily in the second half of the year ended December 31, 2021 due to higher overall customer acquisition by the Company’s clients as we continue to emerge from the adverse impact from the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
International: The Company’s international net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $2.9 million, or 6%, to $49.5 million compared to $46.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily driven by our efforts to grow our international distributor channels compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition, the following table presents the Company’s net sales for the three months ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020:
The Company’s net sales for the three months ended December 31, 2021 increased $21.6 million, or 40%, to $75.3 million compared to $53.7 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the Company’s net sales for the three months ended December 31, 2021 compared to September 30, 2021:
The Company’s net sales for the three months ended December 31, 2021 increased $9.1 million, or 14%, to $75.3 million compared to $66.2 million for the three months ended September 30, 2021.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The Company’s gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $12.2 million, or 9%, to $144.8 million compared to $132.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, while the gross profit margin increased from 51% to 54%. The gross margin improvement resulted from a decrease in costs of sales in the period ended December 31, 2021 from improvement in production yields and favorable product mix compared to the period ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
The Company’s operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $14.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to increases in bonuses and commissions of $4.8 million and marketing and professional fee expenses of $19.0 million primarily related to the launch of Arculus in third quarter of 2021, and an overall increase in other costs of $1.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in transaction costs of approximately $10.0 million.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had income from operations of $81.4 million compared to income of $84.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased from 32% to 30% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $5.8 million, or 94%, to $11.9 million compared to $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The additional interest expense resulted from the refinancing of the Company’s existing debt facility in November 2020 resulting in an increase in outstanding debt during the period ended December 31, 2021. This was offset by a favorable change in fair value of $3.5 million in warrant liabilities and $9.6 million in earnout consideration liability. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below for more detail on the existing debt facility.
Net Income
The Company’s net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $83.4 million, compared to net income of $77.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to favorable change in fair value of $3.5 million in warrant liabilities and $9.6 million in earnout consideration liability and a more profitable sales mix, partially offset by increases in operating expenses as a result of the higher sales volume and costs related to the launch of Arculus.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents the Company’s results of operations for the periods indicated:
Net Sales
The Company’s net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $17.3 million, or 7%, to $260.6 million compared to $243.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net sales during 2020 was due to a 12% increase in domestic sales partially offset by a 10% decrease in international sales.
Domestic: The Company’s domestic net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $22.5 million, or 12%, to $214.0 million compared to $191.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to increased orders resulting from an expanded client base. This increase in orders was partially offset by lower orders from existing clients as well as product mix.
International: The Company’s international net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $5.2 million, or 10%, to $46.6 million compared to $51.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to lower new customer acquisitions for international clients primarily due to the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by product mix.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The Company’s gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $4.8 million, or 4%, to $132.6 million compared to $127.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by product mix, higher sales volumes, favorable overhead costs partially offset by an increase in depreciation expense resulting from higher capital expenditures. The Company’s gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 2% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in gross margin was driven primarily by an overall higher cost of material and labor primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations.
Operating Expenses
The Company’s operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $7.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to an increase in transaction costs of $11.4 million, professional fees of $2.0 million, salaries of $1.0 million and other costs of $1.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in bonuses and commissions of $7.7 million.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
During the year ended December 31, 2020, The Company had income from operations of $84.0 million compared to income of $86.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Its operating margins for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to 32% compared to 36% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other Expenses
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $0.5 million, or 10%, to $5.3 million compared to $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The additional interest expense resulted from the refinancing of the existing debt facility resulting in an increase in outstanding debt during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $77.8 million, compared to net income of $81.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in cost of sales and an increase in operating expenses partially offset by a favorable sales mix and higher sales volumes.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Form 10-K includes certain non-GAAP financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and that may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. The Company believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful to investors in evaluating the Company’s financial performance. The Company uses these measures internally to establish forecasts, budgets and operational goals to manage and monitor its business, as well as evaluate its underlying historical performance and to measure incentive compensation, as we believe that these non-GAAP financial measures depict the true performance of the business by encompassing only relevant and controllable events, enabling the Company to evaluate and plan more effectively for the future. In addition, the Company’s debt agreements contain covenants that use a variation of these measures for purposes of determining debt covenant compliance. The Company believes that investors should have access to the same set of tools that its management uses in analyzing operating results. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as measures of financial performance under U.S. GAAP, and the items excluded from EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing the Company’s financial performance. Accordingly, these key business metrics have limitations as an analytical tool. They should not be considered as an alternative to net income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of the Company’s liquidity, and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. The following unaudited table presents the reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(1)Primarily includes the changes in fair value of warrant liability and earnout consideration liability for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(2)Primarily includes the non-recurring transaction expenses relating to the then proposed Business Combination for the year ended December 31, 2020 and non-recurring litigation costs for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon audited financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures with respect to contingent liabilities and assets at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Certain accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate
assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates including those related to revenue recognition and equity-based compensation. These judgments are based on the Company’s historical experience, terms of its existing contracts, evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by its customers, and information available from outside sources, as appropriate. The Company’s actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. See Note 2 to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional description of the significant accounting policies that have been followed in preparing the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements.
The accounting policies described below are those that the Company considers to be the most critical for an understanding of its financial condition and results of operations and that require the most complex and subjective management judgment.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires management to make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reported amount of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience, current business factors and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, all of which are necessary in order to form a basis for determining the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from those estimates and assumptions. The Company evaluates the adequacy of its reserves and the estimates used in calculations on an on-going basis. Significant areas requiring management to make estimates include the valuation of equity instruments, measurement of changes in the fair value of earnout consideration liability, estimates of derivative liability associated with the exchangeable notes due December 2026, which will be marked to market each quarter based on a Lattice model approach, changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities, valuation allowances on deferred tax assets which are based on an assessment of recoverability of the deferred tax assets against future taxable income and estimates of the inputs used to calculate the tax receivable agreement liability. See Note 7, 9 and 11 for further discussion of the nature of these assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with the accounting standard ASC 606 when the performance obligations under the terms of the Company’s contracts with its customers have been satisfied. This occurs at the point in time when control of the specific goods or services as specified by each purchase order are transferred to customers. Specific goods refer to the products offered by the Company, including metal cards, high security documents, and pre-laminated materials. Transfer of control passes to customers upon shipment or upon receipt, depending on the agreement with the specific customers. ASC 606 requires entities to record a contract asset when a performance obligation has been satisfied or partially satisfied, but the amount of consideration has not yet been received because the receipt of the consideration is conditioned on something other than the passage of time. ASC 606 also requires an entity to present a revenue contract as a contract liability in instances when a customer pays consideration, or an entity has a right to an amount of consideration that is unconditional (e.g. receivable), before the entity transfers a good or service to the customer.
The primary judgments relating to the Company’s revenue recognition include determining whether (i) the contract with a customer exists; (ii) performance obligations are identified; (iii) the transaction price is determined; (iv) the transaction price is allocated to performance obligations; and (v) the distinct performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to the client. Transfer of control is typically evaluated from the customer's perspective.
The Company invoices its customers at the time at which control is transferred, with payment terms ranging between 15 and 60 days depending on each individual contract. As the payment is due within 90 days of the invoice, a significant financing component is not included within the contracts.
The majority of the Company’s contracts with its customers have the same performance obligation of manufacturing and transferring the specified number of cards to the customer. Each individual card included within an order constitutes a separate performance obligation, which is satisfied upon the transfer of goods to the customer. The contract term as defined by ASC 606 is the length of time it takes to deliver the goods or services promised under the purchase order or statement of work. As such, the Company's contracts are generally short term in nature.
Revenue is measured in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those products or services. The Company accounts for shipping and handling as activities fulfill its promise to transfer the associated products to its customers. Accordingly, the Company records amounts billed for sales. Revenue is recognized net of variable consideration such as discounts, penalties, rebates, and returns.
The Company’s products do not include an unmitigated right of return unless the product is non-conforming or defective. If the goods are non-conforming or defective, the defective goods are replaced or reworked or, in certain instances, a credit is issued for the portion of the order that was non-conforming or defective. A provision for sales returns and allowances is recorded based on experience with goods being returned. Most returned goods are re-worked and subsequently re-shipped to the customer and recognized as revenue. Historically, returns have not been material to the Company.
Additionally, the Company has a rebate program with certain customers allowing for rebates based on achieving a certain level of shipped sales during the calendar year. These rebates are estimated and updated throughout the year and recorded against revenues and the related accounts receivable.
Equity-Based Compensation
The Company adopted equity incentive plans in 2021 and 2015. See Note 9 for a detailed discussion of both the plans. The Company estimates the fair value of option awards using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. Option valuation model requires the Company to estimate a number of key valuation inputs including expected volatility, expected dividend yield, expected term, and risk-free interest rate. The expected term assumption reflects the period for which the Company believes the option will remain outstanding. This assumption is based upon the historical and expected behavior of the option holders and may vary based upon the behavior of different groups of option holders. The most subjective estimate is the expected volatility of the underlying unit when determining the fair market value of an option granted. As there was no trading history for the Company’s equity, the Company had utilized an appropriate index to estimate the volatility assumption when calculating the fair value of options granted during 2020 and 2019. A nonpublic entity that is unable to estimate the expected volatility of the price of its underlying share may measure awards based on a “calculated value,” which substitutes the volatility of an appropriate index for the volatility of the entity’s own share price. The Company had used the historical closing values of comparable publicly held entities to estimate volatility. The risk-free rate reflects the U.S. Treasury yield curve for a similar expected life instrument in effect at the time of the grant. There were no grants made during 2021 under both the plans.
In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, the then existing equity holders had the right to receive an aggregate of up to 7,500,000 additional (i) shares of the Company's class A common stock or (ii) Holdings' Units (and a corresponding number of shares of the Company's class B common stock), as applicable, in earn-out consideration based on the achievement of certain stock price thresholds (collectively, the “Earnouts”). There were a total of 657,160 shares subject to ASC 718, or 328,580 shares for each portion of the Earnouts.
Upon the transaction date, a valuation was performed which took into consideration all the key terms and conditions of the award, including the fact that, under Topic 718, there is no requisite service period due to the fact that there is no service condition prospectively, and as of the grant date there is no service inception date preceding the grant date on which to base historical valuation or expense amortization. As such, the award is considered to be immediately vested from a service perspective, and is solely contingent on meeting the hurdles required for the award to be settled. Since there is no future substantive risk of forfeiture, all expense associated with the awards were accelerated and recognized on December 27, 2021.The valuation of the Earnouts was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model that utilizes significant assumptions, including volatility, that determine the
probability of satisfying the market condition stipulated in the award to calculate the fair value of the award. The following assumptions were used to determine the grant date fair value for the Earnouts that were fully expensed at the closing date, December 27, 2021:
A 10% change in the Company’s equity-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 would have affected net income by approximately $0.1 million. The Company includes equity-based compensation expense in selling, general and administrative expenses in its consolidated statement of operations.
Earnout Consideration
As a result of the Business Combination, certain of Holdings' equity holders have the right to receive an aggregate of up to 7,500,000 additional (i) shares of the Company's class A common stock or (ii) Holdings' Units (and a corresponding number of shares of the Company's class B common stock), as applicable, in earnout consideration based on the achievement of certain stock price thresholds (collectively, the “Earnouts”). As such, Earnouts were considered to be derivative liability and the valuation of the Earnouts liability was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation model that utilizes significant assumptions, including volatility, that determine the probability of satisfying the market condition stipulated in the award to calculate the fair value of the award. The Company classifies the Earnouts as liabilities at their fair value on the consolidated balance sheet and adjusts the fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in revaluation of earnout consideration liability in the Company's consolidated statements of operations. See Note 9 for a detailed discussion.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrants as liabilities at their fair value within warrant liability on the consolidated balance sheet and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in revaluation of warrant liability in the Company's consolidated statements of operations. The Private Placement Warrants were valued using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Public Warrants were valued using the quoted market price as the fair value at the end of each balance sheet date. See Note 11 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Derivative Liability - Redemption Make-Whole Provision Feature
A derivative liability was initially recorded as a result of the issuance of the 7.00% Exchangeable notes due December, 2026 (see note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report). The fair value measurement of the derivative liability is classified as Level 3 under the fair value hierarchy as it has been valued using certain unobservable inputs using Lattice model. These inputs primarily include: (1) share price as of the valuation date, (2) assumed timing of redemption of the notes based on redemption threshold using Monte Carlo simulation (3) historical volatility of share price and (4) the risk-free rate. Significant increases or decreases in any
of those inputs in isolation could result in a significantly lower or higher fair value measurement. The fair value of the derivative liability was determined using a Lattice model by calculating the fair value of the notes with the redemption make-whole feature as compared to the fair value of the notes without the redemption make-whole feature, with the difference representing the value of the redemption make-whole feature, or the derivative liability. The conversion feature will be measured at fair value on a quarterly basis and the change in the fair value of the conversion feature for the period will be recorded in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are applied to the income attributable to the controlling interest (see Note 8 ) as the income attributable to the non-controlling interest is pass-through income. The Company complies with the accounting and reporting requirements of ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” which requires an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in future taxable or deductible amounts, based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We will continue to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets and liabilities on a quarterly basis, and will adjust such amounts in light of changing facts and circumstances, including but not limited to future projections of taxable income, tax legislation, rulings by relevant tax authorities and the progress of ongoing tax audits, if any. we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is required to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized in future periods.
The Company was not subject to income taxes due to the then equity structure of the Company prior to Business Combination and was subject to pass through income taxes. Federal, state and local income tax returns for years prior to 2019 are no longer subject to examination by tax authorities.
Market and Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to credit risk consist principally of investments in cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and accounts receivable. The Company’s primary exposure is credit risk on receivables as the Company does not require any collateral for its accounts receivable. Credit risk is the loss that may result from a trade customer’s or counterparty’s nonperformance. The Company uses credit policies to control credit risk, including utilizing an established credit approval process, monitoring customer and counterparty limits, employing credit mitigation measures such as analyzing customers’ financial statements, and accepting personal guarantees and various forms of collateral. The Company believes that its customers and counterparties will be able to satisfy their obligations under their contracts.
The Company maintains cash, cash equivalents with approved federally insured financial institutions. Such deposit accounts at times may exceed federally insured limits. The Company is exposed to credit risks and liquidity in the event of default by the financial institutions or issuers of investments in excess of FDIC insured limits. The Company performs periodic evaluations of the relative credit standing of these financial institutions and limits the amount of credit exposure with any institution if required. The Company has not experienced any losses on such accounts.
Recently Adopted Accounting Policies
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial
conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases” Topic 842, which amends the guidance in former ASC Topic 840, Leases. The new standard increases transparency and comparability most significantly by requiring the recognition by lessees of right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet for all leases longer than 12 months. Under the standard, disclosures are required to meet the objective of enabling users of financial statements to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. For lessees, leases will be classified as finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern and classification of expense recognition in statements of operations. The Company adopted the new lease guidance effective January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective transition approach, applying the new standard to all of its leases existing at the date of initial application which is the effective date of adoption. Consequently, financial information will not be updated and the disclosures required under the new standard will not be provided for dates and periods before January 1, 2021. The Company elected the package of practical expedients which permits to not reassess (1) whether any expired or existing contracts are or contain leases, (2) the lease classification for any expired or existing leases, and (3) any initial direct costs for any existing leases as of the effective date. The Company did not elect the hindsight practical expedient which permits entities to use hindsight in determining the lease term and assessing impairment. The adoption of the lease standard did not change the Company’s previously reported consolidated statements of operations and did not result in a cumulative catch-up adjustment to opening equity. The adoption of the new guidance resulted in the recognition of ROU assets of $6.3 million and lease liabilities of $6.9 million. The difference between the ROU assets and the lease liabilities is primarily due to unamortized lease incentive and deferred rent related to the Company’s operating leases at December 31, 2020. See Note 2 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are its existing cash and cash equivalents balances, cash flows from operations and borrowings on its term loan revolving credit facility and exchangeable notes. The Company’s primary cash requirements include operating expenses, debt service payments (principal and interest), and capital expenditures (including property and equipment).
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $21.9 million and total debt principal outstanding of $395.0 million. The Company believes that cash flows from its operations and available cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to meet its liquidity needs, including the repayment of its outstanding debt, for at least the next 12 months. The Company anticipates that to the extent that it requires additional liquidity, it will be funded through borrowings on its revolving credit facility, the incurrence of other indebtedness, or a combination thereof and offering of its shares in capital markets. The Company cannot be assured that it will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. Additionally, the Company’s liquidity and its ability to meet its obligations and fund its capital requirements are also dependent on its future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond its control. Accordingly, the Company cannot be assured that its business will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future borrowings will be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet its liquidity needs. Although the Company has no specific current plans to do so, if the Company decides to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, it may incur additional debt to finance such acquisitions.
At December 31, 2021, there was $265.0 million of total debt outstanding under the Company’s existing credit facility (the “2021 Credit Facility”). The credit facility comprised a term loan of $250.0 million as well as a $60.0 million revolving loan facility, of which $45.0 million was available for borrowing as of December 31, 2021.
Additional amounts may be available for borrowing during the term of the revolving loan, up to the remaining full $45.0 million, as long as the Company’s maintains a net leverage ratio as stipulated in the credit facility agreement. As of December 31, 2021, The Company’s net leverage ratio met the requirement for the available borrowing as defined in the terms of the credit facility agreement. The 2021 Credit Facility will mature on December 16, 2025.
Interest rates for the 2021 Credit Facility are calculated as the fluctuating bank prime rate plus the applicable margin of 2.0% or, for portions of the debt converted to Euro Loans, the quoted LIBOR rate plus the applicable margin of 3.0%. The Company must also pay an annual commitment fee of 0.40% on the unused portion of the $60.0 million revolving loan commitment. As of December 31, 2021, the effective interest rate on the Company’s 2020 Credit Facility was 3.65%. Total cash interest paid during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.2 million, an increase of $5.0 million compared to the prior year.
The 2021 Credit Facility contains customary covenants, including among other things, certain restrictions or limitations on indebtedness, issuance of liens, investments, asset sales, certain mergers or consolidations, sales, transfers, leases or dispositions of substantially all of the Company’s assets, and affiliate transactions. The Company may also be required to make repayments on the 2021 Credit Facility in advance of the maturity date based on a calculation of excess cash flows, as defined in the agreement, with any required payments to be made after the issuance of the Company’s annual financial statements. The Company did not have a required excess cash flow payment related to 2021, and the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the 2021 Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. See Note 7 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for additional information.
On April 19, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary, Holdings entered into subscription agreements (the “Note Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors ("Notes Investors") pursuant to which such Notes investors, severally and not jointly, purchased on the Closing Date of the Business Combination, senior notes (the “Exchangeable Notes”) issued by the Company and guaranteed by the Company's wholly owned subsidiary, Holdings in an aggregate principal amount of up to $130,000,000 that are exchangeable into shares of Class A common stock at a conversion price of $11.50 per share, subject to the terms and conditions of an Indenture entered by the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary, Holdings and the trustee under the Indenture. The Exchangeable Notes will bear interest at a rate of 7% per annum, payable semiannually in arrears. The Exchangeable Notes will mature in five years on December 27, 2026, and be convertible into shares of Class A common stock at a conversion price of $11.50 per share. The Company will settle any exchange of the Exchangeable Notes in shares of Class A common stock, with cash payable in lieu of any fractional shares.
Exchangeable Notes bear interest at the rate of 7.00% per year from December 27, 2021, or from the most recent date to which interest has been paid or provided for to, but excluding, the next scheduled interest payment date until December 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased or converted pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Indenture. Interest is payable semi-annually in arrears on each June 15 and December 15, commencing on June 15, 2022, to holders of record at the close of business on the preceding June 1 and December 1 (whether or not such day is a Business Day), respectively. Additional interest may be payable as set forth in the Indenture. See Note 7 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Net Cash Provided by Operations
Cash provided by the Company’s operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $77.8 million compared to cash provided by its operating activities of $87.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities of $9.3 million was primarily attributable to a change in fair value of $3.5 million of warrant liability, a change in fair value of $9.6 million of earnout consideration liability, deferred tax benefits of $0.9 million and changes in working capital of $10.5 million. This was partially offset by depreciation expense of $10.4 million, equity compensation expense of $6.1 million, amortization of deferred financing cost of $1.7 million, an increase in net income of $5.6 million and inventory reserve of $0.6 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing
Cash used in the Company’s investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.7 million, primarily relating to capital expenditures of $4.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net Cash Used in Financing
Cash used in the Company’s financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $64.5 million, primarily relating to distributions to equity holders pursuant to the consummation of the business combination on December 27, 2021 and repayments of debt related to The Company’s prior Credit Facility, partially offset by cash drawn under the 2021 Credit Facility, Exchangeable Notes and capital raised through PIPE pursuant to the business combination.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes, as of December 31, 2021, the Company’s material contractual cash obligations by future period (see Notes 2 and 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements):
(1)Includes principal only. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(2)See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had inventory-related purchase commitments totaling approximately $52.1 million.
Financing
The Company is party to the 2021 Credit Facility with various banks and an issuer of Exchangeable Notes to certain holders. For a more complete description of the Company's debt obligations, see Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company in this report Form 10-K.