ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
OVERVIEW
We are a late-stage clinical biopharmaceutical company that is developing CTP-543, a JAK 1/2 inhibitor that we discovered through the application of our DCE Platform. As discussed in detail in the “Business” section in Part I, Item 1. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are evaluating CTP-543 in a Phase 3 clinical program for the treatment of alopecia areata, a serious autoimmune dermatological condition. If these trials are successful, we intend to file an NDA with the FDA in the first half of 2023. There are currently no FDA-approved treatments for alopecia areata.
Since our inception in 2006, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to our research and development efforts, including activities to develop our core capabilities in deuterium chemistry, identify potential product candidates, undertake nonclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacture clinical trial material in compliance with cGMPs, provide general and administrative support for these operations and establish our intellectual property. We have generated an accumulated deficit of $349.5 million since inception through December 31, 2021 and will require substantial additional capital to fund our research and development activities. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We have financed our operations to date primarily through the public offering and private placement of our equity, debt financing, funding from collaborations and patent assignments, asset sales and other arrangements. In February 2014, we completed our initial public offering, whereby we sold 6,649,690 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $14.00 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of $83.1 million. In March 2015, we sold 3,300,000 shares of common stock through an underwritten public offering at a price to the public of $15.15 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of $46.7 million. In January 2020, we sold 5,735,283 shares of common stock through an underwritten public offering at a price to the public of $9.92 per share. At the same time, we sold to a certain existing investor pre-funded warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,800,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $9.919 per pre-funded warrant, which represents the per share public offering price for the common stock less the $0.001 per share exercise price for each pre-funded warrant. The aggregate net proceeds from the January 2020 offering, or the 2020 Financing, were $70.1 million.
In July 2017, we completed the sale of worldwide development and commercialization rights to CTP-656, now known as VX-561, and other assets related to the treatment of cystic fibrosis to Vertex pursuant to the Vertex Agreement. We received $160.0 million in cash upon closing, with $16.0 million initially held in escrow, which was released to us in February 2019. Pursuant to the Vertex Agreement, if VX-561 was approved as part of a combination regimen to treat cystic fibrosis, we were eligible to receive up to $90.0 million in the form of two additional milestones based on marketing approval in the United States and agreement for reimbursement in the first of the United Kingdom, Germany or France. In May 2021, we entered into the Vertex Amendment, pursuant to which Vertex paid us $32.0 million in cash in exchange for the removal of the Milestone Obligation. As a result of the Vertex Amendment, we are not entitled to receive any further payments pursuant to the Vertex Agreement. Additional information concerning the sale of CTP-656 is discussed in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In March 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies. As of December 31, 2021, we had sold 2,209,687 shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $25.2 million, after payment of cash commissions of 3.0% of the gross proceeds to Jefferies.
In November 2021, we closed a financing, or the 2021 Financing, raising $64.4 million in aggregate net proceeds. The 2021 Financing consisted of the sale of (i) 13,997 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock, (ii) 2,253,000 shares of common stock, (iii) warrants to purchase up to 16,250 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock and (iv) a portion of our right to receive potential future AVP-786 royalties under the Avanir Agreement. If the warrants issued in connection with the 2021 Financing are exercised in full, we would receive additional gross proceeds of $103.1 million.
Our operating results may fluctuate significantly from year to year, depending on the timing and magnitude of cash payments received pursuant to collaboration and licensing arrangements and other agreements and the timing and magnitude of clinical trial and other development activities under our current development programs. We generated net losses of $80.1 million and $74.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities as we continue research and development efforts, conduct additional nonclinical studies and clinical trials and seek marketing approval for our product candidates.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we, or our collaborators, obtain marketing approval for one or more of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty. If we obtain, or believe that we are likely to obtain, marketing approval for any product candidates for which we retain commercialization rights, and intend to commercialize a product, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We expect to seek to fund our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements and other sources for at least the next several years. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research and development programs and could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and our ability to develop our products. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve sustained profitability, and we may never do so.
COLLABORATIONS
We have entered into a number of collaborations for the research, development and commercialization of deuterated compounds. To date, our collaborations have provided us with significant funding for our research and development programs. Our collaborators also have applied their considerable scientific, development, regulatory and commercial capabilities to the development of our compounds. In addition, in some instances, where we develop and seek to collaborate with respect to deuterated analogs of marketed drugs or of drug candidates that are more advanced in clinical trials, our collaborators may be eligible for an expedited development or regulatory pathway by relying on previous clinical data regarding their corresponding non-deuterated compound. We believe that our collaborations have contributed to our ability to progress our product candidates.
Our collaborations are discussed further in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
ASSET PURCHASE AGREEMENT
In July 2017, we completed the sale of worldwide development and commercialization rights to CTP-656, now known as VX-561, and other assets related to the treatment of cystic fibrosis to Vertex pursuant to the Vertex Agreement. We received $160.0 million in cash upon closing, with $16.0 million initially held in escrow, which was released to us in February 2019. Additionally, upon the achievement of certain milestone events, Vertex agreed to pay us an aggregate of up to $90.0 million. Of this amount, $50.0 million would have become payable to us upon receipt of FDA marketing approval for a combination treatment regimen containing VX-561 for patients with cystic fibrosis, and $40.0 million would have become payable to us upon completion of a pricing and reimbursement agreement in the first of the United Kingdom, Germany or France with respect to a combination treatment regimen containing VX-561 for patients with cystic fibrosis.
In May 2021, we entered into the Vertex Amendment, pursuant to which Vertex paid us $32.0 million in cash in exchange for the removal of the Milestone Obligation. As a result of the Vertex Amendment, we are not entitled to receive any further payments pursuant to the Vertex Agreement. Additional information concerning the sale of CTP-656 is discussed in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. We could be materially and adversely affected by the risks, or the public perception of the risks, related to an epidemic, pandemic or other public health crisis, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to potential delays in our clinical trials. The ultimate extent of the impact of any epidemic, pandemic or other public health crisis on our business, financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments,
which are highly uncertain and subject to change and will depend on future developments, which cannot be accurately predicted, including the duration of the pandemic, additional or modified government actions, variants or new information that may emerge concerning the severity of such epidemic, pandemic or other public health, among others. Accordingly, we cannot predict the extent to which our business, financial condition and results of operations may be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, but we are monitoring the situation closely.
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS OVERVIEW
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from the sales of products. All of our revenue to date has been generated through collaboration, license and research arrangements with collaborators and nonprofit organizations for the development and commercialization of product candidates, a patent assignment agreement and asset sales.
The terms of these agreements may include one or more of the following types of payments: non-refundable license fees, payments for research and development activities, payments based on the achievement of specified milestones, payment of license exercise or option fees relating to product candidates and royalties on any net product sales. To date, we have received non-refundable upfront payments, several milestone payments, payments for research and development services provided to our collaborators, a change in control payment pursuant to a patent assignment agreement and payments for the sale of assets. However, we have not yet earned any license exercise or option fees, sales-based milestone payments or royalty revenue as a result of product sales.
In the future, we will seek to generate revenue from a combination of product sales and milestone payments and royalties on product sales in connection with our current collaborations or other collaborations we may enter into.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates, which include:
•employee-related expenses, including salary, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense;
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials;
•the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies;
•platform-related lab expenses, which includes costs related to synthesis, analysis and in vitro and in vivo characterization of deuterated compounds to support the selection and progression of potential product candidates;
•expenses related to consultants and advisors; and
•costs associated with nonclinical activities and regulatory operations.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and our clinical sites.
A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external costs, which we track on a program-by-program basis. These external costs include fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and contract research organizations in connection with our clinical trials, and costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials. Our internal research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs, depreciation and other indirect costs. We do not track our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis, as they are deployed across multiple projects under development.
The successful development of any of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably predict with certainty the duration and completion costs of the current or future clinical trials of any of our product candidates or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•the scope and rate of progress of our ongoing as well as any additional clinical trials and other research and development activities;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials, including on account of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on clinical trial sites;
•conduct of and results from ongoing as well as any additional clinical trials and research and development activities;
•significant and changing government regulation;
•the terms and timing and receipt of any marketing approvals;
•the performance of our collaborators;
•our ability to manufacture any of our product candidates that we are developing or may develop in the future; and
•the expense and success of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights, including potential claims that we infringe other parties’ intellectual property.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the cost and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials or other research and development activities beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials and the manufacturing that is typically required for those later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our product candidate development programs progress, but we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our development programs and plans.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses for our employees in executive, operational, finance, legal, investor relations, business development and human resource functions. Other general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs, depreciation and other expenses not allocated to research and development expense and professional fees for directors, accounting and legal services and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents. In both 2021 and 2020, we incurred expenses for intellectual property matters related to CTP-543.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as our pipeline grows and matures. Additionally, if and when we believe that a marketing approval of the first product candidate that we intend to commercialize on our own appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and related expenses as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales, marketing and distribution of our product candidates.
Investment income
Investment income consists of interest income earned on cash equivalents and investments. The amount of investment income earned in any particular period may vary primarily as a result of the amount of cash equivalents and investments held during the period and the types of securities included in our portfolio during the period. Our current investment policy is to maintain a diversified investment portfolio of U.S. government-backed securities and money market mutual funds consisting of U.S. government-backed securities.
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities consists of changes in the fair value of shares of common stock of Processa Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Processa, held by us, as discussed further in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unrealized loss on warrant liabilities
Unrealized loss on warrant liabilities consists of changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities resulting from the 2021 Financing, as discussed further in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income taxes
We record a provision or benefit for income taxes on pre-tax income or loss based on our estimated effective tax rate for the year. We had a pre-tax net loss of $80.1 million and did not record an income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2021. We had a pre-tax net loss of $74.9 million and recorded $85 thousand in income tax benefit during the year ended December 31, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates:
•revenue recognition;
•prepaid and accrued research and development expenses; and
•stock-based compensation.
Revenue recognition
We have primarily generated revenue through arrangements with collaborators for the development and commercialization of product candidates.
We account for revenue according to the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and all related amendments, which is also referred to as Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 606. We adopted ASC 606 effective January 1, 2018. ASC 606 is a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. The revenue standard is based on the principle that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The revenue standard also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts and costs to obtain or fulfill contracts. We applied ASC 606 on January 1, 2018 to all contracts using the modified retrospective approach. For additional details regarding our adoption of ASC 606 and our associated accounting policies, see Notes 2 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Prepaid and accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•contract research organizations in connection with clinical trials;
•investigative sites in connection with clinical trials;
•vendors in connection with nonclinical development activities; and
•vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of clinical supplies.
We generally accrue expenses related to research and development activities based on the services provided and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf as well as other vendors that provide research and development services. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based compensation
Since our inception in April 2006, we have applied the fair value recognition provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, to account for stock-based compensation arrangements with our employees. Stock-based compensation arrangements with non-employees has not been significant. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model for determining the estimated fair value for stock-based awards on the date of grant, which requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards, including the award’s expected term and the price volatility of the underlying stock. We recognize the value of the portion of the awards that is ultimately expected to vest as expense over the requisite vesting periods on a ratable basis for the entire award. Our stock option awards granted to employees generally have a ten-year term and typically vest over a four-year period.
Prior to the year ended December 31, 2020, expected volatility was estimated using a weighted average of our historical volatility of our common stock and the historical volatility of the common stock of a representative group of publicly-traded companies from the biopharmaceutical industry with similar characteristics as us, including stage of product development and therapeutic focus. Having accumulated sufficient historical trading data, we transitioned to calculating expected volatility for the year ended December 31, 2020 based on the historical volatility of only our common stock.
The expected term of awards represents the period of time that the awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method as prescribed by the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin, or SAB, No. 107, Share-Based Payment, as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term of stock options granted to employees.
We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no current intention of paying cash dividends. The risk-free interest rate was estimated using an average of treasury bill interest rates over a period commensurate with the expected term of the option at the time of grant. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
We have computed the fair value of employee stock options at the date of grant using the following weighted-average assumptions:
We have also granted restricted stock units and performance stock units to our employees and directors. We recognize compensation expense for restricted stock units ratably over the required service period. For awards with performance conditions in which the award does not vest unless the performance condition is met, we recognize expense only if we estimate that achievement of the performance condition is probable. If we conclude that vesting is probable, we recognize expense from the date that we reach this conclusion through the estimated vesting date using an accelerated attribution method.
PENDING AND RECENTLY ADOPTED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For detailed information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements and the actual and expected impact on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Discussion of the year ended December 31, 2021
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue
Total revenue was $32.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $24.7 million compared to the $7.9 million in revenue recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020. The revenue recognized in 2021 was primarily attributable to the $32.0 million in cash received from Vertex in exchange for the removal of the Milestone Obligation.
As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $2.8 million related to a payment received from GlaxoSmithKline, or GSK, and $4.8 million related to the potential future AVP-786 royalties under the Avanir Agreement that we sold in the 2021 Financing, of which $2.2 million is associated with RA Capital Healthcare Fund, L.P., or RA Capital, a related party. For additional details related to our contract liabilities and the 2021 Financing, see Notes 12 and 14, respectively, to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and development expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, with our external research expenses separately classified by program and our internal research expenses separately classified by category.
Research and development expenses were $87.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. CTP-543 external costs increased by $39.6 million from $18.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $57.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to increased activity in the two ongoing Phase 3 clinical trials. CTP-692 external costs decreased by $15.2 million from $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the cessation of development activities following the results of the Phase 2 clinical trial. External costs for other programs consisted of costs incurred to develop our research pipeline. Employee and contractor-related expenses consisted primarily of cash and non-cash stock-based compensation expenses. Facility and other expenses consisted primarily of rent and maintenance of our premises.
General and administrative expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including non-cash stock-based compensation. Other general and administrative expenses included accounting and legal services, office and facility-related costs. Total general and administrative expenses were $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is an increase of $3.6 million compared to $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in external professional service expenses and non-cash stock-based compensation expense.
Investment income
Investment income was $46 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of interest income earned on cash equivalents and investments. Investment income decreased $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 due to the decrease in our holdings of available-for-sale securities in order to maintain liquidity requirements.
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities
We recorded an unrealized loss on marketable equity securities of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities consisted of changes in the fair value of shares of common stock of Processa held by us, as discussed further in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unrealized loss on warrant liabilities
We recorded an unrealized loss on warrant liabilities of $2.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Unrealized loss on warrant liabilities consisted of changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities related to the 2021 Financing, as discussed further in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
License and research and development revenue
License and research and development revenue was $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The revenue recognized in 2020 was primarily due to the expiration of two licensing options under our previous collaboration agreement with Celgene Corporation, or Celgene, and the satisfaction of obligations to perform research and development services and to supply nonclinical and clinical trial material in connection with the termination of the agreement with Celgene. We recognized $7.8 million in revenue associated with this arrangement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, we had deferred revenue of $2.8 million related to a payment received from GSK. For additional details related to our contractual liabilities, see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and development expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, with our external research expenses separately classified by program and our internal research expenses separately classified by category.
Research and development expenses were $61.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. CTP-543 external costs primarily related to clinical development, including preparations for the Phase 3 clinical trial that we initiated in November 2020. CTP-692 external costs primarily related to the Phase 2 clinical trial. External costs for other programs consisted of costs incurred to develop our research pipeline. Employee and contractor-related expenses consisted primarily of cash and non-cash stock-based compensation expenses. Facility and other expenses consisted primarily of rent and maintenance of our premises.
General and administrative expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including non-cash stock-based compensation. Other general and administrative expenses included accounting and legal services, office and facility-related costs.
Investment income
Investment income was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of interest income earned on cash equivalents and investments.
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities
We recorded an unrealized loss on marketable equity securities of $3.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities consisted of changes in the fair value of shares of common stock of Processa held by us, as discussed further in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income tax benefit
We recognized a tax benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 upon the utilization of state research and development tax credits when filing our 2019 Massachusetts state tax return.
LIQUIDITY, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND GOING CONCERN
We have incurred cumulative losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception in April 2006, and as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $349.5 million. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may raise through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements and other sources.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $141.6 million. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy, primarily with a view to liquidity and capital preservation. Currently, our funds are held in money market mutual funds consisting of U.S. government-backed securities.
We have financed our operations to date primarily through the public offering and private placement of our equity, debt financing, funding from collaborations and patent assignments, asset sales and other arrangements. In February 2014, we completed our initial public offering, whereby we sold 6,649,690 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $14.00 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of $83.1 million. In March 2015, we sold 3,300,000 shares of common stock through an underwritten public offering at a price to the public of $15.15 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of $46.7 million. In January 2020, we sold 5,735,283 shares of common stock through an underwritten public offering at a price to the public of $9.92 per share. At the same time, we sold to a certain existing investor pre-funded warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,800,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $9.919 per pre-funded warrant, which represents the per share public offering price for the common stock less the $0.001 per share exercise price for each pre-funded warrant. The aggregate net proceeds from the 2020 Financing was $70.1 million.
In July 2017, we completed the sale of worldwide development and commercialization rights to CTP-656, now known as VX-561, and other assets related to the treatment of cystic fibrosis to Vertex pursuant to the Vertex Agreement. We received
$160.0 million in cash upon closing, with $16.0 million initially held in escrow, which was released to us in February 2019. In May 2021, we entered into the Vertex Amendment and received an additional $32.0 million in cash. For additional information concerning the revenue arrangement with Vertex, see Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In March 2019, we entered into the ATM Agreement with Jefferies. As of December 31, 2021, we had sold 2,209,687 shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $25.2 million, after payment of cash commissions of 3.0% of the gross proceeds to Jefferies.
In November 2021, we closed the 2021 Financing, raising $64.4 million in aggregate net proceeds. The 2021 Financing consisted of the sale of (i) 13,997 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock, (ii) 2,253,000 shares of common stock, (iii) warrants to purchase up to 16,250 shares of Series X1 Preferred Stock and (iv) a portion of our right to receive potential future AVP-786 royalties under the Avanir Agreement. If the warrants issued in connection with the 2021 Financing are exercised in full, we would receive additional gross proceeds of $103.1 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net working capital of $134.2 million. We have incurred cumulative net losses of $349.5 million since inception and require capital to continue future development activities. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have financed our operations primarily through the public offering and private placement of our equity, debt financing, funding from collaborations and patent assignments, asset sales and other arrangements. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we conduct our Phase 3 clinical program of CTP-543 in alopecia areata and seek marketing approval for CTP-543. For information regarding our recently completed equity financings, see Notes 13-15 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are subject to risks common to companies in the biotechnology industry, including, but not limited to, risks of failure or unsatisfactory results of nonclinical studies and clinical trials, the need to obtain additional financing to fund the future development of our pipeline, the need to obtain marketing approval for our product candidates, the need to successfully commercialize and gain market acceptance of our product candidates, dependence on key personnel, protection of proprietary technology, compliance with government regulations, development by competitors of technological innovations and ability to transition from pilot-scale manufacturing to large-scale production of products.
Under ASC Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern, management is required at each reporting period to evaluate whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about an entity’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. This evaluation initially does not take into consideration the potential mitigating effect of management’s plans that have not been fully implemented as of the date the financial statements are issued. When substantial doubt exists, management evaluates whether the mitigating effect of our plans sufficiently alleviates the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The mitigating effect of management’s plans, however, is only considered if both (i) it is probable that the plans will be effectively implemented within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued and (ii) it is probable that the plans, when implemented, will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Generally, to be considered probable of being effectively implemented, the plans must have been approved by our board of directors before the date that the financial statements are issued.
Successful completion of our development programs and, ultimately, the attainment of profitable operations are dependent upon future events, including obtaining adequate financing to support our cost structure and operating plan. Our plans to alleviate our financing requirements include, among other things, pursuing one or more of the following steps to raise additional capital, none of which can be guaranteed or are entirely within our control:
•raise funding through the sale of our common or preferred stock;
•raise funding through debt financing; and
•establish collaborations with potential partners to advance our product pipeline.
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and investments will allow us to meet our liquidity requirements into the fourth quarter of 2022. Our history of significant losses, our negative cash flows from operations, our limited liquidity resources currently on hand and our dependence on our ability to obtain additional financing to fund our operations after the current resources are exhausted, about which there can be no certainty, have resulted in our assessment that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least twelve months from the issuance date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business, and do not include any adjustments that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, or if we are unable to procure collaboration arrangements to advance our programs, we would be forced to discontinue some of our operations or develop and implement a plan to further extend payables, reduce overhead or scale back our current operating plan until sufficient additional capital is raised to support further operations. There can be no assurance that such a plan would be successful.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Discussion of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating activities. The cash used in operating activities generally approximates our net loss adjusted for non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our operating activities used cash of $55.2 million as compared to cash used by operating activities of $69.0 million during the prior year. The cash used during 2021 was largely driven by our development activities associated with CTP-543, whereas the cash used during 2020 was largely driven by our development activities associated with CTP-543 and CTP-692.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $32 million in cash received from Vertex in exchange for the removal of the Milestone Obligation, as discussed further in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities consisted of proceeds from the maturity of investments, purchases of investments and purchases of fixed assets. We did not purchase investments for the year ended December 31, 2021, whereas the net cash used to purchase investments for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $156.7 million. Net cash provided by maturities of investments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $52.7 million and $157.2 million, respectively. Purchases of fixed assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $0.3 million and $0.2 million, respectively. The increase in the purchase of investments during the 2020 period is primarily due to the management of funds received from the 2020 Financing, as discussed further in Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financing activities. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our financing activities generated cash of $67.1 million and $92.9 million, respectively. Cash generated during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $64.4 million of aggregate net proceeds from the 2021 Financing, $2.6 million of aggregate net proceeds pursuant to the ATM Agreement and $0.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options. Cash generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $70.1 million of aggregate net proceeds from the 2020 Financing, $22.0 million of aggregate net proceeds pursuant to the ATM Agreement and $0.8 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Operating capital requirements
We do not anticipate commercializing any of our product candidates until 2024 at the earliest. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek marketing approvals for, our product candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved products for which we retain commercialization rights. We are subject to all of the risks incident in the development of new drug products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business, as well as additional risks stemming from the unproven nature of deuterated drugs.
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate significant revenue from product sales unless and until we, or our collaborators, obtain marketing approval of and commercialize one of our current or future product candidates. Because our product candidates are in various stages of development and the outcome of these efforts is
uncertain, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether or when we will achieve profitability.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements and other sources. Except for any obligations of our collaborators to reimburse us for research and development expenses or to make milestone payments under our agreements with them, we do not have any additional committed external sources of funds. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional equity or debt securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders, increased fixed payment obligations and the issuance of securities with rights senior to those of our common stock. We may become subject to covenants under any future indebtedness that could limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, which could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business.
Our expectation with respect to the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors, including those discussed in the "Risk Factors" section in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.