ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”,” “Business” and the audited financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our securities, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change of control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us;
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our units, Class A common stock and/or warrants; and
● may not result in adjustment to the exercise price of our warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Proposed Business Combination
On February 16, 2022, immediately following the termination of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into the Transaction Agreement with Circle, Topco and Merger Sub, Circle is a global financial technology firm that provides internet-native payments and treasury infrastructure. Circle’s mission of raising global economic prosperity through the frictionless exchange of financial value is being met through a series of transaction and treasury services that help businesses and financial institutions globally to take advantage of the shift to a digital asset and blockchain powered global financial system. Circle is the principal operator of one of the fastest growing dollar digital assets, USD Coin (USDC).
The Proposed Transactions contemplated by the Transaction Agreement are comprised of two separate transactions: (a) pursuant to an Irish law court-approved Scheme, Circle’s shareholders will transfer their holdings of shares in the capital of Circle to Topco in exchange for the issuance of new shares in Topco, with the result that, at the effective time of the Scheme, Circle will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Topco; and (b) on the first business day following the Scheme effective time, subject to the conditions of the Transaction Agreement and in accordance with the DGCL, Merger Sub will merge with and into Concord, with Concord surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Topco.
Pursuant to the Scheme, at the Scheme effective time, each holder of Scheme Shares will transfer all of his, her or its Scheme Shares to Topco in exchange for the allotment and issuance by Topco of that number of Topco Ordinary Shares comprising that Scheme shareholder’s pro rata portion of an amount of Topco Ordinary Shares equal to the Company Equity Value divided by $10.00 and rounded down to the nearest whole number of Topco Ordinary Shares. The “Company Equity Value” means $9,000,000,000 plus (i) the aggregate amount of the net proceeds of any equity or convertible debt issued by Circle after March 6, 2021, plus (ii) the proceeds from any private placement completed by Topco or Circle after the date of the Transaction Agreement, plus (iii) the net equity value of any acquisition transaction completed by Circle in which equity interests of Circle or Topco are issued or sold completed after the date of the Transaction Agreement minus (iv) any indebtedness of Circle that will not convert into equity in connection with the Proposed Transactions. At the effective time of the Merger: (a) each share of Concord Class A common stock and each share of Concord Class B common stock (other than shares held by Concord as treasury stock or owned by Concord immediately prior to the Merger effective time) issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Merger effective time will be cancelled and automatically converted into and become the right to receive one Topco Ordinary Share (the “Merger Consideration”); and (b) each Concord warrant that is outstanding immediately prior to the Merger effective time will be converted into a Topco warrant on substantially the same terms as were in effect immediately prior to the Merger effective time. In addition, following the closing of the Proposed Transactions, Topco will issue, as earnout shares, up to an aggregate number of Topco Ordinary Shares equal to 20% of the Topco Ordinary shares in issue (on a fully diluted basis) immediately following the closing to certain of Circle’s existing shareholders, based on the volume weighted average trading price of the Topco Ordinary Shares meeting certain share price thresholds set forth in the Transaction Agreement.
Following the Proposed Transactions, it is expected that the Topco Ordinary Shares will be listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Transaction Agreement is subject to customary conditions of the respective parties, including the approval of the Proposed Transactions byConcord’s stockholders in accordance with Concord’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
Concurrently with the execution of the Transaction Agreement, certain securityholders of Circle entered into a Transaction Support Agreement with Concord, pursuant to which, among other things, such securityholders agreed to vote their Circle shares in favor of the Transaction Agreement, the Scheme and the transaction documents to which Circle is or will be a party. In addition, Circle’s Chief Executive Officer entered into a Transaction Support Agreement with Concord pursuant to which he further agreed not to vote in favor of any Alternative Transaction (as defined in the Transaction Agreement, but excluding for such purpose an initial public offering of Circle) for a period of six months following the termination of the Transaction Agreement under certain circumstances.
Also on February 16, 2022, Concord, Circle, Topco and Merger Sub entered into a Termination of Business Combination Agreement, pursuant to which the parties agreed to mutually terminate the Business Combination Agreement previously entered into among the parties. As a result of the termination of the Business Combination Agreement, effective as of February 16, 2022, the Business Combination Agreement is of no further force and effect, and certain transaction agreements entered into in connection with the Business Combination Agreement, including the subscription agreements, dated as of July 7, 2021, between Concord and certain investors, pursuant to which such investors committed to purchase $415 million of equity upon the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, were terminated in accordance with their respective terms.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO. Following the IPO, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents in the form of specified U.S. government treasury bills or specified money market funds after the IPO, and non-operating income or expense from the changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. Until the completion of our initial business combination, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $27,611,291, primarily driven by formation and operating costs of $1,233,168 and a change in the fair value of the warrant liability of $26,422,676, partially offset by interest income of $44,533.
During the period from August 20, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $230,981, driven by transaction costs of $254,150, related to the IPO, and formation and operating costs of $121,735, partially offset by a change in the fair value of the warrant liability of $138,962 and interest income of $5,942.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of our initial public offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our sponsors in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares and up to $200,000 in loans from our sponsors under unsecured promissory notes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in our trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to fund our working capital requirements (subject to a limit of $250,000 per year) and/or to pay our taxes. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Under the authorized shares method, each share is taxed at a graduated rate based on the number of authorized shares with a maximum aggregate tax of $200,000 per year. Under the assumed par value capital method, Delaware taxes each $1,000,000 of assumed par value capital at the rate of $350; where assumed par value would be (1) our total gross assets following the IPO, divided by (2) our total issued shares of common stock following the IPO, multiplied by (3) the number of our authorized shares following the IPO. Based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding and our estimated total gross proceeds after the completion of the IPO, our annual franchise tax obligation is expected to be capped at the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation of $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the trust account will be for income taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the trust account will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had available to us approximately $200,000 of proceeds held outside the trust account. We will use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the trust account is not sufficient to pay our taxes. We will have until June 10, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination. However, if we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate our initial business combination by that date, we may, by resolution of our board if requested by our sponsor, extend the period of time to consummate a business combination one time, by an additional six months (until December 10, 2022), subject to the sponsor depositing additional funds into the trust account.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsors, an affiliate of our sponsors or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants issued to our sponsors. The terms of such loans by our sponsors, an affiliate of our sponsors or our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsors, an affiliate of our sponsors or our officers and directors, if any, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following our initial public offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations;
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company”, we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things: (1) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (2) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (3) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (4) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.