ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
This section is intended to help potential investors understand our financial performance through a discussion of the factors affecting our financial condition at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 and our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. This section should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Cincinnati Federal provides financial services to individuals and businesses from our main office in Cincinnati, Ohio and our full service branch offices in Miami Heights, Anderson and Price Hill and in Covington and Florence in Northern Kentucky. Our primary market area includes Hamilton County, Ohio, and, to a lesser extent, Warren, Butler and Clermont Counties, Ohio. We also conduct business in the northern Kentucky region and make loans secured by properties in Campbell, Kenton and Boone Counties, Kentucky, as well as in Dearborn County, in southeastern Indiana.
Our business consists primarily of taking deposits from the general public and investing those deposits, together with borrowings and funds generated from operations, in one- to four-family residential real estate loans, nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans, home equity loans and lines of credit and construction and land loans. At December 31, 2021, $80.7 million, or 38.6% of our total loan portfolio, was comprised of one- to four-family residential real estate loans; $41.8 million, or 20.0%, consisted of nonresidential real estate loans; $55.0 million, or 26.3%, consisted of multi-family loans; $11.4 million, or 5.5%, consisted of home equity lines of credit; $19.4 million, or 9.3%, consisted of construction and land loans; $649,000 or 0.3% consisted of commercial business loans and consumer loans. We also invest in securities, which currently consist primarily of mortgage-backed securities issued by U.S. government sponsored entities and Federal Home Loan Bank stock.
Cincinnati Federal also operates an active mortgage banking unit with thirteen mortgage loan officers. This unit originates loans both for sale in the secondary market and for retention in our portfolio. The revenue from gain on sales of loans was $8.8 million for year ended December 31, 2021 and $9.5 million for year ended December 31, 2020.
We offer a variety of deposit accounts, including checking accounts, savings accounts and certificate of deposit accounts. We utilize advances from the FHLB-Cincinnati for liquidity and for asset/liability management purposes. At December 31, 2021, we had no advances outstanding with the FHLB-Cincinnati.
Our results of operations depend primarily on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities. Our results of operations also are affected by our provisions for loan losses, non-interest income and non-interest expense. Non-interest income currently consists primarily of gain (loss) on sale of mortgage loans, checking account service fee income, interchange fees from debit card transactions and income from bank owned life insurance. Non-interest expense currently consists primarily of expenses related to compensation and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, data processing, franchise taxes, federal deposit insurance premiums, impairment losses on foreclosed real estate and other operating expenses.
We invest in bank owned life insurance to provide us with a funding source to offset some costs of our benefit plan obligations. Bank owned life insurance provides us with non-interest income that is nontaxable. Federal regulations generally limit our investment in bank owned life insurance to 25% of our Tier 1 capital plus our allowance for loan losses. At December 31, 2021, this limit was $9.7 million, and we had invested $4.3 million in bank owned life insurance.
Cincinnati Federal Investment Services, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Cincinnati Federal under Ohio law, was formed in 2015 to offer nondeposit investment and insurance products. Cincinnati Federal Investment Services, LLC is currently inactive.
Our results of operations also may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies and actions of regulatory authorities.
Business Strategy
Our current business strategy is to operate as a well-capitalized and profitable community bank dedicated to serving the needs of our consumer and business customers, and offering personalized and efficient customer service. Our goals are to increase interest income through loan portfolio growth, expand fee income with the mortgage banking unit, lower our cost of deposits by increasing non-maturity based accounts, achieve economies of scale through balance sheet growth and diversify sources of income. Highlights of our current business strategy include:
● Increasing our origination of nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans. We began originating a significant amount of nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans in the early 2000s. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, such loans, together with construction and land loans (net of undisbursed loan proceeds), totaled $104.0 million and $77.1 million, or 268.8% and 211.4% of capital plus ALLL, respectively. Under our current Board-approved loan concentration policy, such loans (including construction and land loans, net of undisbursed loan proceeds) shall not exceed 300% of our capital plus ALLL. We intend to continue to increase our origination of nonresidential real estate and multi-family real estate loans, with a focus on multi-family loans. Most nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans are originated with adjustable rates. Nonresidential real estate and multi-family lending is expected to increase loan yields with shorter repricing terms than fixed-rate loans See “Business of Cincinnati Federal-Lending Activities-Commercial Real Estate and Multi-Family Lending.”
● Continuing to focus on our residential mortgage banking operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated $267.7 million of one-to four-family residential loans for sale, and we sold $272.9 million of one-to four-family residential loans. These loans are all sold on a non-recourse basis primarily to the FHLB-Cincinnati, Freddie Mac, and other private sector third-party buyers. Loans are sold on both a servicing-retained and servicing-released basis. Subject to mortgage market conditions, we intend to continue to increase the number of mortgage loan originators in order to increase our volume of sold loans with the potential for increased servicing income.
● Continuing to emphasize one- to four-family residential adjustable rate mortgage lending. We will continue to focus on originating one- to four-family adjustable rate mortgages for retention in our portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, $40.9 million, or 51.0%, of our one- to four-family residential mortgage loans, with contractual maturities after December 31, 2022, were adjustable rate loans. As of December 31, 2020, $54.4 million, or 64.3%, of our one- to four-family residential mortgage loans had adjustable rates. Adjustable rate loans have shorter repricing terms to mitigate interest rate risk.
● Increasing our “core” deposit base. We seek to increase our core deposit base, particularly checking accounts. Core deposits include all deposit account types except certificates of deposit. Core deposits are our least costly source of funds, which improves our interest rate spread, and represent our best opportunity to develop customer relationships that enable us to cross-sell our full complement of products and services. Core deposits also contribute non-interest income from account-related fees and services and are generally less sensitive to withdrawal when interest rates fluctuate. We have continued our marketing efforts for checking accounts through digital, print and outdoor advertising channels. Core deposits as of December 31, 2021 grew $31.3 million or 34.8% over December 31, 2020 balances. The increase is partially attributable to opening a $16.4 million deposit relationship with a local municipality. We continue to significantly expand and improve the products and services we offer our retail and business deposit customers who maintain core deposit accounts and have improved our infrastructure for electronic banking services, including business online banking, mobile banking, bill pay, remote deposit capture, wire transfers and e-statements. The deposit infrastructure we have established can accommodate significant increases in retail and business deposit accounts without additional capital expenditure. We will also continue to use non-core deposits, including certificates of deposit from the National CD Rateline Program, as a source of funds, in accordance with our asset/liability policies and funding strategies.
● Implementing a managed growth strategy. We intend to pursue a growth strategy for the foreseeable future, with the goal of improving the profitability of our business through increased net interest income. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we prepaid our outstanding FHLB-Cincinnati advances and incurred prepayment penalties of $767,000. The prepayment of the FHLB advances significantly decreased our cost of funds. Subject to market conditions, we intend to focus on growing our nonresidential real estate and multi-family loan portfolios as discussed above. To a lesser extent we intend to grow our one to four family residential and construction loan portfolios.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of income and expenses. We consider the accounting policies discussed below to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions that we use are based on historical experience and various other factors and are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, resulting in a change that could have a material impact on the carrying value of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
The following represent our critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is established as losses are estimated to have occurred through a provision for loan losses charged to income. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the uncollectability of a loan balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. The allowance for loan losses is evaluated on a regular basis by management and is based upon management’s periodic review of the collectability of the loans in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect the borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. For the year ended December 31, 2021, there were no loan losses charged against the allowance.
The allowance consists of allocated and general components. The allocated component relates to loans that are classified as impaired. For those loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The general component covers nonclassified loans and is based on historical charge-off experience and expected loss given default derived from our internal risk rating process. Other adjustments may be made to the allowance for pools of loans after an assessment of internal or external influences on credit quality that are not fully reflected in the historical loss or risk rating data.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we may not be able to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan-by-loan basis by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. In most cases impaired loans are collateral dependent. The appraised value is sensitive to a number of factors including condition of the property. During the year-ended December 31, 2021 there were no additional charge-offs on collateral dependent loans.
Groups of loans with similar risk characteristics are collectively evaluated for impairment based on the group’s historical loss experience adjusted for changes in trends, conditions and other relevant factors that affect repayment of the loans.
In the course of working with borrowers, we may choose to restructure the contractual terms of certain loans. In this scenario, we attempt to work-out an alternative payment schedule with the borrower in order to optimize collectability of the loan. Any loans that are modified are reviewed by us to identify if a troubled debt restructuring has occurred, which is when, for economic or legal reasons related to a borrower’s financial difficulties, we grant a concession to the borrower that we would not otherwise consider. Terms may be modified to fit the ability of the borrower to repay in line with the borrower’s current financial status, and the restructuring of the loan may include the transfer of assets from the borrower to satisfy the debt, a modification of loan terms or a combination of the two. If such efforts by us do not result in a satisfactory arrangement, the loan is referred to legal counsel, at which time we commence foreclosure. We may terminate foreclosure proceedings if the borrower is able to work-out a satisfactory payment plan. It is our policy that any restructured loans on nonaccrual, prior to being restructured, remain on nonaccrual status until six months of satisfactory borrower performance, at which time management would consider its return to accrual status. If a loan was accruing at the time of restructuring, we review the loan to determine if it is appropriate to continue the accrual of interest on the restructured loan.
With regards to determination of the amount of the allowance for credit losses, troubled debt restructured loans are considered to be impaired. As a result, the determination of the amount of impaired loans for each portfolio segment within troubled debt restructurings is the same as detailed previously.
Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati Lender Risk Account Receivable. Certain loan sale transactions with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati provide for establishment of a lender risk account receivable, which consists of amounts withheld from loan sale proceeds by the Federal Home Loan Bank of Cincinnati for absorbing inherent losses that are probable on those sold loans. These withheld funds are an asset as they are scheduled to be paid to us in future years, net of any credit losses on those loans sold. The receivables are initially measured at fair value. The fair value is estimated by discounting the cash flows over the life of each master commitment contract. The accretable yield is amortized over the life of the master commitment contract. Expected cash flows are re-evaluated at each measurement date. If there is an adverse change in expected cash flows, the accretable yield would be adjusted on a prospective basis and the asset would be evaluated for impairment. For the year ended December 31, 2021 there were no adverse changes in cash flows expected.
Mortgage Servicing Rights. Mortgage servicing assets are recognized separately when rights are acquired through sale of financial assets. Under the servicing assets and liabilities accounting guidance (ASC 860-50), servicing rights resulting from the sale of loans originated by us are initially measured at fair value at the date of transfer. Cincinnati Federal subsequently measures each class of servicing asset using the fair value method. Under the fair value method, the servicing rights are carried in the balance sheet at fair value and the changes in fair value are reported in earnings in the period in which the changes occur.
Fair value is based on a valuation model that calculates the present value of estimated future net servicing income. The valuation model incorporates assumptions that market participants would use in estimating future net servicing income, such as the cost to service, the discount rate, the custodial earnings rate, an inflation rate, ancillary income, prepayment speeds and default rates and losses. These variables change from quarter to quarter as market conditions and projected interest rates change, and may have an adverse impact on the value of the mortgage servicing rights and may result in a reduction or addition to noninterest income. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the fair value of the mortgage servicing rights decreased $736,000 primarily from an increase in prepayment speed assumptions.
Servicing fee income is recorded for fees earned for servicing loans. The fees are based on a contractual percentage of the outstanding principal or a fixed amount per loan and are recorded as income when earned.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impact
As a result of the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, economic uncertainties have arisen which may negatively affect the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the Company and, in particular, the collectability of the loan portfolio. The duration of these uncertainties and the ultimate financial effects cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Loan Modifications
Beginning in March 2020, we began receiving requests from certain of our borrowers for loan payment deferrals. In connection with the implementation of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and related provisions, we elected the temporary relief in the CARES Act not to apply the guidance in ASC 310-40 on accounting for troubled debt restructurings (TDRs) to loan modifications related to COVID-19 made between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (1) December 31, 2020 or (2) 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The relief was only applied to modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2020.
These modifications for our portfolio loans were for the deferral of principal and interest payments up to 90 day terms. Loan deferral terms may be extended on a case-by-case basis. Each request was evaluated individually and evidenced by a signed loan modification agreement. Interest on loan deferrals continued to accrue during the deferral period. While interest and fees were still accrued to income, through normal GAAP accounting, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments have emerged, interest income and fees accrued would need to be reversed. In such a scenario, interest income in future periods could be negatively impacted. At December 31, 2021, all loan deferral periods had ended and all affected loans had returned to regular repayment terms. In the event of a renewed escalation of the Covid-19 spread, it is uncertain what the potential impact of loan deferrals will have on the Company’s financial position, results of operations and the allowance for loan losses.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no loans remaining in loan deferral status. As of December 31, 2021, borrowers who had requested loan payment forbearance had returned to repayment under the original terms of the loan.
The Company services loans for various investors, including the FHLB-Cincinnati and Freddie Mac. Under terms of our agreement with these entities we are required to remit principal and interest on a scheduled basis. We have conformed our loan deferral program to meet the guidance issued by the FHLB-Cincinnati and Freddie Mac. As of December 31, 2021, there were no sold loans remaining in loan deferral status. As of December 31, 2021, all other borrowers requesting loan payment forbearance had returned to repayment under the original terms of the loan. In the event of a renewed escalation of the COVID-19 spread, it is uncertain what potential impact the loan deferrals for sold loans will have on our financial position.
Paycheck Protection Program
As part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) has been authorized to guarantee loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under the CARES Act through August 8, 2020. We began accepting applications on April 27, 2020. We originated a total of 23 PPP loans totaling $633,800 under the initial PPP. As of December 31, 2021, all loans originated under the original program have been forgiven. We participated in the second round of the PPP and originated seven loans totaling $185,000. As of December 31, 2021, all second round PPP loans had been forgiven.
Asset Impairment
Our mortgage servicing rights (MSRs) have experienced a decrease in their fair value as of December 31, 2021 as mortgage prepayment speed assumptions increased during the year ended December 31, 2021. The low mortgage interest rate environment resulted in increased loan origination volumes which offset the decline in valuation. The volume of loans sold with mortgage servicing rights retained has increased and resulted in an overall increase in the recorded value of our mortgage servicing rights since December 31, 2020. It is uncertain whether prolonged effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will result in future changes in the fair value of our MSRs.
Financial position and results of operations
While we have not experienced any charge-offs related to COVID-19 as of December 31, 2021, our allowance for loan losses calculation and resulting provision for loan losses are impacted by changes in economic conditions. In recent months the economy has experienced moderate growth per the January 2022 Federal Reserve Beige Book summary. As of December 31, 2021, our significant credit quality indicators, such as levels of delinquent, classified, impaired and nonperforming loans, have not deteriorated. Should economic conditions in our market area worsen, we could experience a need for further increases in our allowance for loan losses and be required to record additional provisions for loan loss expense. It is possible that our asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of COVID-19 worsen or are prolonged.
Capital and liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, all of our capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements to be considered a “well capitalized” institution. While we believe that we have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by COVID-19, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by further losses.
We maintain access to multiple sources of liquidity. Wholesale funding sources, particularly the FHLB and National CD Rateline, have remained open to us. If funding costs become elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on our net interest margin. If an extended recession caused large numbers of our deposit customers to withdraw their funds, we might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
Our processes, controls and business continuity plan
Following guidance from the Governors of Ohio and Kentucky, the Company deployed a successful remote working strategy, provided timely communication to our employees and customers, implemented protocols for employee safety, and initiated strategies for monitoring and responding to local COVID-19 impacts - including customer relief efforts. The Company’s preparedness efforts, coupled with timely plan implementation, resulted in minimal impacts to operations as a result of COVID-19. Prior technology planning resulted in the successful deployment of the majority of our operational teams to a remote environment. As the pandemic has progressed, all of our office employees have returned to the office. As of December 31, 2021, our branch lobbies were open for customer transactions with appropriate safety measures established. We do not anticipate incurring additional material costs related to adhering to the State of Ohio or Kentucky’s mandated COVID-19 related business requirements. Our management team continues to meet as needed to respond to any future COVID-19 interruptions or developments. We do not anticipate significant challenges to our ability to maintain our systems and controls in light of the measures we have taken to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The Company does not currently face any material resource constraint through the implementation of our business continuity plans.
Lending
The Company’s loan exposure is predominately residential, multifamily and nonresidential in nature. See Note 3 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no direct exposure to the hospitality, restaurant, travel, energy, aviation, healthcare or senior living industries.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total Assets. Total assets were $251.5 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $14.3 million, or 6.0%, over the $237.1 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets was due primarily to an increase in loans of $28.9 million and an increase in available for sale debt securities of $2.7 million, which were partially offset by a decrease in cash and cash equivalents of $10.5 million, a decrease in loans held for sale of $5.2 million and a decrease in interest-bearing time deposits of $3.0 million.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $10.5 million, or 32.5%, to $21.9 million at December 31, 2021 from $32.3 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily the result of funding loan growth and an increase in available-for-sale securities.
Available-for-Sale Securities. Investment securities available-for-sale increased $2.7 million to $7.9 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $5.2 million at December 31, 2020 due to the purchase of a $5.0 million monthly adjustable mortgage-backed security, partially offset by maturities of $2.3 million. There were no purchases or sales of available-for-sale securities in 2020.
Loans Held for Sale. We currently sell certain fixed-rate, 15- and 30-year term, one-to-four family mortgage loans. We have sold loans on both a servicing-released and servicing-retained basis to: the FHLB-Cincinnati, through its mortgage purchase program; Freddie Mac; and certain private sector third-party buyers. Loans held for sale decreased $5.2 million, or 39.1%, to $8.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $13.3 million at December 31, 2020. In 2021, we originated $267.7 million of loans for sale, all of which were one- to four-family residential real estate loans.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold $272.9 million of one-to- four family residential loans, on both a servicing-retained and servicing-released basis. The reduction in interest rates implemented by the Federal Reserve Board in 2020 continued to have a favorable impact on the residential real estate market and our originations of fixed-rate mortgage loans in 2021. Management intends to continue this sales activity in future periods to generate gains on sale and servicing fee income. However, with market interest rates expected to increase throughout 2022, and real estate activity returning to more normal levels, it is unclear what level of activity we may be able to generate during 2022.
Net Loans. Net loans increased $28.9 million, or 17.3%, to $195.5 million at December 31, 2021 from $166.7 million at December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we originated $89.3 million of loans for the portfolio, $22.4 million of which were one- to four- family residential real estate loans, $21.2 million were nonresidential real estate loans, $21.4 million were multi-family loans, $7.6 million were home equity lines of credit, $16.7 million were construction and land loans. The one-to-four family residential loan portfolio declined by $4.1 million, as borrowers elected to refinance their loans at lower mortgage rates, and the Bank elected to sell the majority of these new fixed rate residential loans in the secondary market. This decline in the residential loan portfolio was offset by net increases in the nonresidential loan portfolio of $12.2 million and $13.3 million in the multifamily loan portfolio. The growth in these segments reflects our strategy to grow the commercial real estate portfolio to enhance loan yields.
Mortgage Servicing Rights. Mortgage servicing rights increased to $2.2 million, or 10.1%, from $2.0 million at December 31, 2021. New mortgage servicing rights of $941,000 were recognized while the fair value of mortgage servicing rights declined $736,000 due to higher prepayment speed assumptions. Mortgage servicing rights are valued by an independent third-party. During 2021 the value of mortgage servicing rights decreased to 79 basis points at December 31, 2021 from 88 basis points at December 31, 2020.
Other Assets. Other assets decreased $534,000, or 33.3%, to $1.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $1.6 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in the fair value of mortgage banking derivatives and the collection of COVID deferral balances.
Deposits. Deposits increased $52.2 million, or 34.3%, to $204.5 million at December 31, 2021 from $152.2 million at December 31, 2020. Our core deposits increased $31.3 million, or 34.8%, to $121.3 million at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. Demand deposit accounts increased $3.8 million, or 9.2% and savings increased $27.5 million, or 57.2%, as part of our strategy to increase lower cost funding sources. Time deposits increased $20.9 million, or 33.7%, to $83.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $62.2 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in time deposits was primarily due to the increase in National CD Rateline deposits to replace higher rate FHLB-Cincinnati advances. Deposits obtained through the National CD Rateline Program increased to $40.9 million at December 31, 2021 from $5.6 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in wholesale time deposits was part of the Bank’s strategy to reduce the cost of funds by repaying higher rate FHLB advances. Per the following Average Balances and Yield table, the cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased 58 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Management intends to continue its strategy of pursuing growth in lower cost core deposits in 2022.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances. Federal Home Loan Bank advances decreased $38.4 million. We had no outstanding advances at December 31, 2021. The decrease in FHLB advances was part of our strategy to reduce our cost of funds. While the prepayment of advances resulted in FHLB advance prepayment penalties of $767,000 on a pre-tax basis, management anticipates a pretax interest expense reduction of approximately $120,000 per quarter as a result of this transaction, which represents the elimination of interest expense on FHLB borrowings, net of the interest expense expected on the new CD Rateline deposits.
Stockholders’ Equity. Stockholders’ equity increased $1.4 million, or 3.4%, to $42.9 million at December 31, 2021 from $41.5 million at December 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from net income of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Comparison of Operating Results for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
General. Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.65 million, compared to a net income of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.5 million or 47.8%. The decrease was primarily due to a $1.0 million decrease in noninterest income and a $2.3 million increase in noninterest expense, partially offset by a $1.2 million increase in net interest income and a $265,000 decrease in the provision for loan losses. The decrease in noninterest income was primarily attributable to decreases in gain on sale of loans and mortgage derivative income. The increase in noninterest expense was primarily attributable to increased personnel expenses of $805,000 due to salary and payroll tax expense increases, benefit plan expense increases, and healthcare expense increases. Noninterest expense included Federal Home Loan Bank advance prepayment penalties of $767,000.
Interest and Dividend Income. Interest and dividend income increased $129,000, or 1.6%, to $8.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to a $212,000, or 2.7%, increase in interest on loans receivable, primarily due to a $12.6 million increase in the average balance on loans, partially offset by a 19 basis point decrease in the average yield on loans.
Interest income on securities decreased $7,000, or 10.7%. The average yield on investment securities decreased 42 basis points to 0.67% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 1.09% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the average yield on available-for-sale securities was attributable to the purchase of lower yielding adjustable and floating rate mortgage-backed securities. Dividends on Federal Home Loan Bank stock and other investments decreased $76,000 primarily due to the decrease in the average yield on other interest-bearing deposits of 45 basis points. The average balance of other interest-bearing deposits, including certificates of deposit in other financial institutions, and federal funds sold increased $2.6 million to $21.6 million at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense. Total interest expense decreased $1.0 million, or 39.5%, to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Interest expense on deposit accounts decreased $625,000, or 37.8%, to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of 53 basis points in the average cost of deposits, which was partially offset by a $19.0 million increase in the average balance year-to-year. The average cost of interest-bearing demand accounts decreased 7 basis points to 0.15%, while average interest-bearing demand account balances increased $3.1 million at December 31, 2021. The average cost of savings accounts decreased 9 basis points to 0.19%, while average savings account balances increased $15.5 million at December 31, 2021.The average balance of certificates of deposits increased $364,000 while the average cost of certificates of deposits decreased 87 basis points to 1.23% at December 31, 2021.
Interest expense on FHLB advances decreased $401,000 to $540,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $941,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The average balance of advances decreased $15.5 million. There were no FHLB advances outstanding at December 31, 2021.
Net Interest Income. Net interest income increased $1.2 million, or 21.3%, to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Average net interest-earning assets increased $18.0 million compared to year end December 31, 2020. The interest rate spread increased to 2.73% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 2.39% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net interest margin increased to 2.88% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 2.58% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Provision for Loan Losses. Based on management’s analysis of the allowance for loan losses described in Note 1 of our financial statements “Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” we did not record a provision for loan losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a provision for loan losses of $265,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The allowance for loan losses was $1.7 million, or 0.80% of total loans, at December 31, 2021, compared to $1.7 million or 0.97% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. The increase in the provision for loan losses in 2020 was due primarily to the uncertainty of impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy as a whole and on our market area in particular. The resurgence of COVID cases nationally in late 2020, and the prospect of continued economic weakness and continued high unemployment, indicated a qualitative factor adjustment was warranted to increase the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020. We included in our consideration of the ALLL the continued low balances of our nonperforming loans and delinquent loans during 2021 and the continuing decrease in historical charge-offs for the six year look back period. Total nonperforming loans were $120,000 and $174,000 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Substandard loans declined to $641,000 at December 31, 2021, from $883,000 at December 31, 2020, and loans past due greater than 30 days totaled $216,000 and $398,000 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Bank had no loan charge-offs during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As a percentage of nonperforming loans, the allowance for loan losses was 1,392% and 962% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The allowance for loan losses reflects the estimate we believe to be adequate to cover incurred probable losses which were inherent in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2021. While we believe the estimates and assumptions used in our determination of the adequacy of the allowance are reasonable, such estimates and assumptions could be proven incorrect in the future, and the actual amount of future provisions may exceed the amount of past provisions, and the increase in future provisions that may be required may adversely impact our financial condition and results of operations. In addition, bank regulatory agencies periodically review our allowance for loan losses and may require an increase in the provision for possible loan losses or the recognition of further loan charge-offs, based on judgments different than those of management.
Non-Interest Income. Non-interest income decreased $1.0 million, or 9.8%, to $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to a decrease of $755,000 in gain on sales of loans and a $587,000 decrease in mortgage derivative income. The decrease in mortgage banking related revenue was due to an increase in market interest rates. The increase in market interest rates resulted in a decline in the demand for refinance loans. While we expect interest rates to rise in 2022, resulting in real estate activity returning to normal levels, it is unclear what level of activity we may be able to generate during 2022.
Non-Interest Expense. Non-interest expense increased $2.3 million, or 19.0%, to $14.1 million from $11.8 million at December 31, 2020. Salaries and employee benefits increased $805,000, or 10.3%. The increase in salaries and employee benefit expense was due to higher wage costs due to competitive pressures, increased equity incentive plan expense, ESOP expense and higher payroll tax expense. The increase in equity incentive plan expenses is the result of grants made under the equity incentive plans approved by stockholders in May 2021. ESOP expenses increased due to the increase in share price during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Federal Home Loan Bank advance prepayment penalty expense increased $767,000 as the Bank repaid all outstanding FHLB advance borrowings. The FHLB advance funding was primarily replaced by $36.7 million in National CD Rateline funds at an average rate of 0.29% and a term of 23 months.
Data processing costs increased $249,000, or 41.6% from due to account growth, new product usage growth, increased ATM management costs, and increased transaction volumes. Advertising expense increased $53,000, primarily from our checking account marketing program through a third-party vendor. Franchise tax expense increased $76,000, or 36.3% due to the increase in Bank equity at December 31, 2020.
Federal Income Taxes. The provision for income taxes decreased $372,000, or 45.3%, to $448,000 at December 31, 2021. The decrease was due primarily to decreased income before income taxes of $1.9 million, or 47.3%. The effective rates were 21.4% and 20.6% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Average Balances and Yields. The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the periods indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made. Any adjustments necessary to present yields on a tax-equivalent basis are insignificant. All average balances are monthly average balances. Management does not believe that the use of month-end balances instead of daily average balances has caused any material differences in the information presented. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances only. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts, and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or interest expense.
(1) Consists of FHLB-Cincinnati stock, FHLB DDA, certificates of deposit and cash reserves.
(2) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-earning assets and the weighted average rate of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Interest on loans includes loan fee income of $233,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $94,000 of loan fee expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. Loan fee income increased in 2021 due to prepayment penalties received on commercial real estate loans.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table presents the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income for the periods indicated. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume.
There were no out-of-period items or adjustments related to the above table.
Management of Market Risk
General. Our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk because, as a financial institution, the majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature and sensitive to changes in interest rates. Therefore, a principal part of our operations is to manage interest rate risk and limit the exposure of our financial condition and results of operations to changes in market interest rates. Our Asset/Liability Committee is responsible for evaluating the interest rate risk inherent in our assets and liabilities, for determining the level of risk that is appropriate, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the policy and guidelines approved by our board of directors.
Our asset/liability management strategy attempts to manage the impact of changes in interest rates on net interest income, our primary source of earnings. Among the techniques we use to manage interest rate risk are:
● originating nonresidential real estate and multi-family loans, and, to a lesser extent, construction, consumer and commercial business loans, all of which tend to have shorter terms and higher interest rates than one- to four-family residential real estate loans, and which generate customer relationships that can result in larger non-interest bearing checking accounts;
● selling substantially all of our newly-originated longer-term fixed-rate one- to four-family residential real estate loans and retaining the shorter-term fixed-rate and adjustable-rate one- to four-family residential real estate loans that we originate, subject to market conditions and periodic review of our asset/liability management needs;
● reducing our dependence on certificates of deposit to support lending and investment activities and increasing our reliance on core deposits, including checking accounts and savings accounts, which are less interest rate sensitive than certificates of deposit; and
● purchasing adjustable and floating rate mortgage-backed securities for the investment portfolio.
Our Board of Directors is responsible for the review and oversight of our Asset/Liability Committee, which is comprised of our executive management team and other essential operational staff. This committee is charged with developing and implementing an asset/liability management plan, and meets at least quarterly to review pricing and liquidity needs and assess our interest rate risk. We currently utilize a third-party modeling program, prepared on a quarterly basis, to evaluate our sensitivity to changing interest rates, given our business strategy, operating environment, capital, liquidity and performance objectives, and for managing this risk consistent with the guidelines approved by the Board of Directors.
Net Portfolio Value. We compute amounts by which the net present value of our cash flow from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet items (net portfolio value or “NPV”) would change in the event of a range of assumed changes in market interest rates. We measure our interest rate risk and potential change in our NPV through the use of a financial model. This model uses a discounted cash flow analysis and an option-based pricing approach to measure the interest rate sensitivity of net portfolio value. Historically, the model estimated the economic value of each type of asset, liability and off-balance sheet contract under the assumption that the United States Treasury yield curve increases or decreases instantaneously by 100 to 300 basis points in 100 basis point increments. However, given the current level of market interest rates, an NPV calculation for an interest rate decrease of greater than 100 basis points has not been prepared. A basis point equals one-hundredth of one percent, and 100 basis points equals one percent. An increase in interest rates from 3% to 4% would mean, for example, a 100 basis point increase in the “Change in Interest Rates” column below.
The table below sets forth, as of December 31, 2021, the calculation of the estimated changes in our net portfolio value that would result from the designated immediate changes in the United States Treasury yield curve.
(1) Assumes an immediate uniform change in interest rates at all maturities.
(2) NPV is the discounted present value of expected cash flows from assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet contracts.
(3) Present value of assets represents the discounted present value of incoming cash flows on interest-earning assets.
(4) NPV Ratio represents NPV divided by the present value of assets.
The table above indicates that at December 31, 2021, in the event of an instantaneous parallel 100 basis point increase in interest rates, we would experience an 8.72% decrease in net portfolio value. In the event of an instantaneous 100 basis point decrease in interest rates, we would experience a 6.96% decrease in net portfolio value.
(1)The calculated changes assume an immediate shock of the static yield curve.
The table above indicates a decrease in net interest income in an increasing interest rate shock scenario. This decrease in net interest income would indicate that the model projects the cost of funds to increase faster than asset yields. The Bank will monitor and adjust assumptions for decay rates and deposit rate sensitivity as market interest rates change. The effect of interest rate changes may be mitigated to the extent deposit costs are less sensitive to market interest rate changes than the model projects. Actual balance sheet composition may differ from projections and mitigate the impact of interest rate changes, as well.
We do not engage in hedging activities, such as engaging in futures, options or swap transactions, or investing in high-risk mortgage derivatives, such as collateralized mortgage obligation residual interests, real estate mortgage investment conduit residual interests or stripped mortgage-backed securities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity describes our ability to meet the financial obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Liquidity is primarily needed to meet the borrowing and deposit withdrawal requirements of our customers and to fund current and planned expenditures. Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans and securities, proceeds from the sale of loans, and proceeds from maturities of securities. We also have the ability to borrow from the FHLB-Cincinnati. At December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding advances from the FHLB-Cincinnati, and had the capacity to borrow approximately an additional $44.7 million from the FHLB-Cincinnati based on our collateral capacity. At December 31, 2021, we had an additional $11.5 million on lines of credit available with three commercial banks.
While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions, and competition. Our most liquid assets are cash and short-term investments including interest-bearing demand deposits. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending, and investing activities during any given period.
Our cash flows are comprised of three primary classifications: cash flows from operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and net cash used in operating activities was $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities, which consists primarily of disbursements for loan originations and purchase of investment securities, partially offset by proceeds from maturing securities, pay downs on mortgage-backed securities and proceeds from sale of foreclosed assets was $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by investing activities was $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities, consisting primarily of a net increase in deposits, the repayment of Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings and repurchase of common stock, was $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash used in financing activities, consisting mainly of a decrease in deposits, the proceeds from the stock subscriptions and repayment of Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings, was $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We are committed to maintaining a strong liquidity position. We monitor our liquidity position on a daily basis. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds to meet our current funding commitments. Based on our deposit retention experience and current pricing strategy, we anticipate that a significant portion of maturing time deposits will be retained. We also anticipate continued participation in the National CD Rateline Program as a wholesale source of certificates of deposit, and continued use of FHLB-Cincinnati advances.
Cincinnati Bancorp, Inc. is a separate corporate entity from Cincinnati Federal and it must provide for its own liquidity to pay any dividends to its stockholders, to repurchase any shares of its common stock, and for other corporate purposes. Cincinnati Bancorp Inc.’s primary source of liquidity is any dividend payments it may receive from Cincinnati Federal. Cincinnati Bancorp, Inc. (on an unconsolidated basis) had $5.7 million in liquid assets at December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, Cincinnati Federal exceeded all of its regulatory capital requirements with a Tier 1 leverage capital level of $37.0 million, or 14.7% of adjusted total assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $12.6 million, or 5.0%; total risk-based capital of $38.7 million, or 20.0% of risk-weighted assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $19.3 million, or 10.0%; and common equity tier 1 risk based capital of $37.0 million, or 19.2%, of risk-weighted assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $12.6 million, or 6.5% of risk-weighted assets. At December 31, 2020, Cincinnati Federal exceeded all of its regulatory capital requirements with a Tier 1 leverage capital level of $34.8 million, or 14.8% of adjusted total assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $11.8 million, or 5.0%; and total risk-based capital of $36.5 million, or 22.0% of risk-weighted assets, which is above the well-capitalized required level of $16.6 million, or 10.0%. Accordingly, Cincinnati Federal was categorized as well capitalized at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Management is not aware of any conditions or events since the most recent notification that would change our category.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
Commitments. As a financial services provider, we routinely are a party to various financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risks, such as commitments to extend credit and unused lines of credit. While these contractual obligations represent our future cash requirements, a significant portion of commitments to extend credit may expire without being drawn upon. Such commitments are subject to the same credit policies and approval process accorded to loans we make. At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding commitments to originate fixed-rate loans of $15.3 million, unfunded lines of credit of $20.9 million and forward sale commitments of $23.4 million. We had commitments to originate loans for portfolio of $3.4 million at December 31, 2021 and $189,000 at December 31, 2020. We anticipate that we will have sufficient funds available to meet our current lending commitments. Time deposits that are scheduled to mature in one year or less from December 31, 2021 totaled $31.1 million. Management expects that a substantial portion of the maturing time deposits will be renewed. However, if a substantial portion of these deposits is not retained, we may utilize Federal Home Loan Bank advances or raise interest rates on deposits to attract new accounts, which may result in higher levels of interest expense.
Contractual Obligations. In the ordinary course of our operations, we enter into certain contractual obligations. Such obligations include data processing services, operating leases for premises and equipment, agreements with respect to borrowed funds and deposit liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for a description of recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Price
The consolidated financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all of the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates, generally, have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than does inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.