Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the “Selected Consolidated Financial and Other Data” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this 10-K filing. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Form 10-K. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future. Except as otherwise noted, all references to 2021 refer to the year ended December 31, 2021 and all references to 2020 refer to the year ended December 31, 2020. Discussion on the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in our prospectus filed on October 22, 2021.
Overview
The Vita Coco Company is a leading platform for brands in the functional beverage category. We pioneered packaged coconut water in 2004 and extended our business into other healthy hydration categories. Our mission is to deliver great tasting, natural and nutritious products that are better for consumers and better for the world. Today we believe that we are the largest brand globally in the coconut and other plant waters category, and one of the largest suppliers of private label coconut water.
Our branded portfolio is led by our Vita Coco brand, which is the leader in the global coconut water category, and also includes coconut oil and coconut milk offerings. Our other brands include Runa, a leading plant-based energy drink inspired from the guayusa plant native to Ecuador, Ever & Ever, a sustainably packaged water, and the recently launched PWR LIFT, a protein-infused fitness drink. We also supply private label products to key retailers in both the coconut water and coconut oil categories.
We source our coconut water, from a diversified global network of 15 factories across seven countries supported by thousands of coconut farmers. As we do not own any of the coconut water factories, our supply chain is a fixed asset-lite model designed to better react to changes in the market or consumer preferences. We also work with co-packers in America and Europe to support local packaging and repacking of our products and to better service our customers’ needs.
Vita Coco is available in over 30 countries, with our primary markets in North America, the United Kingdom, and China. Our primary markets for private label are North America and Europe. Our products are distributed primarily through club, food, drug, mass, convenience, e-commerce, and foodservice channels. We are also available in a variety of on-premise locations such as corporate offices, fitness clubs, airports, cruise lines, and educational institutions.
Our recent historical financial performance reflects the strides we have made to scale and grow our business:
•For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported net sales of $380 million, representing a 22% increase from $311 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the three months ended December 31, 2021, we reported net sales of $87 million, representing a 25% increase from $70 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020 primarily driven by a 61% increase in net sales of Vita Coco Coconut Water during the same period.
•For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated gross profit of $113 million, representing a margin of 30% and a 8% increase from $105 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the three months ended
December 31, 2021, we generated gross profit of $22 million, representing a margin of 25% and remaining relatively flat in absolute dollar terms compared to $23 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020.
•For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net income was $19 million, representing a margin of 5% and a 8% decrease from our net income of $33 million and a margin of 11% for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the three months ended December 31, 2021, our net loss was $3 million, representing a negative margin of 4% and a 120% decrease from our net income of $17 million and margin of 25% for the three months ended December 31, 2020.
•For the year ended December 31, 2021, our adjusted EBITDA was $37 million, representing a margin of 10% and increase of 5% from our adjusted EBITDA of $35 million, representing a margin of 11% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The declining margin was primarily driven by severe escalation of transportation costs, especially ocean freight. For the three months ended December 31, 2021, our adjusted EBITDA loss was $1 million, representing a negative margin of 1% and a decrease of 89% from our adjusted EBITDA of $5 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020, due in part to the challenging supply chain environment we experienced during the three months ended December 31, 2021.
•We have traditionally experienced minimal capital expenditures given our asset-lite supply chain model. We believe that our operating cash flow and access to credit facilities provide us with sufficient capability to support our growth plans.
•As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $0 million and $25 million, respectively, of outstanding indebtedness.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the growth of our business and our future success are dependent upon many factors, the most important of which are as follows:
Ability to Grow and Maintain the Health of Our Brands
We have developed a strong and trusted brand in Vita Coco that we believe has been integral to the growth and health of our business, and are in the early stages of developing additional brands to broaden our portfolio. In addition, we are continuously developing and sharpening our marketing strategies to ensure that our story and purpose are understood and resonate with consumers. The success and reputation of our current brands and any brands we develop in the future are critical to the growth of our business and our future success. We aim to grow our brands by expanding distribution, adding new formats, promoting trials with new consumers and investing in marketing to attract new consumers and demonstrating to existing consumers the quality and value of their purchases. To grow and maintain the health of our bands we must invest in sales and marketing and execute on our sales strategy to develop and deepen consumers’ connection to our brands. We believe that the strength of our core brand, Vita Coco, should enable us to continue to invest in expanding our brands across beverage categories and channels, and to deepen relationships with consumers across all demographics.
Ability to Generate Incremental Volume Through Product Innovation
The beverage industry is subject to shifting consumer preferences which presents opportunities for new beverage occasions, new tastes and new functional benefits. Our future success is therefore partially dependent on our ability to identify these trends and develop products and brands that effectively meet those needs. Our innovation efforts focus on developing and marketing product extensions, improving upon the quality and taste profiles of existing products, and introducing new products or brands to meet evolving consumer needs. We aim to develop and test new products, and scale the most promising among them to ensure a strong pipeline of product innovation.
We maintain in-house research and development capabilities as well as strong third-party relationships with flavor development houses, and we monitor the latest advancements in clean ingredients to support continued innovation and learning. Our ability to successfully improve existing products, or develop, market and sell new products or brands depends on our commitment and continued investment in innovation, and our willingness to try and fail and learn from our experiences.
Relationship with Suppliers and Asset-Lite Supply Chain Model
We believe our global asset lite supply chain model has been an integral part in our ability to efficiently scale our business and compete in the marketplace. This asset-lite model creates leverage with our partners across our supply chain, allowing us to effectively manage total delivery costs and affording greater ability to shift volume between our suppliers,
and thus better manage our supply levels. In addition, our scale of sourcing has allowed us to add volume and service retailers more reliably, and our global position as the largest and highest quality coconut water procurer in the world protects our customer and supplier relationships. We aim to drive continuous operational improvements with our supplier partners to enhance quality of our products, better control costs and ultimately maintain our competitive advantage. Our dedicated engineering support team supports our supply partners’ expansion, efficiency and environmental initiatives and shares best practices across our supplier network.
Ability to Successfully Execute Both In-Store and Online
To aid the growth of our business, we intend to continue improving our operational efficiency and leverage our brand position across channels, and therefore have a balanced approach to investment and development of capabilities in retail and e-commerce execution. Our DSD network is an important asset in executing physical retail programs and ensuring product availability and visibility in the United States. Managing our DSD network requires relationship building and communication as to plans, and alignment of goals and interests. We look to adapt our approaches as consumer and retail behavior changes to ensure we remain competitive and visible regardless of channel.
Quarterly Performance of Our Business
The beverage market is subject to seasonal variations, and we have typically experienced moderately higher levels of our sales in the second and third quarters of the year when demand for our functional beverage products are highest during the warmer months. Our fourth quarter shipments can also be influenced by our retailer and distributor customers rightsizing their inventory levels after the peak selling levels of the second and third quarters.
Our sales can also be influenced by the timing of holidays and weather fluctuations. In addition, our financial results may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to the timing of significant promotional activity or programs of our retail customers, on-boarding new retail or distribution partnerships, which typically launch with inventory buy-ins, and the timing of new product launches, which may also impact comparability to prior periods. These factors can also impact our working capital and inventory balances in each period in ways that may be difficult to forecast. Our goal is to make the right business decisions for our long-term success despite fluctuations in quarterly operating results.
Economic Environment & Industry Trends
Our business is healthier where consumers have higher discretionary incomes and are motivated by health and wellness diets and hydration. Most of our products are at premium prices reflecting their functionality and uniqueness so we do better in more developed economies and major urban areas. As economies continue to develop and education on health and wellness becomes more mainstream, we anticipate our offerings becoming more appealing and endeavor to position our products to benefit from such changes.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide beginning in January 2020. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact the Company’s cash flow, business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic (including any resurgences), impact of the new COVID-19 variants and the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, and the level of social and economic restrictions imposed in the United States and abroad in an effort to curb the spread of the virus, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape.
The Company has experienced some impacts on inventory availability and delivery capacity since the outbreak which have impacted, at times, the Company’s ability to fully service its customers, including temporary facility shutdowns, local transportation interruptions, and general pressure on global shipping lines. The Company has taken measures to bolster key aspects of its supply chain and the Company continues to work with its supply chain partners to try to ensure its ability to service its customers. Although not a material impact in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, the Company saw in fiscal year 2021 significant changes to global ocean shipping availability and pricing of containers, lengthening transit times, increased domestic transportation costs and some payroll inflationary effects among other impacts. Starting in the second quarter 2021, we took pricing actions such as delaying promotions until later in the year, reducing discounting and sharing cost increases with private label customers as we were able, in order to partially offset the inflationary costs of goods effects we were experiencing.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we estimate that our EBITDA absorbed incremental costs of goods on a rate/mix basis compared to prior year of approximately $24 million, relating to transportation cost increases across both ocean
freight and domestic logistics as a result of global supply chain disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not believe the current costs of goods inflated by the current economic and supply chain pressures are fully representative of our future costs of goods in a normal supply chain environment.
The Company is continuing to monitor the situation carefully to understand any future potential impact on its people and business. The Company is taking all necessary steps to protect its people and mitigate any risk to its business. As a result, it is not currently possible to ascertain the overall impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity. Future events and effects related to COVID-19 cannot be determined with precision and actual results could significantly differ from estimates or forecasts.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Sales
We generate revenue through the sale of our Vita Coco branded coconut water, Private Label and Other products in the Americas and International segments. Our sales are predominantly made to distributors or to retailers for final sale to consumers through retail channels, which includes sales to traditional brick and mortar retailers, who may also resell our products through their own online platforms. Our revenue is recognized net of allowances for returns, discounts, credits and any taxes collected from consumers.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes the costs of the products sold to customers, inbound and outbound shipping and handling costs, freight and duties, shipping and packaging supplies, and warehouse fulfillment costs.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is net sales less cost of goods sold, and gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of net sales. Gross profit has been, and will continue to be, affected by various factors, including the mix of products we sell, the channel through which we sell our products, the promotional environment in the marketplace, manufacturing costs, commodity prices and transportation rates. We expect that our gross margin will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these variables.
Management believes gross margin provides investors with useful information related to the profitability of our business prior to considering all of the operating costs incurred. Management uses gross profit and gross margin as key measures in making financial, operating and planning decisions and in evaluating our performance.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses include marketing expenses, sales promotion expenses, and general and administrative expenses. Marketing and sales promotion expenses consist primarily of costs incurred promoting and marketing our products and are primarily driven by investments to grow our business and retain customers. We expect selling and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars and to vary from period to period as a percentage of net sales for the foreseeable future. General and administrative expense include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation, broker commissions and other headcount-related expenses associated with supply chain & operations, finance, information technology, human resources and other administrative-related personnel, as well as general overhead costs of the business, including research and development for new innovations, rent and related facilities and maintenance costs, depreciation and amortization, and legal, accounting, and professional fees. We expense all selling, general and administrative expense as incurred. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars to support business growth and, in the near term, our transition to a public company.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
In connection with our acquisition of Runa, we agreed to pay contingent payments to Runa’s former shareholders only if a certain revenue growth rate is achieved. Assuming the revenue growth is achieved, the former shareholders could elect for payment to be calculated based on quarterly data available between December 2021 and December 2022, as follows: 49% of the product of (a) the net revenue for the trailing 12 calendar months and (b) a specified multiple, which is contingent on the revenue growth achieved since December 31, 2017. The contingent consideration payout cannot exceed
$51.5 million. If a certain revenue growth rate is not achieved, the Company is not required to pay any contingent payment. The contingent consideration payable to Runa’s former shareholders was re-measured at fair value, which reflects estimates, assumptions, and expectations on Runa’s revenue and revenue growth as of the valuation date. A key factor in the contingent consideration calculation is whether the growth levels specified in the contract can be met within the four year time period immediately following the acquisition. The design of the payout is to reward for high growth in the initial years following the acquisition. Therefore, the contingent payment reduction, by itself, was not considered a triggering event as it measures against growth targets that must be achieved during a limited period, whereas projections used for intangible and goodwill impairment testing consider a longer period of time. Additionally, the Runa brand has been integrated into the Americas operations, and therefore the goodwill was assigned and tested at the Americas reporting unit level. As such, since the goodwill is tested at this higher reporting unit level, changes in the individual Runa brand projections are not indicative of a triggering event for goodwill since Runa sales are an insignificant portion of the overall financial results of the Americas reporting unit. In 2020, we did elect to perform the quantitative assessment. At the Americas reporting unit level, there was significant cushion between the fair value of the reporting unit and the carrying value, and therefore, no goodwill impairment was recorded. As of December 31, 2021, we expect the contingent consideration to be zero. The contingent consideration will continue to be remeasured until the term of the agreement ends in December 2022. However, we do not believe that the Runa business will achieve the growth targets required and thus we expect that the contingent consideration will be zero at December 2022.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Unrealized Gain/(Loss) on Derivative Instruments
We are subject to foreign currency risks as a result of our inventory purchases and intercompany transactions. In order to mitigate the foreign currency risks, we and our subsidiaries enter into foreign currency exchange contracts which are recorded at fair value. Unrealized gain on derivative instruments consists of gains or losses on such foreign currency exchange contracts which are unsettled as of period end. See “-Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Foreign Currency Exchange Risk” for further information.
Foreign Currency Gain/(Loss)
Our reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. We maintain the financial statements of each entity within the group in its local currency, which is also the entity’s functional currency. Foreign currency gain/(loss) represents the transaction gains and losses that arise from exchange rate fluctuations on transactions denominated in a currency other than the functional currency. See “-Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Foreign Currency Exchange Risk” for further information.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents, and money market funds, as well as interest received as part of an interest rate swap which was terminated in May 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interests on our credit facilities and term loans.
Income Tax Expense
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States and taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we operate. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using statutory rates. We regularly assess the need to record a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Operating Segments
We operate in two reporting segments:
•Americas-The Americas segment is comprised of our operations in the Americas region, primarily in the United States and Canada.
•International-The International segment is comprised of our operations primarily in Europe, the Middle East and the Asia Pacific regions.
Each segment derives its revenues from the following product categories:
•Vita Coco Coconut Water-This product category consists of all branded coconut water product offerings under the Vita Coco labels, where the majority ingredient is coconut water. For these products, control is transferred upon customer receipt, at which point the Company recognizes the transaction price for the product as revenue.
•Private Label -This product category consists of all private label product offerings, which includes coconut water and oil. The Company determined the production and distribution of private label products represents a distinct performance obligation. Since there is no alternative use for these products and the Company has the right to payment for performance completed to date, the Company recognizes the revenue for the production of these private label products over time as the production for open purchase orders occurs, which may be prior to any shipment.
•Other-This product category consists of all other products, which includes Runa, Ever & Ever and PWR LIFT product offerings, Vita Coco product extensions beyond coconut water, such as Vita Coco Sparkling, coconut milk products, and other revenue transactions (e.g., bulk product sales). For these products, control is transferred upon customer receipt, at which point the Company recognizes the transaction price for the product as revenue.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
n/m-represents percentage calculated not being meaningful
Net Sales
The following table provides a comparative summary of the Company’s net sales by operating segment and product category:
Volume in Case Equivalent
The primary driver of the consolidated net sales increase of 22.2% was increased case equivalent volumes. The following table provides a comparative summary of our volume in Case Equivalents, or CE, by operating segment and product category:
Note: A CE is a standard volume measure used by management which is defined as a case of 12 bottles of 330ml liquid beverages or the same liter volume of oil.
*International Other excludes minor volume that is treated as zero CE.
Americas Segment
Growth of Americas CE volumes of Vita Coco Coconut Water was strongest in DSD channels, but all core channels experienced strong volume growth.
Americas net sales increased by $61.0 million, or 23.2% to $323.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $262.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by CE volume increase of 19.5%, as well as reduced price promotions and favorable changes in mix for branded products.
Vita Coco Coconut Water net sales increased by $67.1 million, or 40.7%, to $231.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $164.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a combination of increased consumer demand, retail execution, and overall brand strength.
Private Label net sales decreased by $2.8 million, or 3.4%, to $80.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $83.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by lower consumer demand for Private Label Oil, offset by Private Label Water growth in the Grocery channel.
Net Sales for Other products decreased by $3.3 million, or 22.3%, to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by year on year reduction of bulk sales and decreased sales CE volume of Runa, Vita Coco Oil, Coco Creations, and Vita Coco sparkling waters, which was partly offset by recent innovations.
International Segment
International net sales increased by $7.9 million, or 16.5%, to $55.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by increased sales in our European region and partially offset by decreased in bulk product sales in our Asia Pacific region.
Vita Coco Coconut Water net sales increased by $7.5 million, or 27.5%, to $34.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $27.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by CE Volume growth in both Europe and Asia Pacific as we saw recovery in sales after COVID-19 shutdowns experienced in 2020.
Private Label net sales increased by $1.4 million, or 11.2%, to $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by higher demand in both Private Label Oil and Private Label Water across international regions.
Net Sales for Other products decreased by $1.0 million, or 12.6%, to $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by decreases in bulk product sales from our Asia Pacific region.
Gross Profit
On a consolidated basis, cost of goods sold increased $60.6 million, or 29.4%, to $266.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $205.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. On a consolidated and segment basis, the increase was primarily driven by CE volumes and significant escalation in transportation costs in 2021, with the primary driver being ocean freight costs due to shipping and port constraints related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On a consolidated basis, gross profit increased by $8.3 million, or 7.9%, to $113.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $104.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increased sales volume and favorable price/mix, partially offset by the increase in cost of goods sold. Gross margin was 29.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 33.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The approximate 400 basis points decrease was largely driven by cost pressure related to transportation, including both ocean freight and domestic logistics.
Operating Expenses
n/m-represents percentage calculated not being meaningful
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expense increased by $14.2 million, or 19.0%, to $88.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $74.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $14.2 million was driven primarily by increases in People Costs (salaries and benefits, including stock based compensation) of $7.2 million, and other one-time expenses related to public company readiness and ongoing public company costs of $3.6 million. There was also an additional increase in spend of $2.4 million in marketing to support our brands and retail activation programs.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
There was no change in the fair value of contingent consideration for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a gain of $16.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain recorded during the year ended December 31,
2020 was the result of lower performance expectations during the earn-out period for Runa resulting in revaluation of the contingent consideration liability to $0 as of December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
n/m-represents percentage calculated not being meaningful
Unrealized Gain/(Loss) on Derivative Instruments
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded unrealized gains of $2.1 million relating to outstanding derivative instruments for forward foreign currency exchange contracts. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded unrealized losses of $4.7 million relating to outstanding derivative instruments for forward foreign currency exchange contracts. All forward foreign currency exchange contracts were entered to hedge some of our exposures to the British Pound, Canadian Dollar, Brazilian Real, Malaysian Ringgit, and Thai Baht.
Foreign Currency Gain/(Loss)
Foreign currency loss was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.8 million gain for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in both years was a result of movements in various foreign currency exchange rates related to transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency.
(Loss) on Extinguishment of Debt
On October 27, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding balance on the 2021 Term Loan using the net proceeds from the IPO and recognized a non-cash loss of $0.1 million on the early extinguishment of debt, primarily related to the write-off of deferred financing costs.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $0.3 million, or 68.6%, to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by an amended interest rate from 1.78% to 0.58% on the loan to the co-CEO described in Note 19, Related-Party Transactions, to our notes to the consolidated financial statements. On September 16, 2021, the co-CEO of the Company, repaid the outstanding principal balance and accrued interest on the promissory note.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.4 million, or 54.5%, to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by non-recurring interest expense upon the settlement of an interest rate swap in May 2020 which impacted our interest expense by $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which did not repeat in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Expense
n/m-represents percentage calculated not being meaningful
Income tax expense was $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective combined federal, state and foreign tax rate decreased to 21.6% from 25.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
The effective tax rate for both periods is higher than the US statutory rate of 21% primarily as a result of state income taxes for the US company and other nondeductible expenses for tax purposes, and is partially offset by lower statutory tax rates in countries outside the US that the Company operates in. The change in effective tax rates between the periods is primarily driven by the jurisdictional mix of the Company’s pre-tax profits and the relative impact of other non-deductible expense in relation to the pre-tax profits.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures that are used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, and lenders. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as alternatives to net income as a measure of financial performance or cash flows from operations as a measure of liquidity, or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP and should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
These non-GAAP measures are key metrics used by management and our board of directors, to assess our financial performance. We present these non-GAAP measures because we believe they assist investors in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance and because we believe it is useful for investors to see the measures that management uses to evaluate the company.
We define EBITDA as net income before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as EBITDA with adjustments to eliminate the impact of certain items, including certain non-cash and other items, that we do not consider representative of our ongoing operating performance.
A reconciliation from net income to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below:
(a)Non-cash charges related to stock-based compensation, which vary from period to period depending on volume and vesting timing of awards. We adjusted for these charges to facilitate comparison from period to period.
(b)Unrealized gains or losses on derivative instruments and foreign currency gains or losses are not considered in our evaluation of our ongoing performance.
(c)Non-cash income related to the changes in fair value of the contingent consideration liability related to Runa, which we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing performance.
(d)Represents the non-cash loss on extinguishment of debt primarily for the write-off of deferred financing costs related to the early paydown of the 2021 Term Loan with the IPO proceeds, which we do not consider in our evaluation of ongoing performance.
(e)Reflects other charges inclusive of other non-recurring expenses mostly related to our public company readiness preparation and a two-year management incentive program structured differently from other regular employee compensation, which we do not consider in our evaluation of our ongoing performance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through cash generated from our business operations and proceeds on borrowings through our credit facilities and term loans. We had $28.7 million and $72.2 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalent balances will be sufficient to support operating and capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. We supplemented our liquidity needs with incremental borrowing capacity under the 2021 Term Facility and the Revolving Facility, which we amended in May 2021. With the successful completion of the IPO, the net proceeds from our IPO were used to repay the 2021 Term Loan as described in Note 10, Debt, in the consolidated financial statements.
Considering recent market conditions and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have reevaluated our operating cash flows and cash requirements and continue to believe that current cash, cash equivalents, future cash flows from operating activities and cash available under our Revolving Facility will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including working capital needs, capital expenditures, and contractual obligations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements included herein.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, our working capital needs primarily for inventory build, our global footprint, the expansion of our marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support product development efforts, the introduction of new and enhanced products and the continued market consumption of our products, as well as any shareholder distribution either through equity buybacks or dividends. Our asset-lite supply chain model provides us with a low cost, nimble, and scalable supply chain, which allows us to quickly adapt to changes in the market or consumer preferences while also efficiently introducing new products across our platform. We may seek additional equity or debt financing in the future in order to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products and/or new IT infrastructures. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or general cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued product innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations, and financial condition.
Cash Flows
The following tables summarize our sources and uses of cash:
n/m-represents percentage calculated not being meaningful
Operating Activities
Our main source of operating cash is payments received from our customers. Our primary use of cash in operating activities are for cost of goods sold and SG&A expenses.
The unfavorable changes in our operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily a result of changes in working capital of $37 million. Reflected in working capital changes for the year ended December 31, 2021 were increased inventories in 2021, which we rebuilt after finishing December 2020 with very low inventory levels, increased accounts receivable due to increased sales volume, increased accrued trade promotions due to increased sales volumes and related promotions, and increases in prepayments to suppliers to secure inventory due to increased demand. Reflected in working capital changes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were decreased inventories due to constrained supply during the COVID-19 pandemic, increased accrued trade promotions due to increased sales volumes and related promotions, increased other current assets due to the increase in contract assets for the recognition of private label revenue, and increased net advances to suppliers to secure inventory due to increased demand.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $0.6 million, primarily driven by cash paid for property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million, driven by cash paid for property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $26.8 million, resulting from $50.0 million paid to acquire treasury stock, repayment of $25.0 million on the Revolving Facility, partially offset by $30.4 million in net proceeds from issuance of common stock upon initial public offering, and $17.7 million proceeds from settlement of the loan to the co-CEO described in Note 19 of the consolidated financial statements, and $0.2 million from the exercise of stock options and warrants. The 2021 Term Loan was borrowed and repaid during the year ended December 31, 2021 with the IPO proceeds, resulting in no net cash impact.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.1 million resulting from $25.0 million proceeds from the Revolving Facility and $0.9 million from the exercise of stock options and warrants, partially offset by $16.9 million relating to the repayment of outstanding indebtedness under our Prior Term Facilities, and $6.9 million paid to acquire treasury stock.
Debt
We had zero outstanding debt as of December 31, 2021 compared to $25.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020 related to borrowings under the Revolving Facility and vehicle loans.
Revolving Credit Facility
In May 2020, we entered into a five-year credit facility ("Revolving Facility" or "2020 Credit Facility") with Wells Fargo consisting of a revolving line of credit, which provided for committed borrowings of $50.0 million and a $10.0 million non-committed accordion feature. The Revolving Facility was further amended in May 2021 and October 2021, and currently provides for committed borrowings of $60 million. We may repay outstanding balances under the Revolving Facility at any time without premium or penalty. Borrowings under the Revolving Facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, either (a) adjusted LIBOR (which shall not be less than 0.0%) plus the applicable rate or (b) base rate (determined by reference to the greatest of the prime rate published by Wells Fargo, the federal funds effective rate plus 1.5% and one-month LIBOR plus 1.5%). The applicable rate for LIBOR borrowings under the Revolving Facility is subject to step-downs based on our total net leverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement) for the immediately preceding fiscal quarter. In addition, the Company is currently subject to an unused commitment fee ranging from 0.05% and 0.20% on the unused amount of the line of credit, with the rate being based on the Company’s leverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement). The maturity date on the 2020 Credit Facility is May 12, 2026. The effective interest rate
as of December 31, 2021 was 0.97%. The outstanding balance on the Revolving Facility was zero and $25 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we were compliant with all financial covenants.
Term Loan Facility
In May 2021, we entered into a Term Commitment Note, or the Term Facility with Wells Fargo pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement entered into in connection with the Credit Facility. The Term Facility provides us with term loans of up to $30.0 million, or the Term Loans. Borrowings under the Term Facility bear interest at the same rate as the Revolving Facility. We were required to repay the principal on the Term Loans in quarterly installments, commencing on October 1, 2021, through maturity date of May 21, 2026. On October 27, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding balance on the 2021 Term Loan using the net proceeds from the IPO.
Vehicle Loans
We periodically enter into vehicle loans. Interest rate on these vehicle loans range from 4.56% to 5.68%. The outstanding balance on the vehicle loans as of December 31, 2021 was less than $0.1 million.
For additional information, see Note 10, Debt, to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangement
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, including entities sometimes referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We have contractual obligations to repay indebtedness and required interest payments and unused commitment fees under our Revolving Facility and vehicle loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding balance on the Revolving Facility. Any future outstanding balances on the Revolving Facility will be required to be repaid by May 2026.
We lease certain assets under noncancelable operating leases, which expire through 2025. The leases relate primarily to office space in addition to machinery and equipment. Future minimum commitments under these leases are $1.5 million as of December 31, 2021.
In connection with our business acquisitions of Runa, we entered into contingent consideration arrangements, which would require future cash outflows related to milestone payments based on revenue performance. Under the terms of the arrangement, we are obligated to pay the former shareholders up to $51.5 million if certain revenue thresholds are met during the period from December 31, 2021 through December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have recognized a liability of $0 related to the revenue performance contingent consideration as we believe the required milestones are not expected to be achieved.
As of December 31, 2021, we also have inventory purchase commitments, which include any raw material or packaging commitments with our suppliers to secure our needs for future orders, which are generally due to be paid within one year. We also have production purchase commitments from our manufacturers based on our production plans, forecasts and contracts, that might result in costs if we were to reduce our purchases significantly in 2022 or for some relationships, in future years. We have other contractual payments related to information technology service agreements, sponsorship and marketing agreements, and minimum contractual third-party warehouse commitments, which are not individually material.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various
other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing within this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). ASC 606 defines a five-step model that requires entities exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which include (1) identifying the contract or agreement with a customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract or agreement, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised good is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company is expected to be entitled to receive in exchange for those products. Each contract includes a single performance obligation to transfer control of the product to the customer.
For our various products in the Vita Coco Coconut Water and Other product categories, control is transferred upon customer receipt, at which point the Company recognizes the transaction price for the product as revenue. The transaction price recognized reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for the sale of the product. The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied at that time. The Company does not have any significant contracts with customers requiring performance beyond delivery, and contracts with customers contain no incentives or discounts that would meet the criteria for a distinct good or service that could cause revenue to be allocated or adjusted over time. Shipping and handling activities are performed before the customer obtains control of the goods and therefore represent fulfillment costs, which are included in cost of goods sold, rather than revenue.
Additionally, the Company determined the production and distribution of private label products represents a distinct performance obligation. Since there is no alternative use for these products and the Company has the right to payment for performance completed to date, the Company recognizes the revenue for the production of these private label products over time as the production for open purchase orders is completed, which may be prior to any shipment. The resulting contract assets are recorded in Prepaid expenses and other current assets.
The Company provides trade promotions to its customers. These discounts do not meet the criteria for a distinct good or service and therefore, the Company reduces revenue for the discounts associated with meeting this obligation based on the expected value method. These consolidated financial statements include trade promotion accruals. Trade promotion accruals are made for invoices that have not yet been received as of year-end and are recorded as a reduction of sales. This promotion accrual is a management estimate based upon the known price of retail promotions and estimates of the sales volume during the promotion period.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (ASC 718) for stock options issued under the 2014 Stock Option and Restricted Stock Plan.
The Company measures all stock option awards based on their fair value on the date of the grant and recognizes compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period of each stock-option grant, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award by using the accelerated attribution method. The Company applies an estimated forfeiture rate derived from historical employee termination behavior. If the actual forfeitures differ from those estimated by management, adjustment to compensation expense may be required in future periods. The Company issues stock-based awards with service-based and performance-based and market-based vesting conditions. The Company recognizes expense for performance-based awards when it becomes probable that such awards will be earned over a requisite service period. The Company defers the recognition of compensation expense for the stock-option awards that vest upon a qualifying liquidity events until the qualifying events are probable of occurrence. Stock option awards are equity-classified, as they do not contain a cash settlement option or other features requiring them to be liability-classified.
The Company uses the Black-Scholes-Merton, or Black-Scholes, option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock awards with service-based vesting conditions and performance-based vesting conditions. For stock awards with
performance-based and market-based vesting conditions, the Company uses the Barrier option valuation model to determine the fair value.
The Company has classified stock-based compensation expense in its consolidated statements of operations in SG&A expenses. See Note 14, Stockholders’ Equity, to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The fair value of each stock option is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model or the Barrier option valuation model, which uses multiple assumptions and judgments. The subjective assumptions and the application of judgment in determining the fair value of the awards represent management’s best estimates. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our equity compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The most significant assumptions and judgments are as follows:
•Fair value of common stock.
•Option exercise price-Approximated fair value of common stock.
•Expected volatility-We determine the expected price volatility based on the historical volatilities of our peer group, as we do not have a trading history for our shares. Industry peers consist of several public companies in the soft drinks industries similar to us in size, stage of life cycle and financial leverage. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be utilize in the calculation.
•Expected term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding based on the service or performance conditions specified for the awards. We account for the expected life of the options with service conditions in accordance with the “simplified” method as defined in ASC 718, which enables the use of a practical expedient for “plain vanilla” share options. The expected term using the simplified method is calculated using the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual term.
•Risk-free interest rate-We based the risk-free rate on U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant of the award for a term corresponding to the duration of the options.
•Dividend yield-We used a dividend rate of zero as we do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future.
Determination of fair value of common stock - The calculation of the fair value of awards also requires an estimate of our equity value. Prior to the IPO, as there was no public market for our common stock, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management and valuations by a third-party specialist. The board considered the most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and an assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations are performed in accordance with guidance outlined in the Americas Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Our third-party common stock valuations were prepared using a probability weighted-expected return method, or PWERM. Under this method, discrete future outcomes, such as an IPO, and non-IPO scenario were weighted based on our estimate of the probability of each scenario. In determining the equity value under each scenario, the IPO scenario utilized the market approach while the non-IPO scenario utilized a combination of the income approach and market approach. In leveraging the income approach, we estimated the equity value based on the expectation of future cash flows that the Company will generate. These future cash flows, and an assumed terminal value, were discounted to their present values using a discount rate that reflects the risks inherent in the cash flows. In leveraging the market approach, the third-party common stock valuations reviewed the trading multiples of guideline publicly traded companies, the transactions multiples of guideline comparable company transactions, and also gave consideration to our precedent transactions. Given our simple capital structure, after subtracting net debt, the residual equity value as of the various date was allocated to the common stock.
In addition to considering the results of these third-party valuations, our board of directors considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date, including:
•the nature and history of our business;
•our stage of development and commercialization and our business strategy;
•external market conditions affecting our industry and the global soft drinks and consumer products industry;
•the market value of companies that are engaged in a similar business to ours;
•our financial positions, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results;
•the lack of an active public market for our common stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, or IPO, or sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions;
•the analysis of IPOs and the market performance of similar companies in our industry;
•the overall inherent risks associated with our business at the time awards were approved; and
•the overall equity market conditions and general economic trends.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation could have been materially different.
Once a public trading market for our common stock was established in connection with the completion of the IPO in October 2021, it is now no longer necessary for our board of directors to estimate the fair value of our common stock in connection with our accounting for granted stock options and other such awards we may grant, as the fair value of our common stock is now determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock.
Stock Awards Granted Subsequent to Our Initial Public Offering
For stock awards granted subsequent to our initial public offering, the fair value of the common stock assumed for the grant date fair value of the awards will be based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the day of grant.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 740, Income Taxes, which requires an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed annually for differences between the consolidated financial statements and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. Such deferred income tax assets and liabilities computations are based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax positions are included in income tax expense in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income and accrued expenses in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company recognizes the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
We must make assumptions and judgments to estimate the amount of valuation allowances to be recorded against our deferred tax assets, which take into account current tax laws and estimates of the amount of future taxable income, if any. Changes to any of the assumptions or judgments could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates.
Intangible assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of acquired trade names and distributor relationships. The Company determines the appropriate useful life of our intangible assets by performing an analysis of expected cash flows of the acquired assets. Intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives of ten years, using the straight-line method, which approximates the pattern in which the economic benefits are consumed. The Company’s intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable, or a triggering event. When a triggering event is identified, a test of recoverability is performed by estimating the undiscounted future cash flows associated with such assets and comparing them to the carrying value of the asset. When the recoverability test fails, the Company measures the impairment loss based on the fair value of the assets compared to the carrying amount of the asset. The fair value of the trade names is determined through an income approach using the relief
from royalty method. The fair value of the distributor relationships is determined through an income approach using the excess earnings method.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination and is measured in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other. Goodwill is not amortized; instead goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis on December 31, or more frequently if the Company believes indicators of impairment exist.
The Company has determined that there are three reporting units for purposes of testing goodwill for impairment: (i) the Americas reporting unit, (ii) the Europe reporting unit, and (iii) the Asia reporting unit. The Company first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. In performing the qualitative assessment, the Company reviews factors both specific to the reporting units and to the Company as a whole, such as financial performance, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, and the fair value of each reporting unit at the last valuation date. If the Company elects this option and believes, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the carrying value of each of the reporting units exceeds their fair value, the quantitative impairment test is required; otherwise, no further testing is required.
Alternatively, the Company may elect to bypass the qualitative assessment and perform the quantitative impairment test instead, or if the Company reasonably determines that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, the Company performs its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of each of the reporting units with their carrying amount. The fair value of each of the reporting units is estimated by blending the results from the income approach and the market multiples approach. These valuation approaches consider a number of factors that include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates, and comparable multiples from publicly-traded companies in our industry, and require us to make certain assumptions and estimates regarding industry economic factors and future profitability of our business. It is our policy to conduct impairment testing based on our most current business plans, projected future revenues and cash flows, which reflect changes we anticipate in the economy and the industry. The cash flows are based on five-year financial forecasts developed internally by management and are discounted to a present value using discount rates that properly account for the risk and nature of the respective reporting unit’s cash flows and the rates of return market participants would require to invest their capital in our reporting unit. The Company will recognize an impairment for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds a reporting unit’s fair value. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no impairments recorded.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, and our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to other public companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for private companies.
We will cease to be an emerging growth company on the date that is the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the closing of this offering, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements elsewhere within this Annual Report on Form 10-K .