ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The information herein contains forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical fact made herein are forward looking. In particular, the statements herein regarding industry prospects and future results of operations or financial position are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of words such as “believes,” “estimates,” “could,” “possibly,” “probably,” anticipates,” “projects,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” or “should” or other variations or similar words. No assurances can be given that the future results anticipated by the forward-looking statements will be achieved. Forward-looking statements reflect management’s current expectations and are inherently uncertain. Our actual results may differ significantly from management’s expectations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, included herewith. This discussion should not be construed to imply that the results discussed herein will necessarily continue into the future, or that any conclusion reached herein will necessarily be indicative of actual operating results in the future. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment of our management.
General Overview
We operate two distinct business operations. These are:
● the Marine Technology Business (also referred to in this Form 10-K as “Products Business”, “Products Operations” or “Products Segment”); and
● the Marine Engineering Business (also referred to in this Form 10-K as “Engineering Business”, “Engineering Operations”, or “Services Segment”).
Our Marine Technology Business is a technology solution provider to the subsea and underwater market. It has a long-established pedigree in this market, and it innovates, designs, develops and manufactures proprietary solutions for this market (both for commercial and defense applications) including our range of flagship volumetric real time sonar solutions.
These solutions and products are used primarily in the underwater construction market, offshore oil and gas, offshore wind energy industry, and in the complex dredging, port security, mining and marine sciences sectors. Our customers include service providers to major offshore renewable companies, oil and gas (“O&G”) companies, law enforcement agencies, ports, mining companies, underwater vehicle manufacturers, Prime Defense Contractors as OEM integrators, defense bodies, fisheries and research institutes.
Our Marine Engineering Business is a supplier of engineering services and embedded solutions (such as mission computers) to prime defense contractors such as Raytheon, Northrop Grumman, Thales Underwater, Atlas Electronik UK and Babcock International Group. Generally, the items supplied into the defense market are sub-systems in broader mission critical integrated systems and thus requires a high level of reliability, consistency in standards and robustness.
We have long-standing relationships with prime defense contractors, and we use these credentials to secure more business. We support some significant defense programs by supplying and maintaining proprietary parts (or parts for which we are preferred suppliers) through obsolescence management programs. These services provide recurring stream of revenues for our Services segment.
Both the Marine Technology Business and Marine Engineering Business have established synergies in terms of customers and specialized engineering skill sets (hardware, firmware and software) encompassing capturing, computing, processing and displaying data in harsh environments.
Factors Affecting our Business
Our business is affected by a number of factors including those set out below:
A. United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union (“Brexit”)
The UK was a member of the European Union member states for close to 50 years. This membership enabled the freedom of movement of goods, persons, capital and services between member states. Following a referendum in 2016 the country voted to leave the EU. The UK withdrew from its membership of the EU on December 31, 2020. This withdrawal removed these rights.
As part of the withdrawal, the UK Government and EU reached an agreement on December 30, 2020, on trade in certain areas.
The change in the UK EU membership status adversely impacts our business in several important areas:
● Our shipments into the European Union are subject to customs process. This results in increased costs and time for the processing of shipments. This operates as a deterrent for EU customers to work with us. We endeavor to mitigate this by shipping to our subsidiary in Denmark which ships to our customer. This means increased costs which we are unable to recover and significant delays which may risks the project.
● Our technology requires training to support its effective implementation. Typically for sales and rentals we would mobilize our engineers to train and assist these customers in set up of the equipment. Under the new trade agreement, we will need to obtain the necessary work permits from the EU member state to which we intend to send our engineer. This will be time consuming and costly and the rules for granting such permit will vary from member state to member state. Furthermore, we have no precedent to know if these permits will be granted.
● We are not able to recruit from EU Member states without getting work permits. As a result, we are subject to skills shortages and significant increase in the costs of salaries as many technology companies are competing for the same skills.
The Company established a company, Coda Octopus Products A/S, in Denmark to maintain a presence in the European Union and to address some of the foreseeable issues. This subsidiary is crucial for our continued relationship with EU customers.
B. Currency Risks:
The Company’s operations are split between the United States, United Kingdom, Denmark and Australia. A large proportion of our revenues (approximately 73%) and costs are incurred outside of the USA with a significant part (68.3% of our total revenues) of that in the United Kingdom (“UK”). In addition, a significant part of our assets (both current and fixed) is held in British Pounds by our foreign subsidiaries. Significant currency fluctuations (particularly the British Pound or Danish Kroner versus the US Dollar) may affect our financial results and the value of our assets. With the conclusion of the trade agreement between the UK and EU which removed a lot of the ongoing uncertainty associated with the UK’s withdrawal from the European Union we anticipate the British Pound will be less volatile against other major currencies including the US Dollar.
C. Impact of Coronavirus Outbreak (referred to in this Form 10-K as “Coronavirus”, “Pandemic” or “COVID-19”)
General Impact
The global outbreak of the Coronavirus has resulted in governments throughout the world, implementing measures restricting the freedom of movement of people and other curtailment of business activities including business closure to curb the spread of the Coronavirus.
The Company’s operations started to be impacted from the Pandemic early in the second quarter of 2020 FY. During the 2020 FY this resulted in a steep decline in our business activities and therefore demand for our goods and services. This caused a fall in revenue with operating expenses remaining relatively fixed. This affected our overall financial performance in the 2020 FY.
Throughout the 2021 FY, we have been impacted less by the Pandemic when compared to the 2020 FY. However, we continue to be affected in that the Marine Technology Business heavily relies on trade shows and in-person visits to various countries such as Japan, South Korea, China and EU-Bloc to meet potential customers and conduct on-water demonstrations. Since March 2020, we have not been able to conduct business development through in-person trips. This has affected the pace of adoption and uptake of our products including both the Echoscope PIPE® and the DAVD systems, which require on-water demonstrations.
Furthermore, we sell our products and solutions globally. We are dependent on these countries allowing foreigners to enter the country. In 2021 FY Japan, China, Singapore, South Korea, Australia and New Zealand did not allow in-person visits. These limitations have severely hampered our ability to increase significant demand for our goods and services.
Finally, the Marine Technology offerings are used at sea. The Pandemic has resulted in an overall reduction of offshore activities. Only high priority projects are going ahead. This directly impacts on the demand for both the sale or rental of our products.
Impact on Revenues and Earnings
Until the business environment normalizes, we are uncertain as to the extent of the impact the coronavirus outbreak will have on our future financial results. The inability to have unrestricted travel and movement which is crucial for in-person customer engagements, severely limits our ability to engage with our potential customers and therefore the opportunity to increase demand for our goods and services.
On the Products Business side, a significant part of our revenues is generated from field customer support work (training, assistance in mobilization of equipment or operating the equipment on behalf of our customers). Coronavirus has caused many of these field projects to be postponed indefinitely - which in turn negatively affects our revenues and financial results.
On the Services Business side, travel is also an important element as many of its engineering projects require customers to come to our facilities to conduct Critical Design Reviews (“CDRs”). Also, in-person customer engagement is important to increase demand for our services. The Pandemic has severely curtailed our ability to proactively engage our customers thereby adversely affecting the pipeline of opportunities we are pursuing. In addition, with Government employees working from home, the opportunity to have in-person engagements is significantly reduced. This directly reduces demand for our services.
Furthermore, the requirements for social distancing measures mean that we are significantly under-utilizing our capacity, particularly production capacity and thus increasing our overall costs of operations.
Government Policies on Coronavirus
Our operations are based in a number of countries, with each country establishing different rules related to Coronavirus including rules on restricting business operations, limiting staff travel work and quarantining rules. This has generally resulted in a much less predictable working environment for planning and delivering customer projects and project cost management. Several implications flow from this including:
● Impairment of the business’ productivity
● Project over runs
● Increased operation costs resulting from our Pandemic response
● Increase project costs due to the delay caused by self-isolation rules or business closure or restriction on travel to work
● Higher staff costs due to increased sick pay allowance which varies according to the country where the business operations are located, combined with lower overall productivity.
Impact on Liquidity, Balance Sheet and Assets
Failure to curb the coronavirus Pandemic in the near future, coupled with a downturn in the global economic outlook, may adversely impact on our availability of our free cashflow, working capital and business prospects. As of October 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $17,747,656 and for the year then ended we generated $3,269,770 of cash from operations. Based on our outstanding obligations including loans and notes payable, their terms and our cash balances we believe we have sufficient working capital to effectively continue our business operations for the foreseeable future.
Products Business Outlook
In the 2020 and 2021 FY we were impacted by varying degrees of limitation caused by the Pandemic.
In the 2020 FY the Products Business revenues were severely impacted by the Coronavirus Pandemic (“Pandemic”). In the Second Quarter of the 2020 FY, the business activities were severely curtained for this reason. Later in 2020 FY, the business climate started to improve with increased moderation of the global lockdown which facilitated more business activities. Notwithstanding, in the 2020 FY our business activities were severely limited by the Pandemic resulting in a steep decline in our financial performance for that period and a sharp reduction in our backlog. This also caused our pipeline of opportunities to shrink as business development, marketing and customer engagements were extremely limited.
In the 2021 FY, we saw an improvement in the business conditions with less restrictions. Nevertheless, have not returned to pre-Pandemic levels. In the 2021 FY we had limited opportunities to participate in trade shows and in-person customer engagements, which are key pillars for increasing the demand for our goods and services. In addition, we sell our products globally with most of our sales from Asia. A key pillar of the promotion and selling of our products is the ability to have in-person visits and engagements with our customers in their home countries and perform on-water demonstration. Also Industry Trade Shows are pivotal for our business development activities. An important trade show in the Asian calendar was the Japanese Offshore Renewable Wind Energy Trade Show which took place in October 2021. Due to the rules in place in Japan, foreign companies were not allowed to attend. The ongoing restrictions have meant that since March 2020, we have had very limited opportunities to travel to visit our customers in-person or perform on-water demonstration of our underwater products. This impacts the Company’s ability to effectively promote its products and solution and therefore increase demands at a viable pace and hinders the building of meaningful pipeline of opportunities.
A significant part of the Products Business human capital and resources are based in the UK. In the 2021 FY period The UK Government introduced a tiered system to manage the Coronavirus outbreak in various regions of the UK. In January 2021, the Scottish Government moved to the highest levels of restrictions which introduced a national lockdown during January. This restriction hampers our ability to have meaningful interaction with our customers and therefore limit the amount of business development activities which we can pursue.
A substantial part of our revenues is generated by our UK operations. With the UK leaving the European Union, we believe that we may realize less sales from the EU member states countries unless we are able to effectively staff the Danish subsidiary, Coda Octopus Products A/S. With the ongoing Pandemic it has remained difficult to effectively recruit and train staff for our Danish operations.
We rely on specialist software development skills. There is an acute shortage of these skills which has resulted in reduced resourcing of these skills in our business and at the same time significantly increased costs associated with securing these skills. This impacts our ability to service and develop our products and/or serve to increase our overall costs, and therefore may impact on our financial results.
We rely on sophisticated electronics for our products, and we anticipate delay in the supply chain and increases in prices. This may affect, among other things, our gross margins and ability to fulfill customer orders in a timely manner along with a resulting decline in revenues.
In the 2021 FY the Products Business revenues were $15,804,222 compared to $11,278,181 in the 2020 FY, representing an increase of 40.1%.
Services Business Outlook
In the 2021 FY the Services Business revenues were $5,527,305 compared to $8,765,629 in the 2020 FY, representing a fall of 36.9%.
In 2020 FY the Services Business mainly executed backlog orders and therefore although it was affected by the Pandemic, it could use its resources on the backlog work. In 2021 FY due to the Pandemic, the Services Business had difficulties in performing business development and thereby increase the demand for its services. This was further compounded by the delays in receiving anticipated orders from Prime Defense Contractors.
The ongoing Pandemic combined with the protractedness of Defense Contracting has affected the performance of the Services Business.
The Services Segment business opportunities are concentrated around a few US Prime Defense Contractors and is very dependent on securing sub-contracts from these primes. This also means that the Services Segment revenues are from a highly concentrated source. Furthermore, a change in Administration always has the effect of delaying spending including on new defense projects and this is typical for the first year of the new Administration.
D. Political Landscape/Exporting to China
We sell our products globally and increasingly to Asia. The recent change in both the US and UK Governments attitude towards trade with China and to a lesser extent the European Union member states, directly affects the sale of our products to customers based in China. Our real time 3D sonars which are rated above 300 meters along with our inertial navigation and attitude measurement sensors (F280® series) are subject to export control for certain countries, including China. We also are not allowed to promote our DAVD technology in China.
In December 22, 2020 the US Government Department of Commerce (Bureau of Industry and Security, Commerce) amended the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) to add seventy-seven (77) Chinese entities “determined ….to be acting contrary to the national security or foreign policy interests of the United States”. The amended EAR in general states that there is a “presumption of denial” of grant of export licenses to these entities and their affiliates. In a new pronouncement dated November 4, 2021, the US Government has expanded the list significantly which is an indication that the US Government policy and disposition towards China is hardening and companies in the technology space will increasingly find it difficult to sell to China due to government restrictions.
The UK Government is generally in lock step with the US Government’s position and recently, refused to grant export licenses for several applications for end users in China for the first time in 25 years of our dealing with the UK Export Control Organization. The curtailment of access to this market due to refusal to issue export licenses is likely to significantly impact our revenues from Asia.
Furthermore, even though our sonars which are rated at 250m or less do not require export licenses for China, and our other products such as our geophysical products and Pan & Tilt devices, the UK Customs are now indiscriminately seizing all our shipments which are destined for China.
In 2020 FY we were unable to meet demand for $1,300,000 of sales order for China, due to refusal by the UK Government to issue export licenses. In the 2021 FY we had much less sales/opportunities enquiries from China than previous years.
The removal of China as a trading partner is likely to have significant negative impact on our revenues and growth strategy. China has one of the largest planned investment programs for offshore renewables, the market for which most of our technology is used for in China. After significant business development in China, we had started to see persistent and credible growth for our products in this market. Unless there is a change in this policy, we are likely to see a decline in growth and sales into the Chinese Market. It is estimated that around 50-75 multibeam sonars are sold to China Commercial Market each year (approximately $10 million). It is this market we had started to make significant inroads in to increase our global market share. Unless the Government’s current policy/stance changes and becomes favorable to resumption of trade with China, we are unlikely to realize this potential.
E. Supply Chain Disruption
Due to the exceptionally high demand in the semi-conductor market, we are experiencing extreme lead times for components which are necessary for the manufacture and service of our products. We are also seeing significant price increases for these and other routine components. Both the extended lead time, in some instances 99 weeks lead time is being quoted by suppliers, and the price increase may affect our ability to meet customer requirements and make the prices of our products uncompetitive. The Products Business may reasonably endeavor to reduce the impact of the extended lead times we are experiencing by priming supply chain as far as possible. However, the impact on the Engineering Business is more severe and could grind their operations to a halt since this part of our business does not know what parts or components are required until their customers place an order for bespoke engineering work package. We therefore have a high risk that our Engineering Business’ may be severely impacted by the shortages that we are currently experiencing. The increase in inventory in our financial statements evidence our mitigation strategy to increase inventory where we can.
Our technology is based on electronics that are designed and manufactured to our specification exclusively for us. These electronic components are costly. Advancement in technology may make these specialized components or circuits obsolete. Reengineering these key components could result in significant capital expenditure and also may cripple the production of our products since quick replacements cannot be found and would require new engineering work. Furthermore, there is no broader market for these components.
F. Significant Increase in the Price of Raw Materials
In addition to the disruption in the Supply Chain, we are also experiencing very significant increase in price of raw materials which we are unlikely to be able to pass on to our customers. These increases may make the cost of making our products prohibitive and uncompetitive and could affect our margins and also the viability of our business.
G. Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (“DFARS”)
As a sub-contractor to Prime Defense Contractors in general we are subject to flow-down from their contract with the Government. Some of these flow downs may be onerous. Recently we have been receiving DFARS for mandatory vaccination against COVID-19 of all our staff members who work in the Services Business in the US under Executive Order 14042. Executive order 14042 also establishes Safety Protocols for Federal Contractors/Subcontractors to safeguard against the spread of COVID-19. As a small business with limited resources and inability to attract key skills central to the business activities (engineering, software development etc), if we are unable to implement the DFAR due to personnel not willing to have the vaccination, we could lose vital skills which could impact our ability to provide the services we do, particularly in this competitive climate which currently prevails. The impact of losing staff is greater for a small business where it has limited surplus resources and necessarily suffers from a high degree of concentration of skills.
H. Shortage of Key Skills/Resourcing Levels
We are experiencing an extreme shortage of personnel with key skills which are critical to our business, such as electronic. software development skills, technical support engineers, field support engineers and business development skills. Recently, it was widely reported in both the UK and US media that there were over 1,000,000 unfilled vacancies.
This situation is further compounded by significant global increases in salaries. In addition, with the UK withdrawing from EU membership, this exacerbates an already critical situation for businesses.
Since we are a small business, we are hindered in our ability to compete for certain specialized electronic engineering skills as our remuneration package is not as competitive as those offered by bigger companies which are competing for the same skills.
We are looking to address the skills shortage by establishing a subsidiary in India, where potentially software development skills and support engineers’ skills are more readily available (as we do not believe the local situation will improve in the near future- given the different Tech companies that are competing for the same skills). We can, however, give no assurance that this will serve as adequate mitigation for this issue.
I. Supplying Products without Training
The underwater imaging products which we supply are complex. Customers benefit from our on-site training program as part of the adoption of the technology. The customers for our products are globally based. Since February 2020, we have not been able to provide hands-on field support to our customers. Pre-pandemic we would typically supply equipment with engineering support for training and mobilization assistance and would also provide a number of customer training events. The Pandemic has rendered this impossible due to the various and varying restrictions applicable in the places where our customers reside. Our products are complex and without support, there is substantially increased risks for customers’ dissatisfaction, thus jeopardizing the long- term customer relationship and the reputation of the products.
J. Government Spending for Defense:
We are dependent on the timely allocation of funds to defense procurement by governments in the United States and the United Kingdom. A large part of our revenues in the Services Segment derives from government funding in the defense sector. In general, where there is a change of government, spending priorities may change from those priorities of the previous Administration. This may adversely impact on our revenues. Furthermore, the US Federal Defense Budget is dependent on the New Administration being able to secure approval in Congress for the defense budget. The slim majority on which the current Administration operates is likely to hinder future spending on new defense projects.
K. Investments:
We lack the financial resources to advance our flagship technology at the commercially appropriate pace required to capture new markets and increase our sales which could facilitate new entrants to the market. For example, Teledyne Technologies Incorporated, a multi-billion company, has in recent years acquired a number of subsea companies that may speed up their entry into our market.
In relative terms, the Company has limited external sources of capital available, and as such is reliant upon its ability to sell its products and services to provide sufficient working capital for its operations and obligations. Notwithstanding, on or around November 27, 2019 the Company secured a $4 million Revolving Credit Line from HSBC NA, its current bankers, which can be used for working capital purposes, including expansion activities as required. This line of credit is subject to annual renewals by HSBC.
L. Technological Advancement:
A significant part of our growth strategy is predicated on our flagship real time volumetric imaging sonar technology and our Diver Augmented Vision Display (DAVD) solution. The technology space is inherently uncertain due to the fast pace of innovations and therefore we can give no assurance that we can maintain our leading position in these areas or that innovations in other areas may not surpass our solutions that we currently supply to the subsea market. An example of new technology entering the subsea market is LIDAR technology. However, unlike our sonar technology, LIDAR technology cannot be employed in zero visibility conditions and cannot generate a volume pulse or image moving objects required for real time inspection and monitoring underwater.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported values of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported levels of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Below is a discussion of accounting policies that we consider critical to an understanding of our financial condition and operating results and that may require complex judgment in their application or require estimates about matters which are inherently uncertain. A discussion of our significant accounting policies, including further discussion of the accounting policies described below, can be found in Note 2, “Summary of Accounting Policies” of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
All of our revenues are earned under formal contracts with our customers and are derived from both sales and rental of underwater technologies and equipment for imaging, mapping, defense and survey applications and from the engineering services that we provide. Our contracts do not include the possibility for additional contingent consideration so that our determination of the contract price does not involve having to consider potential variable additional consideration. Our product sales do not include a right of return by the customer.
Regarding our Products Segment, all of our products are sold on a stand-alone basis and those market prices are evidence of the value of the products. To the extent that we also provide services (e.g., installation, training, etc.), those services are either included as part of the product or are subject to written contracts based on the stand-alone value of those services. Revenue from the sale of services is recognized when those services have been provided to the customer and evidence of the provision of those services exist.
For further discussion of our revenue recognition accounting policies, refer to Note 2, paragraph h - “Revenue Recognition” in the financial statements.
Stock based Compensation
We recognize the expense related to the fair value of stock based compensation awards within the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income. The stock based fair value compensation is determined as of the date of the grant or the date at which the performance of the services is completed (measurement date) and is recognized over the periods in which the related services are rendered.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740). Under ASC 740, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the income tax effects of differences between the bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and their bases for income tax reporting. The Company’s differences arise principally from the use of various accelerated and modified accelerated cost recovery system lives for income tax purposes versus straight line depreciation used for book purposes and from the utilization of net operating loss carry-forwards.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are the amounts by which the Company’s future income taxes are expected to be impacted by these differences as they reverse. Deferred tax assets are based on differences that are expected to decrease future income taxes as they reverse. Correspondingly, deferred tax liabilities are based on differences that are expected to increase future income taxes as they reverse. Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements discusses the amounts of deferred tax assets and liabilities, and also presents the impact of significant differences between financial reporting income and taxable income.
For income tax purposes, the Company uses the percentage of completion method of recognizing revenues on long-term contracts which is consistent with the Company’s financial reporting under U.S. GAAP.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets consist principally of the excess of cost over the fair value of net assets acquired (i.e., goodwill), customer relationships, non-compete agreements and licenses. Goodwill was allocated to our reporting units based on the original purchase price allocation. Goodwill is not amortized and is evaluated for impairment annually or more often if circumstances indicate impairment may exist. Customer relationships, non-compete agreements, patents and licenses are being amortized on a straight-line basis over periods of 2 to 15 years. The Company amortizes its intangible assets using the straight-line method over their estimated period of benefit. We periodically evaluate the recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets and carefully consider events or circumstances that warrant revised estimates of useful lives or that indicate that impairment exists.
Step 1 of the goodwill impairment test used to identify potential impairment compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value, which is based on future discounted cash flows, exceeds the carrying amount, goodwill is not considered impaired. The Company has adopted Accounting Standards Codification 2017 - 04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, which permits the Company to impair the difference between carrying amount in excess of the fair value of the reporting unit as the reduction in goodwill.
At the end of each year, we evaluate goodwill on a separate reporting unit basis to assess recoverability, and impairments, if any, are recognized in earnings. An impairment loss would be recognized in an amount equal to the excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit compared to the fair value of the reporting unit. To date, the Company has not had any goodwill impairments.
Fiscal Year 2021 Consolidated Results of Operations
In this Form 10-K, the following meanings are ascribed to the terminologies set out immediately below:
FY Financial Year
FY Means the Fiscal Year ended October 31, 2020
FY Means the Fiscal Year ended October 31, 2021
Although in the 2021 FY our financial results have improved over the 2020 FY, this should be contextualized by the fact that starting in the second quarter of the 2020 FY, our business was severely curtailed by the Pandemic resulting in a steep decline in our financial performance in 2020 FY.
Even though in the 2021 FY our financial results have improved over the 2020 FY, we are still not back to pre-Pandemic conditions, and we continue to be affected by constraints associated with the ongoing Pandemic. This in turn affects our business opportunities including limiting the sales and marketing effort that we can perform since our markets are global with a significant emphasis on Asia for our Marine Technology Business. It also reduces demand for our products and services and impacts on the pipeline we can build for future business.
However, the Business is still impacted by the constraints placed upon the global business environment from the ongoing Pandemic and the various measures taken by respective governments such as limitations on opening of business, quarantining rules or restrictions on travel (both domestic and abroad) and excluding foreigners from entering into the country (Japan, Singapore, China and South Korea, which are important markets for us). In addition, the Services Business financial performance in the 2021 FY was significantly below our business plan goals and this was largely due to delays in securing defense orders and to conduct meaningful business development activities, all of which impacted on the performance of the Services Business, and thus, the overall performance of the Group. Because of the slim congressional majority that the US Administration is operating with in a very divided political climate this has hindered the pace of defense spending and anticipated awards of projects.
In the 2021 FY, the Products Business generated 74.1% of our consolidated revenues and our Services Segment generated 25.9% of our consolidated revenues. In the 2020 FY the Products Business generated 56.3% of our consolidated revenues and our Services Segment generated 43.7% of our consolidated revenues.
In the 2021 FY we received $648,872 under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) from the US Government. This amount was utilized in accordance with the purpose and objective of the program and has now been forgiven. The amount was recorded in our financial statements as “Other Income”. We also received $135,000 from the UK Government under its Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (“CJRS”), this reduced our Selling General & Administrative Expenses. In 2021FY we also received a benefit of $701,568 in Employee Retention Credits which resulted in the reduction of our tax obligations.
Comparison of fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 to fiscal year ended October 31, 2020
The information provided below pertains to the Company’s consolidated financial results. For information on the performance of each Segment including the disaggregation of revenues and geographical split, see Note 12 (“Segment Analysis”) of our audited Consolidated Financial Statements of October 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue:
We realized an increase in revenues in the 2021 FY compared to the 2020 FY.
This is largely due to an increase in the revenues of the Products Business.
The Products Business revenues increased by 40.1% in the 2021 FY over the 2020 FY and the Services Business revenues declined by 36.9% over that same period. Notably, equipment sales and rental revenues generated by the Products Business increased significantly over the 2020 FY.
During the year ended October 31, 2021, the Company had one customer from whom it generated sales greater than 10% of net revenues. Revenue from this customer was $2,484,173, or 12% of net revenues during the period. Total accounts receivable from this customer as of October 31, 2021 was $468,149 or 11% of accounts receivable.
Gross Margin:
Gross Profit Margins reported in our financial results may vary according to several factors. These include:
● The percentage of consolidated sales attributed to our Marine Technology Business. The Gross Profit Margin yielded by the Marine Technology Business is generally higher than that of the Services Business;
● The percentage of consolidated sales attributed by the Services Business. The Services Business yields a lower gross profit margin on generated sales which are largely based on time and materials contracts (except for its Thermite® products);
● The mix of sales within the Marine Technology Business including:
● Outright Sale versus Rentals;
● Hardware Sale versus Software;
● Mix of Services rendered in the period - Offshore Engineering Services versus Paid Customer Research and Development Projects
● The mix of engineering projects performed (design prototyping versus manufacturing), may also affect Gross Profit Margins;
● Level of applicable commissions earned by Third Party Sales Agents or Distributors on sales of our Products.
● Level of Depreciation associated with rental assets used by the Marine Technology Business for servicing the rental market.
In the 2021 FY Gross Profit Margins for the Marine Technology Business were 79.9% compared to 80.0% in the 2020 FY. For the Services Operation these were 38.6% in the 2021 FY compared to 42.3% in the 2020 FY.
Since there are more variable factors affecting Gross Profit Margins in the Marine Technology Business, a table showing a summary break-out of sales generated by the Marine Technology Business in the 2021 FY compared to the 2020 FY is set out below:
* Due to the restriction on global travel, the Marine Technology Business is often unable to attend customers sites to assist with engineering services such as set up of equipment and training. Since 2020 we have largely been supporting customers remotely and, in principle, we are less able to recover fees for virtual/on-line support. The reduction in revenue for this category reflects this shift.
In the 2021 FY we paid $605,620 in commission compared to $610,088 in the 2020 FY. Although equipment sales increased significantly, there was a higher percentage of direct sales in the 2021 FY compared to the 2020 FY where a significantly higher percentage emanated from Asia thus attracting more commission.
For more detailed information on the composition and disaggregation of our revenues, please refer to Note 13 (“Disaggregation of Revenue”) of our audited Consolidated Financial Statements of October 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development (R&D):
Research and Development costs are, in general, an ongoing cost for the Marine Technology Business operations since it will need to either maintain the products it has in the market or continue to advance these products to keep them competitive (both in price and performance) and to expand the product offerings which we have in the market.
In this connection, we continue to invest in research and development to further our business goals including maintaining our lead in the real time volumetric imaging sonar sector (Marine Technology Business) and becoming an embedded supplier of mission computers through re-engineering our Thermite® (now Thermite® Octal) via our Services Business and launching derivatives of the newly designed Thermite® Octal. The key unique selling point for the Thermite® range that is a rugged COTS system that we can customize these for specific customer requirements. Competing companies sell standard COTS mission computers and, in general, do not offer customize solutions. This is the business opportunity for our Thermite technology.
In the 2021 FY this category of expenditure decreased by 6.5%. The decrease is largely due to reduced spending in this area in the Marine Engineering Business (expenditures fell by 54.6% and was $473,569 in the 2021 FY compared to $1,042,243). This reflects our strategy to reduce expenditures on the Thermite® Octal development until we can gage customer requirements through the demonstrations and other engagements that we were performing pre-Pandemic.
In 2021 FY the Products Business continued to develop the range of its product offerings including its volumetric real time imaging sonar series, the new inertial navigation and positioning system (its new® series), its new sonar software platform and 4G USE® Software Development. The Products Business has now crystallized many of these developments and we do not expect this area of expenditures to materially increase in the 2022 FY.
In the 2020 FY, we had $190,000 of R&D expenditures attributable to the Diver Augmented Vision Display (DAVD) System which was during that period funded by the Group. The subsequent generations of the DAVD (GEN 2, GEN 3 (and now GEN 4) are funded by the Office of Naval Research.
In the 2021 FY we have incurred exceptional expenses of $363,900 for sub-contracting costs for an ASIC device for our sonar series. The overall anticipated expenditure for the new ASIC device is approximately $1 million. The current ASIC device being used is obsolete and this has necessitated the development. We anticipate that we will complete the development of the ASIC Device in FY 2022.
Changes in this category by Segment are set out immediately below:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (SG&A):
SG&A in the 2021 FY increased by 17.5% over the 2020 FY period. There are several factors which account for this increase. Some of the material factors are:
●
Pandemic Relief Contributions: In the 2020 FY we had certain contributions relating to Pandemic-relief under the UK Government’s Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (“CJRS”). Although in the 2021 FY we had some contributions under the CJRS, these amounts were reduced by 91%. This affects the area of Wages and Salaries.
● Increase in Legal and Professional Fees. In the 2020 FY due to the uncertainties of the impact of the Pandemic on the Business, we had certain waivers of fees by our CEO and Board members which, in the 2020 FY reduced expenditures relating to this category. In the 2021 FY we also incurred bonus costs of $100,000 to our CEO. We also paid bonus of $55,034 to a key member of staff.
● Stock Based Compensation Expenses (Non-Cash Item). In the 2021 FY we expensed $1,050,821 for stock based compensation as compared to $610,780 in the corresponding 2020 FY, representing an increase of 72%
Further discussions on SG&A are set out immediately below.
Key Areas of SG&A Expenditure across the Group for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to the year ended October 31, 2020
We incurred a material increase in the category of expenditures relating to Wages and Salaries. In the 2020 FY we had contributions under the CJRS of $257,844 compared to $135,000 in the 2021 FY. Without this contribution, the real cost of Wages and Salaries in the 2021 FY would be $3,496,494 and $3,451,905 in the 2020 FY. Due to the scarcity of skills, we require for our business we are experiencing a significant pressure in the costs of Wages and Salaries. Market conditions for wages and salaries have changed significantly. We are seeing a persistently sharp rise in the costs of labor in the market and therefore anticipate that this area of expenditures will continue to increase in the 2022 Financial Year.
In the 2021 FY expenditures relating to the category of “Rent” reduced by 7.4% compared to FY 2020. Rent is not a material expenditure in the Group as most premises which we now use for our business operations are owned by the Company except for premises used in Denmark and other small storage facilities that we use in other parts of the Group.
In 2021 FY expenditures relating to the category of “Marketing” was reduced by 47.8% due to decreases in travel and trade show costs as a result of the Pandemic which restricted movement of people. In the event that the Pandemic should recede allowing for unrestricted global travel this is an area of expenditures which we project will increase significantly. We are also investing in building a global brand for our products and this will require significant investment in the 2022 through to 2024 Financial Years - subject to the Pandemic-related barriers discussed throughout being removed. We are budgeting approximately $400,000 per year for marketing within our business plan. These amounts will include personnel costs, marketing equipment and material costs, website development etc. and a products channel, but this will be intended for our products and brands in the market.
In the 2021 FY we had expenses of $1,050,821 for stock based compensation (a non-cash item) as compared to $610,780 in the corresponding 2020 FY.
Operating Income:
In the 2021 FY Operating Income increased by 40.0%, although Total Operating Expenses increased by 9.2%. The increase in Operating Income is largely due to the increase in Revenue by 6.4% over the 2020FY coupled with an increase in our Gross Profit Margins.
Other Income:
In the Financial Year Other Income increased by 114.8%.
The makeup of Other Income is as follows:
In both Financial Years 2021 and 2020 we received in $648,872 and $648,871, respectively, under the Paycheck Protection Program scheme (“PPP”) which the US Administration made available as part of the Pandemic response package for US companies. All the PPP amounts received have been utilized in accordance with the purpose and objective of the program and these amounts have now been forgiven under the Program.
In addition, in Financial Year 2021 we received $701,568 in Employee Retention Credits (ERC), as part of the Pandemic response package for US companies. These are payroll tax refunds for maintaining our employees throughout the Pandemic
In addition to the amounts received pursuant to the PPP and ERC schemes described above, we have in the 2021 FY recorded an amount of $84,942 for Other Income in our Financial Statements.
Interest Expense:
In the 2021 FY Interest Expenses reduced by 23.6%. This is due to the reduction in the principal amount outstanding under our Senior Secured Debenture with HSBC NA. This loan will mature in December 2021 - see Note 16 Subsequent Events of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the HSBC Debentures. We therefore do not anticipate Interest Expense to be a material item of expenses in our financial statements.
Net Income before Income taxes for the year ended October 31, 2021, compared to the year ended October 31, 2020
In the 2021 FY, Net Income before taxes increased by 54.4% due to an increase in revenues (by 6.4% or $1,287,717 over the previous 2020 FY), an increase in Other Income and a reduction in the category of Interest Expenses.
Net Income after Income taxes for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to the year ended October 31, 2020
In the 2021 FY Net Income after taxes increased by 48.0%. This is due to the increase in Net Income before Income taxes coupled with the recording in the 2021 FY of $701,568 in Employee Retention Credits which we received as part of the US Government’s response to the Pandemic compared to $0 in the 2020 FY.
Comprehensive Income for the year ended October 31, 2021 compared to the year ended October 31, 2020
In the 2021 FY Comprehensive Income increased by 77.4%. A large part of our Comprehensive Income changes relates to foreign currency adjustments relating to fluctuations during the reporting period.
We conduct a large part of our business in various foreign currencies, for example, the British pound, Danish Kroner, Euros and Australian Dollars.
This category is affected by foreign currency adjustments during the reporting period. In the 2021 FY we had a gain of $654,219 compared to a loss of $185,870 in the 2020 FY. There are generally significant foreign currency fluctuations, particularly between the US dollar (our reporting currency) and the British Pound. Since the UK decided to leave the European Union, the British Pound has been falling significantly against the US dollar (see Note 2, paragraph n of Notes to the audited Consolidated Financial Statements for October 31, 2021 and 2020 for fuller information regarding our Foreign Currency Translation policy).
Segment Analysis
We are operating in two reportable segments, which are managed separately based upon fundamental differences in their operations. Segment operating income is total segment revenue reduced by operating expenses identifiable with the business segment. Overhead includes general corporate administrative costs.
The Company evaluates performance and allocates resources based upon operating income. The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as those described in the summary of accounting policies.
There are inter-segment sales in the table below which have been eliminated from our financial statements. However, for the purpose of segment reporting, these inter-segment sales are included in the table below only.
The following tables summarize certain balance sheet and statement of operations information by reportable segment for the financial years ending October 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Coda Octopus Martech and Coda Octopus Colmek (“Services Segment” or “Marine Engineering Business”) are providing engineering services as sub-contractors mainly to prime defense contractors and Coda Octopus Products operations are comprised primarily of product sales, technology solutions sales, rental of equipment and/or software and associated services (“Products Segment” or “Marine Technology Business”).
The Company’s reportable business segments sell their goods and services in four geographic locations:
● Americas
● Europe
● Australia/Asia
● Middle East/Africa
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of October 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $18,477,857, working capital of $31,310,563 and stockholders’ equity of $41,049,073. For the year then ended, the Company generated cash flow from operations of $3,269,770.
We believe that our current level of cash and cash generation will be sufficient to meet our short and medium-term liquidity needs. As of October 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of approximately $17.75 million and both billed and unbilled receivables of approximately $5.29 million. Our current cash balance represents approximately 27 months of Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. The Company continues to critically evaluate the level of expenses that we incur and reduce those expenses as appropriate.
We also have access to a revolving line of credit of $4 million from HSBC NA. This line of credit is available to the Company for short-term working capital purpose. All amounts under the Revolving Line of Credit are payable at the end of each financial year. The facility was renewed for another year and extends to November 2022. To date, the Company has not borrowed any funds under this credit line.
Our main liquidity issues are forward buying components and inventory for our products which encompass specialized electronics for which there is no after-market except for the products which they are designed to for, funding our research and development program (“R&D”) which requires significant expenditures in attracting engineering skills and incurring non-recoverable costs for researching, developing and prototyping products and managing our currency exposure and business development and marketing costs required for the success of our business.
Operating Activities
Net cash generated from operating activities for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $3,269,770. We recorded net income for the period of $4,947,765. Other items in uses and sources of funds from operations included non-cash charges related to depreciation and amortization, deferred tax asset and stock-based compensation, which collectively totaled $2,460,020. Funding from the Paycheck Protection Program was recognized as income and reduced cash from operating activities by $648,872. Changes in operating assets decreased net cash from operating activities by $4,772,155 and changes in current liabilities increased net cash from operating activities by $1,283,012.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $964,204.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided in financing activities for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $139,233 and resulted in paying down the debt of the Company and receiving funding from the Paycheck Protection Program.
Secured Promissory Note
On April 28, 2017, Coda Octopus Group, Inc. (the “Company”) together with its wholly owned US subsidiaries, Coda Octopus Products, Inc. and Coda Octopus Colmek, Inc. (together, the “Subsidiaries”), entered into a loan agreement with HSBC Bank NA (the “Lender”) for a loan in the principal amount of $8,000,000 (the “Loan”). The annual interest rate is fixed at 4.56%.
The obligations in connection with the repayment of the Loan are secured by all assets of the Company and its Subsidiaries. In addition, the repayment of the Loan is guaranteed by three of the Company’s overseas subsidiaries.
In March 2018, the Company repaid a significant portion of the outstanding HSBC Debenture. As of October 31, 2021, we had $63,559 outstanding under this loan.
The remaining balance of $63,559 was repaid by the end of the calendar year of 2021 - see Note 16 Subsequent Events of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the HSBC Debentures.
All security interests held by HSBC NA is expected to be released pursuant to the terms of the Loan Documents (Security Agreement). There will then be no encumbrances relating to debentures recorded against the Company and/or its assets.
Foreign Currency
The Company maintains its books in local currency: US Dollars for its US operations, British Pounds for its United Kingdom operations, Danish Kroner for its Danish operations and Australian Dollars for its Australian operations.
For the 2021 FY, 27% of the Company’s operations were conducted inside the United States and 73% outside the United States through its wholly owned subsidiaries. As a result, currency fluctuations may significantly affect the Company’s sales, profitability, balance sheet valuations and financial position when the foreign currencies of its international operations are translated into U.S. dollars for financial reporting purposes. In addition, we are also subject to currency fluctuation risks with respect to certain foreign currency denominated receivables and payables. Although the Company cannot predict the extent to which currency fluctuations may affect the Company’s business and financial position, there is a risk that such fluctuations will have an adverse impact on the Company’s sales, profits, balance sheet valuations and financial position. Because differing portions of our revenues and costs are denominated in foreign currency, movements in those currencies could impact our margins by, for example, decreasing our foreign revenues when the dollar strengthens and not correspondingly decreasing our expenses. The Company does not currently hedge its currency exposure. In the future, we may engage in hedging transactions to mitigate foreign exchange risk.
The translation of the Company’s denominated balance sheets and results of operations into US dollars (USD) are affected by changes in the average value of USD against the currencies of our foreign subsidiaries (British, Danish and Australian) included in our consolidated results.
British Operations 2021 FY and 2020 FY
British Pound against USD
Average exchange rate was $1.3758 USD to the GBP against $1.2897 USD
An increase in the value of the GBP against the USD by 6.7%
Australian Operations 2021 FY and 2020 FY
Australian Dollar (“AUD”) against USD
Average exchange rate was $0.7531 against $0.6830 USD
An increase in the value of the AUD against the USD by 10.3%
Danish Operations 2021 FY and 2020 FY
Danish Kroner (DKK) against USD
Average exchange rate was $0.1603 against $0.1517 USD to the DKK
An increase in the value of the DKK against the USD by 5.7%
These are the values we have used in the calculations below which show the impact of these currency fluctuations on our operations in the 2021 FY:
This table shows that the effect of constant exchange rates, versus the actual exchange rate fluctuations, increased net income for the year by $315,975 and increased net assets by $1,124,447. These amounts are material to our overall financial results.
Since the UK voted to leave the European Union membership in 2016 until recently, the UK’s future trade relationship with the European Union was uncertain. This uncertainty gave rise to significant volatility of the UK Pound against major currencies including the US Dollar causing us to suffer losses due to currency fluctuations. With the future relationship now determined, it is anticipated that the fluctuations between the British Pound and other major currencies including the US Dollar will not be as extreme and we anticipate that losses suffered due to this is likely to reduce.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Inflation
The effect of inflation on the Company’s operating results in the 2021 FY was not significant.
Notwithstanding, while the past few years have seen fairly benign rates of inflation in labour and materials both in the countries in which we operate, those that we source from and those that we sell to, since the end of the 2021 FY,we are now seeing worrying signs of inflation in almost all countries. In the US, UK and Denmark, countries in which we have operations, inflation has moved from 1.2%, 0.9%, and 0.3% in 2020 to 7.0%, 5.4%, and 1.6% today respectively.
This is combined with shortages of supply both in components and availability of skills and labour. As examples, we have seen labour rates for new hires in the US, UK and Denmark rise by approximately 10%, which leads to knock-on demands for increased pay across all our existing staff. We have also seen some key component availability go from 4-week lead time to 78 weeks combined with significant price increases of on some components for our products. The levels of our margins are therefore at risk and preservation of our margins is dependent upon our ability to pass on these increases to our customers which is improbable, particularly since our customer base is global (in the Far East inflation profiles are very different).