Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Bull Horn Holdings Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Restatements of Previously Issued Financial Statements
We previously restated our historical financial results to (i) reclassify our warrants as derivative liabilities pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40 rather than as a component of equity as we had previously treated the Warrants, and (ii) to restate the value of our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to include all ordinary shares being subject to possible redemption. The impact of these restatements is reflected in the discussion of our results of operations below and is as disclosed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements as of and for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 included in Amendment No. 2 to our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 2, 2022.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the BVI on November 27, 2018 formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar initial business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
While our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not necessarily be limited to a particular industry, sector or region, since our initial public offering, we have capitalized on the expertise of our management team in the sports (including sports franchises or assets related to sports franchises, and sports technology), entertainment and brands sectors.
We have yet to find, and may not be able to find, a suitable target business and consummate our initial business combination by the May 3, 2022 deadline in our charter to do so. If we fail to consummate an initial business combination by May 3, 2022 (which date may be extended as described below), we will either seek an amendment to our charter to extend the deadline by which we must consummate our initial business combination or liquidate our trust account, each as described elsewhere in this report.
On April 5, 2022, we filed a definitive proxy statement to announce our intention to hold a special meeting of our shareholders on April 26, 2022 to seek an extension of the deadline by which we must consummate our initial business combination on a month to month basis (subject to additional monies being funded into our trust account by our sponsor or its designees as described in such definitive proxy statement) from May 3, 2022 up until November 3, 2022. Such an extension requires the approval of our public shareholders to amend our charter, who will be provided the opportunity to at the time of the special meeting to redeem all or a portion their ordinary shares in the same manner as with respect to our initial business combination. A significant number of such redemptions will have a material adverse effect on the amount held in our trust account and other adverse effects on our company, such as our ability to have enough cash to implement an initial business combination or to maintain our listing on Nasdaq. In connection with such special meeting of shareholders, we may engage in negotiations and enter into transactions with certain (as of yet unidentified) shareholders of our company with regard to transactions under which our sponsor would assign founder shares to such shareholders in consideration of their voting in favor of the extension and not redeeming their holdings in our company in connection therewith. Additionally, our sponsor may also separately explore transactions under which it would sell its interest in our company to another management team.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $15,229,329, which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $7,577, other interest income of $71, and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $15,903,000, offset by operating costs of $681,319.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $17,279,776, which consisted of operating costs of $68,430, transaction costs allocated to the warrant liabilities of $112,550 and changes in fair value of warrant liability of $17,100,000, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $1,204.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 3, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 7,500,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $75,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 3,750,000 private warrants to our sponsor and the underwriters of our initial public offering at a price of $1.00 per private warrant generating gross proceeds of $3,750,000.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the private warrants, a total of $75,750,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $4,243,264 in transaction costs, including $1,500,000 of underwriting fees, $2,250,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $493,264 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $502,839. Net income of $15,229,329 was impacted by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $7,577 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $15,903,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $178,409 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $115,695. Net loss of $17,279,776 was impacted by interest earned on marketable securities held in trust account of $1,204, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $17,100,000 and transaction costs allocable to the warrant liabilities of $112,550. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $47,265 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $75,758,781. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $404,345. We are using the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and to structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. These warrants would be identical to the private warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we would be required to issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board (the “FASB”)’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” have until May 3, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination (although we are presently calling a special meeting of our shareholders to seek approval of an extension of such date). It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time or any extended deadline, if approved. If an initial business combination is not consummated by our initial deadline date or an extended deadline date (if approved), there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of our company. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur and an extension is not requested by our sponsor, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after May 3, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than described below.
The underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee of three percent (3.0%) of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $2,250,000. The deferred fee will be paid in cash upon the closing of a business combination from the amounts held in the trust account, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We account for our warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40 under which the warrants that do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify our warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. Our private warrants and our public warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial lattice simulation model. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public warrants from the units, the public warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Ordinary Shares Subject to Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable shares of ordinary shares is excluded from income (loss) per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.