Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on October 19, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate a business combination utilizing cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering (as defined below), the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option (as defined below) and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below), our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a business combination, we intend to initially focus our search on identifying a prospective target business in the technology, media and telecommunications industries (“TMT”) in the United States and other developed countries. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Initial Public Offering
Our registration statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on February 23, 2021. On February 26, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 units (the “Units” and the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units, the “Public Shares”), including the underwriters’ exercise of their full over-allotment option of 4,500,000 units, at $10.00 per Unit (“Over-Allotment Option”), generating gross proceeds of $345.0 million (the “Initial Public Offering”), and incurring offering costs of approximately $18.8 million, inclusive of approximately $11.8 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of an aggregate of 5,933,333 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) to our sponsor, X-icity Holdings Corporation, at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $8.9 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, a total of $345.0 million was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) and we had $2.0 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $18.9 million in transaction costs, including $6.7 million of underwriting fees, $11.8 million of deferred underwriting fees and $0.3 million of other costs.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or February 26, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from October 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $5.6 million which primarily consists of $7.3 million of changes in fair value of warrant liabilities and interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $31,165, partially offset by operating costs of $1.2 million and warrant offering costs of $0.5 million.
For the period from October 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,636, which is attributed to operating costs incurred.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.7 million of cash and working capital of $0.8 million.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through the sponsor’s payment of $25,000 of our liabilities in exchange for issuance of 7,187,500 shares of our Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, (the “Founder Shares”), and a promissory note (the “Note”) issued by our sponsor. We repaid the Note on February 26, 2021.
On February 26, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units, including the underwriters’ exercise of their full Over-Allotment Option, generating gross proceeds of $345.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,933,333 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $8.9 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, a total of $345.0 million was placed in the Trust Account and we had $2.0 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $18.9 million in transaction costs, including $6.7 million of underwriting fees, $11.8 million of deferred underwriting fees and $0.3 million of other costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $345,031,165. We intend to utilize substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on funds in the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete a business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1.3 million. Net income of $5.8 million was primarily impacted by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7.3 million, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $31,165 and changes in operating assets and liabilities which used $0.1 million of cash from operating activities, partially offset by deferred warrant offering costs charged to expense of $0.3 million.
For the period from October 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $5,407, funded by the Note from our sponsor.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1.5 million of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to a business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of a business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of a business combination. If we are unable to complete a business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following a business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term cash obligations, other than the deferred underwriting commissions described below and an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on February 23, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination or our liquidation.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (as defined below), if any, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated as of August 4, 2020. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until the termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. The underwriters exercised their full Over-Allotment Option concurrent with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering on February 26, 2021.
The underwriters were paid an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit (excluding the 400,000 units purchased by Pendrell and an affiliate of Craig McCaw as well as 517,500 shares purchased by certain other parties (total of 917,500 shares) with respect to which no underwriting discount is payable), or $6,716,500 in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. $0.35 per unit (excluding the 400,000 units purchased by Pendrell and an affiliate of Craig McCaw as well as 517,500 shares purchased by certain other parties (total of 917,500 shares) with respect to which no underwriting discount is payable), or $11,753,875 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates We have identified the following as critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 34,500,000 shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold as part of the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the prospectus for the public offering. In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, redemption provisions not solely within the control of Colicity Inc. require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. As a result, all of our Class A common stock is classified as temporary equity.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. However, we believe classifying all of our common stock subject to possible redemption as temporary equity does not invalidate the $5 million requirement as we will not redeem our Class A common stock in an amount that would cause our net tangible assets to be less than $5,000,001.
Public and Private Placement Warrants
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with ASC Topic 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815”), under which we have determined that the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of derivatives as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of the change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity and amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. As an emerging growth company under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, the provisions of ASU 2020-06 are effective for Colicity beginning on January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently evaluating the impact of this standard on our financial statements but do not expect the adoption of ASU 2020-06 to have a material effect on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.