Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including those set forth under “Forward-looking Statements” and “Risk Factors”, as revised and supplemented by those risks described from time to time in other reports which we file with the SEC.
Overview
We are building a leading, diversified specialty pharmaceutical company committed to improving the lives of people living with serious medical conditions. Our portfolio includes Xtampza ER, an abuse-deterrent, extended-release, oral formulation of oxycodone, and Nucynta ER and Nucynta IR (collectively, the “Nucynta Products”), which are extended-release (“ER”) and immediate-release (“IR”) formulations of tapentadol.
Xtampza ER was approved by the FDA in April 2016 for the management of pain severe enough to require daily, around-the-clock, long-term opioid treatment and for which alternative treatment options are inadequate. We commercially launched Xtampza ER in June 2016.
Nucynta ER is indicated for the management of pain severe enough to require daily, around the clock, long-term opioid treatment, including neuropathic pain associated with diabetic peripheral neuropathy in adults, and for which alternate treatment options are inadequate. Nucynta IR is indicated for the management of acute pain severe enough to require an opioid analgesic and for which alternative treatments are inadequate in adults. We began shipping and recognizing product sales on the Nucynta Products on January 9, 2018 and began marketing the Nucynta Products in February 2018. We initially licensed the right to commercialize the Nucynta Products in the United States through a Commercialization
Agreement with Assertio Therapeutics, Inc. (formerly known as Depomed) (“Assertio”) entered into in December 2017 (the “Nucynta Commercialization Agreement”). On February 6, 2020, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Assertio (the “Nucynta Purchase Agreement”), pursuant to which we agreed to acquire from Assertio certain assets related to the Nucynta Products (the “Nucynta Acquisition”), including the license from Grünenthal GmbH (“Grünenthal”), for an aggregate purchase price of $375.0 million. On February 13, 2020, we closed the Nucynta Acquisition in accordance with the Nucynta Purchase Agreement. Upon closing, the Nucynta Commercialization Agreement was effectively terminated. Our prior royalty obligation to Assertio ceased and our only remaining royalty obligation is to pay 14% of net sales of the Nucynta Products directly to Grünenthal.
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $276.9 million in net revenues, comprised of $103.7 million from sales of Xtampza ER and $173.2 million from sales of the Nucynta Products.
Outlook
We expect to continue to incur significant commercialization expenses related to marketing, manufacturing, distribution, selling and reimbursement activities. We are promoting Xtampza ER to approximately 10,000 health care professionals who write approximately 62% of the branded extended-release oral opioid prescriptions in the United States with a sales team of approximately 94 sales representatives and managers. We are promoting the Nucynta Products to the same health care professionals to whom we promote Xtampza ER, leveraging our existing sales organization. We have historically paid royalties to Assertio on all revenues from the sale of Nucynta Products based on certain net sales thresholds. Upon the closing of the Nucynta Acquisition and the termination of the Nucynta Commercialization Agreement (except for certain sections that survive in accordance with the Nucynta Purchase Agreement) in February 2020, our prior royalty obligation to Assertio ceased and our only remaining royalty obligation is to pay 14% of net sales of the Nucynta Products directly to Grünenthal.
We were historically not profitable and incurred net losses in each year since inception until 2020. However, we generated net income of $71.5 million and $26.8 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $256.3 million.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, together with expected cash inflows from the commercialization of our products, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, debt service and capital expenditure requirements under our current business plan for the foreseeable future.
As of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we expect the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to contain it to continue to impact our revenue. Notwithstanding the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions in many jurisdictions, and amidst continuing public health concerns relating to the spread of COVID-19, weekly pain patient office visits continue to be depressed compared to pre-COVID periods, which in turn may account for fewer patients beginning therapy with our products. We believe that the disruptions caused by COVID-19 will continue and there remains substantial uncertainty as to when such disruptions will cease.
Financial Operations Overview
Product Revenues
Product revenue through the year ended December 31, 2021 has been generated from product sales of Xtampza ER and the Nucynta Products. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, product sales are recorded upon delivery of products to customers, net of a provision for estimated chargebacks, rebates, sales incentives and allowances, distribution service fees, and returns.
Cost of Product Revenues
Cost of product revenues include amortization of the intangible asset acquired in connection with the Nucynta Acquisition and the prior Nucynta Commercialization Agreement (“Nucynta Intangible Asset”), royalty expense, the cost of active pharmaceutical ingredient, the cost of producing finished goods that correspond with revenue for the reporting period, as well as certain period costs related to freight, packaging, stability and quality testing. Please refer to Note 4, License Agreements, and Note 9, Intangible Assets, for further detail around the Nucynta Intangible Asset and royalty expense.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs associated with our research and development activities for our products. These costs are expensed as incurred and include compensation and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation; costs associated with conducting our clinical and non-clinical activities, including clinical and non-clinical trials that we conduct for post-marketing requirements; and costs for laboratory supplies, depreciation of lab equipment, and other expenses including allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses for our employees in executive, finance, sales and marketing and administrative functions. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs and professional fees for directors, accounting and legal services, and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents. As we continue to invest in the commercialization of our products, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to continue to be substantial for the foreseeable future.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of cash and non-cash interest costs related to the term notes and convertible notes issued in February 2020 in connection with the Nucynta Acquisition. Historically, interest expense also related to the Nucynta Commercialization Agreement and cash interest costs from the Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”). However, in January 2020, the Company prepaid the outstanding principal, accrued interest, and required prepayment fees on the SVB term loan and recognized an immaterial loss on extinguishment as a component of interest expense.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes reflects expense for federal and state income taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company removed its valuation allowance on the substantial majority of its deferred tax assets, resulting in a tax benefit in 2021. Given the valuation allowance that was recorded on deferred tax assets during the year ended December 31, 2020, the provision for 2020 income taxes consisted of state income tax for certain states that enacted changes in tax laws that prevented us from using our state-level NOLs to offset taxable income.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. Estimates include revenue recognition, including the estimates of product returns, discounts and allowances related to commercial sales of our products, estimates utilized in the valuation of inventory, estimates of useful lives with respect to intangible assets, accounting for stock-based compensation, contingencies, intangible assets and tax valuation allowances. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience when available and on various factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our accounting policy for revenue recognition will have a substantial impact on reported results and relies on certain estimates. Estimates are based on historical experience, current conditions and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets, liabilities and equity and the amounts of revenues and expenses. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Product Revenue
Our only source of revenue to date has been generated by sales of our products, which are primarily sold to distributors (“customers”), which in turn sell the product to pharmacies and others for the treatment of patients (“end users”). Revenue for product sales is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. This generally occurs upon delivery to our customers when estimated provisions for chargebacks, rebates, sales incentives and allowances, distribution service fees, and returns are reasonably determinable. Therefore, product sales are recorded upon delivery to our customers net of estimated chargebacks, rebates, sales incentives and allowances, distribution service fees, as well as estimated product returns.
Sales Deductions
Sales deductions consist primarily of provisions for (1) rebates and incentives, including managed care rebates, government rebates, co-pay program incentives, and sales incentives and allowances; (2) product returns, including return estimates for both the Nucynta Products and Xtampza ER; and (3) trade allowances and chargebacks, including fees for distribution service fees, prompt pay discounts, and chargebacks. We estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in revenue under the expected value method for all sales deductions other than trade allowances, which are estimated under the most likely amount method. These provisions reflect our best estimates of the amount of revenue to which we are entitled based on the terms of our contracts.
Provisions for rebates and incentives are based on the estimated amount of rebates and incentives to be claimed on the related sales from the period. As our rebates and incentives are based on products dispensed to patients, we are required to estimate the expected value of claims at the time of product delivery to distributors. Given that distributors sell the product to pharmacies, which in turn dispense the product to patients, claims can be submitted significantly after the related sales are recognized. Our estimates of these claims are based on the historical experience of existing or similar programs, including current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and estimated distribution channel inventory levels. Accruals and related reserves required for rebates and incentives are adjusted as new information becomes available, including actual claims. If actual results vary, we may need to adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of the adjustment.
Provisions for trade allowances and chargebacks are primarily based on customer-level contractual terms. Accruals and related reserves are adjusted as new information becomes available, which generally consists of actual trade allowances and chargebacks processed relating to sales recognized in the period.
Provisions for product returns are based on product-level returns rates, recent unprocessed return claims, as well as relevant market events and other factors. Our return policy requires that product is physically returned within an 18-month window beginning six months prior to expiration and up until twelve months after expiration. Estimates of the future product returns are made at the time of revenue recognition to determine the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled (that is, excluding the products expected to be returned). To the extent we receive amounts in excess of what we expect to be entitled to receive due to a product return, we do not recognize revenue when we transfer products to customers but instead recognize those excess amounts received as a refund liability. We update the measurement of the refund liability at the end of each reporting period for changes in expectations about the amount of refunds with the corresponding adjustments recognized as revenue (or reductions of revenue).
Historically, estimates of the refund liability for product returned for Nucynta Products were based on historical returns rates as these products have been commercially sold in the US since 2009 for Nucynta IR and since 2011 for Nucynta ER. Because the Company began selling the Nucynta Products in 2018, the majority of Nucynta Products sold to customers by the Company were not eligible for return until the year ended December 31, 2021, or beyond. For Xtampza
ER, estimates of the refund liability for product returns were historically based on a combination of historical actual returns processed to date, taking into consideration the expiration date of product upon delivery to customers, as well as forecasted customer buying and return patterns, channel inventory levels, and other specifically known market events and trends. Refer to Note 3, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, for more information.
Provisions for trade allowances and chargebacks are primarily based on customer-level contractual terms. Accruals and related reserves are adjusted as new information becomes available, which generally consists of actual trade allowances and chargebacks processed relating to sales recognized in the period.
Intangible Assets
We record the fair value of finite-lived intangible assets as of the transaction date. Intangible assets are then amortized over their estimated useful lives using either the straight-line method, or if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefit of the asset is expected to be utilized. We test intangible assets for potential impairment whenever triggering events or circumstances present an indication of impairment. If the sum of expected undiscounted future cash flows of the intangible assets is less than the carrying amount of such assets, the intangible assets would be written down to the estimated fair value, calculated based on the present value of expected future cash flows. As of December 31, 2021, our only intangible asset is related to the Nucynta Intangible Asset. There have been no triggering events that indicate that the carrying value is not recoverable from undiscounted cash flows.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
The Company provides a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining the extent to which a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is required, the Company evaluates all available evidence including projections of future taxable income, carry back opportunities, reversal of certain deferred tax liabilities, and other tax planning strategies. Prior to generating income during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a history of operating losses and a valuation allowance was maintained on the majority of the Company’s deferred tax assets through March 31, 2021.
As a result of sustained positive earnings history as demonstrated through recent cumulative earnings, as of June 30, 2021, the Company began using projections of future taxable income as a source of realizing its deferred tax assets. Accordingly, the Company released the portion of the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets expected to be realized through future earnings in the three months ended June 30, 2021, and subsequent quarters. The Company has maintained a valuation allowance on the portion of its deferred tax assets that are not more likely than not to be realized due to tax limitation or other conditions of $2.0 million as of December 31, 2021. The Company recognized a total tax benefit of $74.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included a deferred tax benefit of $78.0 million.
Significant judgment is required in making these assessments to maintain or reverse our valuation allowances, and, to the extent our future expectations change we would have to assess the recoverability of these deferred tax assets at that time.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Product revenues, net were $276.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“2021”), compared to $310.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (“2020”), representing a $33.1 million decrease. For 2021, Xtampza product revenue was $103.7 million compared to $128.0 million for 2020. The $24.3 million decrease for Xtampza revenue was due to higher gross-to-net adjustments, primarily related to rebates and provisions for returns, partially offset by a benefit from an increase in sales volume and price. For 2021, Nucynta IR and ER revenue was $102.2 million and $71.0 million, respectively, compared to $116.3 million and $65.7 million, respectively, for 2020. The $8.8 million decrease for Nucynta Products revenue was due to a decrease in sales volume and higher provisions for returns, partially offset by a benefit from lower gross-to-net adjustments primarily related to rebates.
Cost of product revenues (excluding intangible asset amortization) was $59.1 million for 2021, compared to $69.5 million for 2020. The $10.4 million decrease was primarily related to a decrease in royalty expense for the
Nucynta Products, partially offset by an increase in sales volume for Xtampza. Investments in manufacturing, including the transfer of the Nucynta ER manufacturing process, which is expected to be completed in 2022, may impact the relationship between revenue and costs of product revenues (excluding intangible asset amortization) in future periods. In the 2020 Period, we recognized $14.2 million in sales-based royalty expense due to Assertio under the terms of the Nucynta Commercialization Agreement. Our sales-based royalty obligations to Assertio ceased upon closing of the Nucynta Acquisition on February 13, 2020.
Intangible asset amortization was $67.2 million for 2021, compared to $60.7 million for 2020. The $6.5 million increase was primarily related to the Nucynta Acquisition, in which $367.1 million of consideration was allocated to the existing intangible asset as incremental cost in 2020. The intangible asset is being amortized on a straight-line basis over its estimated useful life of approximately six years.
Research and development expenses were $9.5 million for 2021, compared to $9.8 million for 2020. The $300,000 decrease was primarily related to a decrease in salaries, wages and benefits, partially offset by an increase in trial related costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $119.0 million for 2021, compared to $113.8 million for 2020. The $5.2 million increase was primarily related to:
● an increase in audit, legal, and other professional fees of $3.5 million, primarily related to higher costs associated with ongoing intellectual property litigation;
● an increase in litigation settlements of $2.9 million due to the Company executing a settlement framework to resolve 27 pending opioid-related lawsuits. Refer to Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies, for further information;
● an increase in salaries, wages and benefits of $1.6 million, primarily due to stock-based compensation expense,
● an increase in insurance of $747,000, primarily due to higher premiums; partially offset by
● a decrease in sales, marketing and consulting costs of $3.6 million, primarily due to lower costs incurred in 2021 to support the ongoing commercialization of our products.
Restructuring expenses were $4.6 million for 2021, compared to zero for 2020. The increase in restructuring expenses is due to the Company entering into a plan to reduce its workforce, primarily related to its salesforce in 2021. The arrangements included the payment of a cash severance benefit near the time of separation, together with continued medical benefits and related services. Refer to Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, for further information.
Interest expense was $21.0 million for 2021, compared to $28.9 million for 2020. The $7.9 million decrease was primarily due to lower non-cash interest expense associated with the Company’s convertible notes in 2021 as a result of the adoption of ASU 2020-06 in 2021 combined with lower cash interest expense associated with the Company’s term note due to continued principal payments.
Interest income was $12,000 for 2021, compared to $232,000 for 2020. The $220,000 decrease was primarily due to lower interest rates earned on money market funds.
Benefit from income taxes was $74.9 million for 2021, which includes a $78.0 million tax benefit related to the release of the Company’s valuation allowance on the majority of its net operating losses and other deferred tax assets, compared to a provision for income taxes of $830,000 for 2020. The $75.7 million increase was primarily due to the Company’s valuation allowance release in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
We have historically incurred net losses in each year since inception until 2020. Historically, we have funded our operations primarily through the private placements of our preferred stock and convertible notes, public offerings of common stock and convertible notes, and commercial bank debt. As of December 31, 2021, we had $186.4 million in cash and cash equivalents. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, together with expected cash inflows from operations, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, debt service and capital expenditure requirements under our current business plan for the foreseeable future.
Borrowing Arrangements and Equity Offerings
The following transactions represent the material borrowing arrangements and equity offerings.
Pharmakon Term Notes
On February 6, 2020, in connection with the execution of the Nucynta Purchase Agreement, we, together with our subsidiary, Collegium Securities Corporation, entered into the Loan Agreement with BioPharma Credit PLC, as collateral agent and lender; and BioPharma Credit Investments V (Master) LP, as lender. The Loan Agreement provides for a $200.0 million secured term loan (the “term notes”), the proceeds of which were used to finance a portion of the purchase price paid pursuant to the Nucynta Purchase Agreement. The outstanding principal balance for the term notes as of December 31, 2021 is $112,500, including $50,000 of obligations due in the first twelve months after period end.
The term notes will mature on the calendar quarter end immediately following the 48-month anniversary of the closing of the Nucynta Acquisition, and is guaranteed by our material domestic subsidiaries and is also secured by substantially all of our material domestic assets. The term notes will bear interest at a rate based upon LIBOR (subject to a LIBOR floor of 2.0%), plus a margin of 7.5% per annum. We are required to repay the term notes by making equal quarterly payments.
The Loan Agreement contains certain covenants and obligations of the parties, including, without limitation, covenants that require us to maintain $200.0 million in annual net sales and covenants that limit our ability to incur additional indebtedness or liens, make acquisitions or other investments or dispose of assets outside the ordinary course of business. Failure to comply with these covenants would constitute an event of default under the Loan Agreement, notwithstanding our ability to meet its debt service obligations. The Loan Agreement also includes various customary remedies for the lenders following an event of default, including the acceleration of repayment of outstanding amounts under the Loan Agreement and execution upon the collateral securing obligations under the Loan Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all of its covenants.
2026 Convertible Notes
On February 13, 2020, in connection with the execution of the Nucynta Purchase Agreement, we issued 2.625% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “convertible notes”), in the aggregate principal amount of $143.8 million, in a public offering registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The proceeds were used to finance a portion of the purchase price paid pursuant to the Nucynta Purchase Agreement.
The convertible notes are senior, unsecured obligations and will accrue interest at a rate of 2.625% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2020. The notes will mature on February 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted. Before August 15, 2025, noteholders will have the right to convert their notes only upon the occurrence of certain events. From and after August 15, 2025, noteholders may convert their notes at any time at their election until the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately before the maturity date. We will settle conversions by paying or delivering, as applicable, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. The initial conversion rate is 34.2618 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of notes, which represents an initial conversion price of approximately $29.19 per share of common stock. The conversion rate and conversion price will be subject to adjustment upon the occurrence of certain events. The outstanding principal balance for the convertible notes as of December 31, 2021 is $143,750. There are no principal repayment obligations due in the first twelve months after period end.
Debt Commitment Letter
On February 14, 2022, in connection with the definitive agreement to acquire BioDelivery Sciences International, Inc. (“BDSI”) (the “Merger Agreement”), we entered into a commitment letter (the “Debt Commitment Letter”) with Pharmakon Advisors, L.P. pursuant to which funds managed by Pharmakon Advisors, L.P. have committed, subject to customary conditions, to provide to Collegium a four (4) year senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $650.0 million (the “Term Facility”), including $100.0 million of principal repayment obligations due in the first twelve months of the loan.
Proceeds will be used to finance a portion of Collegium’s acquisition of BDSI, as well as to repay the outstanding debt of Collegium and BDSI and pay certain fees and expenses related thereto. Under the terms of the Debt Commitment Letter, the Term Facility will have $100 million in amortization payments during the first year and the remaining $550 million balance will amortize in equal quarterly installments over the remaining three (3) years. The loan will initially bear interest at 3-month LIBOR plus 7.50% per annum subject to a 1.20% floor, and Collegium will pay a one-time fee of 2% due at signing and 1% due at closing. The obligation of Pharmakon Advisors, L.P. to provide the financing under the Debt Commitment Letter is subject to a number of conditions, including the receipt by Pharmakon Advisors, L.P. of executed loan documentation, the accuracy of certain representations and warranties in all material respects and consummation of the Transactions as contemplated by the Merger Agreement.
Cash flows
In this section, we discuss cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $103.6 million in 2021, compared to $93.9 million in 2020. The $9.7 million increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to changes in working capital, including accounts receivable and accrued rebates, returns, and discounts, and accrued expenses, as well as higher net income exclusive of non-cash items.
Investing activities. Cash used in investing activities was $1.9 million in 2021, compared to $373.8 million in 2020. The $371.9 million increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily related to the Nucynta Acquisition. The remaining change is related to the timing of purchases of property, plant, and equipment primarily for the dedicated manufacturing suite at our contract manufacturing organization.
Financing activities. Cash used in financing activities was $89.3 million in 2021, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $286.5 million in 2020. The $375.8 million decrease was primarily related to net proceeds from the term notes of $192.1 million and issuance of the convertible notes of $138.3 million, both of which were issued in 2020. The remaining change is primarily related to repurchases of common stock of $47.9 million, including the ASR Program, and changes in payments made for employee restricted stock tax withholdings, partially offset by proceeds from exercises of stock options.
Funding requirements
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, together with expected cash inflows from the commercialization of our products, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, debt service and capital expenditure requirements under our current business plan for the foreseeable future. However, we are subject to all the risks common to the commercialization and development of new pharmaceutical products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business.
Certain economic or strategic considerations may cause us to seek additional cash through private or public debt or equity offerings. Such funds may not be available when needed, or, we may not be able to obtain funding on favorable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our products. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities, it could result in dilution to our existing shareholders, increased fixed payment obligations and the existence of securities with rights that may be senior to those of our common stock. If we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations and potentially impair our competitiveness, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Our forecast that our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we
currently expect. The amount and timing of future funding requirements, both near- and long-term, will depend on many factors, including:
● the generation of reasonable levels of revenue from products sales;
● the cost of growing and maintaining sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for our products;
● the cost of patent infringement litigation, including our litigation with Purdue, relating to Xtampza ER and the Nucynta Products, which may be expensive to defend;
● the cost of litigation related to opioid marketing and distribution practices;
● the timing and costs associated with manufacturing our products, for commercial sale and clinical trials
● our need to expand our regulatory and compliance functions; and
● the effect of competing technological and market developments.
If we cannot capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
Contractual Obligations
The Company’s contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 that will affect our future liquidity include our term notes, including interest, convertible senior notes, including interest, operating lease obligations, and purchase obligations. For further detail regarding our term notes and convertible senior notes, refer to Note 12, Debt. For further detail regarding our operating lease obligations, refer to Note 13, Leases.
The Company’s purchase obligations represent the minimum purchase obligations of up to $3.0 million per year with our contract manufacturer which are in effect as of December 31, 2021 and will remain in effect each year until the termination of our manufacturing agreement.
We also have employment agreements with executive officers that would require us to make severance payments to them if we terminate their employment without cause or the executives resign for good cause. These payments are contingent upon the occurrence of various future events, and the amounts payable under these provisions depend upon the level of compensation at the time of termination of employment, and therefore, are not calculable at this time.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial results presented on a GAAP basis, we have included information about certain non-GAAP financial measures such as adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating expenses. We use these non-GAAP financial measures to understand, manage and evaluate our business as we believe they provide additional information on the performance of our business. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures, taken in conjunction with our results under GAAP, provide analysts, investors, lenders and other third parties insight into our view and assessment of our ongoing operating performance. In addition, we believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures, when viewed with our results under GAAP and the accompanying reconciliations, provide supplementary information that may be useful to analysts, investors, lenders, and other third parties in assessing our performance and results from period to period. We report these non-GAAP financial measures to portray the results of our operations prior to considering certain income statement elements. These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, net income or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
In our quarterly and annual reports, earnings press releases and conference calls, we may discuss the following financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP, to supplement our consolidated financial statements presented on a GAAP basis.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents GAAP net income adjusted to exclude interest expense, interest income, the benefit from or provision for income taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, restructuring expenses, and litigation settlements. Adjusted EBITDA, as used by us, may be calculated differently from, and therefore may not be comparable to, similarly titled measures used by other companies.
There are several limitations related to the use of adjusted EBITDA rather than net income, which is the nearest GAAP equivalent, such as:
● adjusted EBITDA excludes depreciation and amortization, and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated or amortized may have to be replaced in the future, the cash requirements for which are not reflected in adjusted EBITDA;
● we exclude stock-based compensation expense from adjusted EBITDA although (a) it has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy and (b) if we did not pay out a portion of our compensation in the form of stock-based compensation, the cash salary expense included in operating expenses would be higher, which would affect our cash position;
● adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, working capital needs;
● adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the benefit from or provision for income taxes or the cash requirements to pay taxes;
● adjusted EBITDA does not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● we exclude restructuring expenses from adjusted EBITDA. Restructuring expenses primarily include employee severance and contract termination costs. The amount and/or frequency of these restructuring expenses are not part of our underlying business; and
● we exclude litigation settlements from adjusted EBITDA, as well as any applicable income items or credit adjustments due to subsequent changes in estimates. This does not include our legal fees to defend claims, which are expensed as incurred.
Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Adjusted EBITDA was $118.3 million for 2021 compared to $139.7 million for 2020. The $21.4 million decrease was primarily due to higher GAAP net income of $44.8 million and higher adjustments for amortization expense of $6.5 million, restructuring expenses of $4.6 million, litigation settlements of $2.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of $2.3 million, depreciation expense of $866,000, and interest income of $220,000, partially offset by lower adjustments for income taxes of $75.7 million, primarily due to the impact of the Company’s valuation allowance release, and interest expense of $7.9 million.
The following is a summary of 2021 quarterly Adjusted EBITDA through December 31, 2021:
Adjusted Operating Expenses
Adjusted operating expenses is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents GAAP operating expenses adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation expense, restructuring, and litigation settlements.
Adjusted operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Adjusted operating expenses were $101.2 million for 2021 compared to $101.7 million for 2020. The $500,000 decrease was primarily related to an increase in GAAP operating expenses of $9.4 million due to the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses, partially offset by the decrease in research and development expenses, and higher adjustments for stock-based compensation expense, restructuring, and litigation settlements as described above in “Results of Operations.”
The following is a summary of 2021 quarterly adjusted operating expenses through December 31, 2021:
The following is a summary of 2020 quarterly adjusted operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.