Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References in this report (the “Annual Report”) to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to CONX Corp. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, and references to the “Sponsor” refer to nXgen Opportunities, LLC. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the State of Nevada on August 26, 2020, whose business purpose is to effect a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or assets. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination utilizing cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below), our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating an initial business combination, we intend to focus our search on identifying a prospective target that can benefit from our operational expertise in the technology, media and telecommunications (“TMT”) industry, including the wireless communications industry.
Our registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on October 29, 2020. On November 3, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 75,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $750.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,333,333 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $17 million.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $750.0 million was placed in the Trust Account (as defined below) and we had $1.7 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $42.3 million in transaction costs, including $15 million of underwriting fees, $26.3 million of deferred underwriting fees and $1 million of other costs.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of private placement units, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating an initial business combination.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or November 3, 2022 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Nevada law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 26, 2020 (inception) through November 3, 2020 were organizational activities, and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below. Subsequent to our Initial Public Offering, we have been focused on identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. Additionally, we recognize non-cash gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our warrant liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net income of $2,117,495, which was primarily related to a change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $7,030,803, partially offset by offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities of $1,879,881, fair value of Private Placement Warrants in excess of proceeds of $2,875,266 and general and administrative expenses of $162,382.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $19,356,076, which was primarily related to a change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $19,855,000, partially offset by general and administrative expenses of $555,487.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from Charles W. Ergen in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and a promissory note (the “Note”) issued by Mr. Ergen. We repaid the Note on November 3, 2020.
On November 3, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 75,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per unit generating gross proceeds of $750.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,333,333 private placement warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) to the Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $17 million.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $750.0 million was placed in the trust account (the “Trust Account”) and we had $1.7 million of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $42.3 million in transaction costs, including $15 million of underwriting fees, $26.3 million of deferred underwriting fees and $1 million of other costs in connection with our initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $(115,223). Net income of $2,117,495 was offset by offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities of $1,879,881. Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in $(115,223) of cash used in operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $(461,468), principally due to the payment of general and administrative expenses during the year.
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $750,005,343 and $750,080,355, respectively. The increase was due to interest earned on the assets in our trust account.
We intend to utilize substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we withdrew no interest earned on the Trust Account to pay income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with our initial business combination, the initial stockholders or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating and consummating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares, Private Placement Warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and stockholder rights agreement dated as of October 29, 2020. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $15 million in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $26.3 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies, except as described below.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change. In accordance with ASC 825-10 “Financial Instruments”, the Company has concluded that a portion of the transaction costs which directly related to the IPO and the private placement of the Private Placement Warrants, which were previously charged to stockholders’ equity, should be allocated to the warrants based on their relative fair value against total proceeds, and recognized as transaction costs in the statement of operations.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company will provide holders of the Company’s outstanding shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, sold in the Initial Public Offering with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their public shares upon the completion of a Business Combination either: (i) in connection with a stockholder meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) without a stockholder vote by means of a tender offer. The decision as to whether the Company will seek stockholder approval of a Business Combination or conduct a tender offer will be made by the Company, solely in its discretion. The public stockholders will be entitled to redeem their public shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then held in the Trust Account (initially anticipated to be $10.00 per Public Share). The per-share amount to be distributed to public stockholders who redeem their public shares will not be reduced by the deferred underwriting commissions the Company will pay to the underwriters. These public shares will be recorded at a redemption value and classified as temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering in accordance with ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The Company will proceed with a Business Combination if a majority of the shares voted are voted in favor of the Business Combination. The Company will not redeem the public shares in an amount that would cause its net tangible assets to be less than $5,000,001. If a stockholder vote is not required by law and the Company does not decide to hold a stockholder vote for business or other legal reasons, the Company will, pursuant to its articles of incorporation, conduct the redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules of the SEC and file tender offer documents with the SEC prior to completing a Business Combination. If, however, stockholder approval of the transaction is required by law, or the Company decides to obtain stockholder approval for business or legal reasons, the Company will offer to redeem shares in conjunction with a proxy solicitation pursuant to the proxy rules and not pursuant to the tender offer rules. Additionally, each public stockholder may elect to redeem their public shares irrespective of whether they vote for or against the proposed transaction.
Recent accounting standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company will adopt ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2022 and is currently assessing the impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.