Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Note numbers refer to “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021. We discuss our cash flows and current financial condition under “Capital Resources and Liquidity.” For a discussion related to fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020, please refer to Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the Year Ended October 31, 2021, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on December 10, 2021, and is available on the SEC's website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at investor.coopercos.com.
Within the tables presented, percentages are calculated based on the underlying whole-dollar amounts and, therefore, may not recalculate exactly from the rounded numbers used for disclosure purposes.
Outlook
We are optimistic about the long-term prospects for the worldwide contact lens and general health care markets, and the resilience of and growth prospects for our businesses and products. However, we face significant risks and uncertainties in our global operating environment as further described in the “Risk Factors” section in Part I, Item 1A of this filing. These risks include uncertain global and regional business, political and economic conditions, including but not limited to those associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, inflation, foreign exchange rate fluctuations, regulatory developments, supply chain disruptions, and escalating global trade barriers. These risks and uncertainties have adversely affected our sales, cash flow and current performance in the past and are likely to further adversely affect our future sales, cash flow and performance.
Global Market and Economic Conditions - Over the last few years in the U.S. and globally, market and economic conditions have been challenging, particularly in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Foreign countries, in particular the Euro zone, have experienced recessionary pressures and face continued concerns about the systemic impacts of adverse economic conditions and geopolitical issues. In addition, changes in economic conditions, supply chain constraints, logistics challenges, labor shortages, the war in Ukraine, and steps taken by governments and central banks, particularly in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other stimulus and spending programs, have led to higher inflation, which is likely to lead to an increase in costs and may cause changes in fiscal and monetary policy, including increased interest rates. In a higher inflationary environment, we may be unable to raise the prices of our products and services sufficiently to keep up with the rate of inflation. These economic conditions could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
COVID-19 Considerations - The COVID-19 pandemic and health crisis led to ongoing economic and societal disruptions and uncertainties that have negatively impacted business and healthcare activity globally. As a result of healthcare systems responding to the demands of managing the pandemic, governments around the world imposing measures designed to reduce the transmission of the COVID-19 virus, and individuals responding to the concerns of contracting the COVID-19 virus, many optical practitioners and retailers, hospitals, medical offices and fertility clinics closed their facilities, restricted access, or delayed or canceled patient visits, exams and elective medical procedures, and many customers that have reopened are experiencing reduced patient visits. These factors have had, and in the future may continue to have, an adverse effect on our sales, operating results and cash flows.
We have taken an active role in addressing the pandemic’s impact on our employees, suppliers, distribution channels, operations and customers, including taking precautionary measures and developing contingency plans with respect to our operations and to help ensure the safety of our personnel in all our facilities, and we have endeavored and continue to follow recommended actions of government and health authorities to protect our employees worldwide. As of the date of this filing, we have not experienced any significant disruption at our manufacturing facilities or in our access to necessary raw materials and other supplies or with our distribution network; however, we have experienced higher unabsorbed fixed overhead costs, labor inefficiencies, delays in receiving certain raw materials, higher cost of production and higher freight charges as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
At this time, future developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic remain highly uncertain and largely outside of our control. We cannot predict the spread, duration and severity of the pandemic or any subsequent outbreaks, potential actions taken by governments to respond to the pandemic, or potential impacts on global and local economic activity. We
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
will continue to closely monitor the developments relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and the responses from governments and private sector participants.
For more information on the risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" herein.
CooperVision - We compete in the worldwide contact lens market with our spherical, toric, multifocal, toric multifocal contact lenses offered in a variety of materials including using silicone hydrogel Aquaform® technology and PC Technology™. We believe that there will be lower contact lens wearer dropout rates as technology improves and enhances the wearing experience through a combination of improved designs and materials and the growth of preferred modalities such as single-use and monthly wearing options. CooperVision also competes in the myopia management and specialty eye care contact lens markets with myopia management contact lenses using its ActivControl® technology and with products such as orthokeratology (ortho-k) and scleral lenses. In November 2019, CooperVision received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for its MiSight® 1 day lens, which is the first and only FDA-approved product indicated to slow the progression of myopia in children with treatment initiated between the ages of 8-12 and became available in the United States during fiscal 2020. In August 2021, CooperVision received Chinese National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) approval for its MiSight® 1 day lens for use in China. CooperVision is focused on greater worldwide market penetration using recently introduced products, and we continue to expand our presence in existing and emerging markets, including through acquisitions.
CooperVision acquired the following entity during fiscal 2022:
• A privately-held Denmark-based ortho-k contact lens distributor in May 2022
CooperVision acquired the following entities during fiscal 2021:
•A privately-held UK contact lens manufacturer in April 2021
•A privately-held medical device company (SightGlass Vision Inc. (SGV), a developer of spectacle lenses for myopia management) in January 2021
During the second quarter of fiscal 2022, the Company initiated a plan to exit its contact lens care business, a non-core business unit of the CooperVision segment. We expect the exit activity to be substantially completed in the first half of fiscal 2023. Exit charges recognized in the three and twelve months ended October 31, 2022, were $9.2 million and $33.2 million, of which $26.7 million is recognized in cost of sales and $6.5 million is recognized in selling, general, and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Exit costs primarily related to inventory write-down, asset impairments and employee-related costs. Total exit costs are expected to be in a range of $30.0 million to $40.0 million.
In March 2022, CooperVision and Essilor International SAS (Essilor) entered into a Contribution Agreement and a Stock Purchase Agreement under which Essilor paid CooperVision $52.1 million in exchange for a 50% interest in SGV and a proportionate share of certain revenue-based milestone payments related to the January 2021 acquisition of SGV by CooperVision. As part of these agreements, each party contributed their interest in SGV and $10 million in cash to form a new joint venture. CooperVision then remeasured the fair value of its retained equity investment in the joint venture at $90.0 million which resulted in a $56.9 million gain in Other (income) expense on deconsolidation of SGV.
On November 1, 2022, subsequent to the fiscal year ended October 31, 2022, CooperVision closed an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) to acquire a U.S. based privately held leading expert in specialty contact lenses for both normal and irregular corneal conditions. The Company is in the process of finalizing purchase accounting information.
Our ability to compete successfully with a full range of silicone hydrogel products is an important factor to achieving our desired future levels of sales growth and profitability. CooperVision manufactures and markets a wide variety of silicone hydrogel contact lenses. Our single-use silicone hydrogel product franchises, clariti® and MyDay®, remain a focus as we expect increasing demand for these products as well as future single-use products as the global contact lens market continues to shift to this modality. Outside of single-use, the Biofinity® and Avaira Vitality® product families comprise our focus in the FRP, or frequent replacement product, market which encompasses the 2-week and monthly modalities. Included in this segment are unique products such as Biofinity Energys®, which helps individuals with digital eye fatigue.
CooperSurgical - Our CooperSurgical business competes in the general health care market with a commitment to advancing the health of women, babies and families through its diversified portfolio of products and services focusing on women's health and fertility. CooperSurgical has established its market presence and distribution system by developing products and acquiring companies, products and services that complement its business model.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CooperSurgical acquired the following entities during fiscal 2022:
• A private cryopreservation services company in April 2022
• Generate Life Sciences (Generate), a privately-held leading provider of donor egg and sperm for fertility treatments, fertility cryopreservation services and newborn stem cell storage (cord blood & cord tissue) in December 2021
CooperSurgical acquired the following entities during fiscal 2021:
•A privately-held medical device company that develops single-use illuminating medical devices in May 2021
•A privately-held medical device company in March 2021
•A privately-held medical device company in February 2021
•A privately-held in vitro fertilization (IVF) cryostorage software solutions company in December 2020
On April 6, 2022, CooperSurgical entered into an asset purchase agreement to acquire Cook Medical's Reproductive Health business, a manufacturer of minimally invasive medical devices focused on the fertility, obstetrics and gynecology markets. The aggregate consideration is $875.0 million in cash, with $675.0 million payable at the closing and the remaining $200.0 million payable in $50.0 million installments following each of the first, second, third and fourth anniversaries of the closing. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, such as receipt of required regulatory approvals.
Transition from LIBOR
The UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), announced in July 2017 that it will no longer persuade or require banks to submit rates for LIBOR after 2021. In March 2021, the FCA confirmed its intention to stop requiring banks to submit rates required to calculate LIBOR after 2021. However, for U.S. dollar-denominated (USD) LIBOR, only one-week and two-month USD LIBOR will cease to be published after 2021, and all remaining USD LIBOR tenors will continue being published until June 2023. Further, in March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. This guidance provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. We have material contracts that are indexed to LIBOR and are continuing to monitor this activity and evaluate the related risk. We are continuing to evaluate the scope of impacted contracts and the potential impact. We are also monitoring the developments regarding alternative rates and may amend certain contracts to accommodate those rates if the contract does not already specify a replacement rate. While the notional value of agreements potentially indexed to LIBOR is material, we do not expect a material impact on our financial statements related to this transition.
We believe that current cash, cash equivalents and future cash flow from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including working capital needs, capital expenditures and contractual obligations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the financial statements included in this annual report. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our liquidity needs such as that for acquisitions, share repurchases, cash dividends or other activities as we execute our business strategy, we anticipate that additional funds will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds; however, such financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
2022 Compared with 2021
CooperVision Net Sales
The contact lens market has two major product categories:
•Spherical lenses including lenses that correct near- and farsightedness uncomplicated by more complex visual defects; and
•Toric and multifocal lenses including lenses that, in addition to correcting near- and farsightedness, address more complex visual defects such as astigmatism and presbyopia by adding optical properties of cylinder and axis, which correct for irregularities in the shape of the cornea.
CooperVision Net Sales by Category
Single-use spheres - This includes Biomedics 1 day, clariti 1 day, MyDay, MiSight and Proclear 1 day
Toric - This includes Avaira Vitality toric, Biomedics toric, Biofinity toric, clariti 1 day toric, MyDay toric and Proclear toric
Multifocal - This includes Biofinity multifocal, Biofinity toric multifocal, clariti 1 day multifocal, MyDay multifocal and Proclear 1 day multifocal
Non single-use sphere, other - This includes our Avaira Vitality spheres, frequent replacement product (FRP) lens portfolio (Biofinity spheres, Biofinity Energys, Biomedics, Proclear spheres, clariti spheres), ortho-k, scleral and custom lenses, contact lens solutions and other
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In the fiscal year ended October 31, 2022, the growth experienced across all categories (except for "Other" as mentioned below) was partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange rate fluctuations, which approximated $149.5 million. Sales growth was primarily driven by an increase in the volume of lenses sold across our core portfolio due to a recovery in demand from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Toric and multifocal lenses grew primarily through the success of MyDay and Biofinity.
•Single-use sphere lenses grew primarily through MyDay, clariti and MiSight lenses.
•Non single-use sphere lenses grew primarily through Biofinity and ortho-k.
•"Other" products decreased primarily due to exit of the contact lens care business. Contact lens care represented approximately 1% and 2% of net sales in fiscal 2022 and 2021.
•Total silicone hydrogel products increased by 7%, representing 78% of net sales in fiscal 2022 compared to 76% in fiscal 2021.
CooperVision Net Sales by Geography
CooperVision competes in the worldwide soft contact lens market and services in three primary regions: the Americas, EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) and Asia Pacific.
CooperVision's growth in net sales across all regions was primarily attributable to market gains of silicone hydrogel contact lenses. Refer to CooperVision Net Sales by Category above for further discussion.
CooperSurgical Net Sales by Category
CooperSurgical supplies the family health care market with a diversified portfolio of products and services. Our office and surgical offerings include products that facilitate surgical and non-surgical procedures that are commonly performed primarily by obstetricians and gynecologists in hospitals, surgical centers, fertility clinics and medical offices. Fertility offerings include highly specialized products and services that target the IVF process, including diagnostics testing with a goal to make fertility treatment safer, more efficient and convenient.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The chart below shows the percentage of net sales of office and surgical products and fertility.
Office/Surgical - This includes Endosee endometrial imaging products, Fetal Pillow cephalic elevation devices for use in Cesarean sections, illuminated speculum products, Lone Star retractor systems, loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) products, Mara water ablation systems, newborn stem cell storage, PARAGARD contraceptive IUDs, point-of-care products and uterine positioning products.
Fertility - Our significant fertility products and services include cryostorage, donor gamete services, fertility consumables and equipment and genomic services (including preimplantation genetic testing).
In the fiscal year ended October 31, 2022, net sales increase in both categories was mainly due to the Generate acquisition. The increase was offset by unfavorable foreign exchange rate fluctuations, which approximated $33.4 million.
Gross Margin
Consolidated Gross Margin decreased in fiscal 2022 to 65% compared to 67% in fiscal 2021 primarily driven by unfavorable currency and contact lens care exit costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense (SGA)
CooperVision's SGA decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the $56.8 million increase in fair value of the contingent consideration related to SGV acquisition in fiscal 2021, partially offset by increase in SGA to support sales growth.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CooperSurgical's SGA increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to the addition of Generate's SGA and acquisition and integration expenses.
Corporate SGA increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to share-based compensation related expenses.
Research and Development Expense (R&D)
CooperVision's R&D expense increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to myopia management programs and timing of R&D projects. CooperVision's R&D activities are primarily focused on the development of contact lenses, manufacturing technology and process enhancements.
CooperSurgical's R&D expense increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 mainly due to the addition of Generate's R&D expense. CooperSurgical's R&D activities are focused on developing and refining diagnostic and therapeutic products including medical interventions, surgical devices and fertility solutions.
Amortization Expense
CooperVision's amortization expense decreased in absolute dollars in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to the deconsolidation of SGV.
CooperSurgical's amortization expense increased in absolute dollars in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets newly acquired through acquisitions.
Operating Income
CooperVision's operating income increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to an increase in net sales partially offset by net changes in operating expenses.
CooperSurgical's operating income decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to an increase in SGA and amortization expenses, partially offset by an increase in net sales.
Corporate operating loss increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher share-based compensation expense.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
On a consolidated basis, operating income increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to an increase in consolidated net sales.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased during fiscal 2022 compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher average debt balances and higher interest rates.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Investment gain primarily consists of a gain on remeasurement of the fair value of retained equity investment in SGV as a result of deconsolidation.
Foreign exchange loss is primarily associated with the strengthening of the US dollar against foreign currencies and the effect on intercompany receivables.
Other expense (income), net increased in fiscal 2022, primarily due to a loss on minority investments, partially offset by defined benefit plan related income.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective tax rates for fiscal 2022 and 2021 were 18.8% and (499.1)%, respectively. The increase was primarily due to an intra-group transfer of intellectual property in fiscal 2021 and UK tax rate change in fiscal 2021, as discussed below. The increase was also due to changes in the geographic composition of pre-tax earnings and changes in excess tax benefits from share-based compensation.
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 was lower than the US federal statutory rate primarily due to foreign earnings in jurisdictions with lower tax rates and changes in unrecognized tax benefits, partially offset by foreign earnings subject to US tax. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was lower than the US federal statutory tax rate primarily due to the intra-group transfer, UK tax rate change, and earnings in foreign jurisdictions with lower tax rates partially offset by foreign earnings subject to US tax.
In November 2020, the Company completed an intra-group transfer of certain intellectual property and related assets of CooperVision to a UK subsidiary as part of a group restructuring to establish headquarters operations in the UK. Determining fair value involved significant judgment related to future revenue growth, operating margins, and discount rates. The transfer resulted in a step-up of the UK tax-deductible basis in the intellectual property and goodwill, creating a temporary difference between the book basis and the tax basis of these assets. As a result, the Company recognized a deferred tax asset of $1,987.9 million, with a corresponding income tax benefit, during the first quarter of fiscal 2021. During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, the Company recognized a $536.7 million tax benefit related primarily to the remeasurement of this deferred tax asset caused by the UK enactment of a 25% corporate tax rate.
See Note 6. Income Taxes for additional information.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Working capital at October 31, 2022 and October 31, 2021, was $253.4 million and $733.2 million, respectively. The decrease in working capital is primarily due to an increase in accounts payable as a result of timing of payment to vendors, and an increase in short-term debt due to the 364-day term loan agreement entered into during fiscal 2022. See Note 5. Financing Arrangements for further information.
The $43.1 million increase in inventories was primarily due to higher sales, and the buildup of inventory for future product launches.
Cash Flow
Operating cash flow
Cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2022 was lower than cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021, primarily due to settlement of contingent consideration of $52.3 million.
Investing Cash Flow
Cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2022 was higher than cash used in investing activities in fiscal 2021, primarily attributable to $1.6 billion cash paid, net of cash acquired, for the Generate acquisition, partially offset by $52.1 million proceeds from the sale of a 50% interest in SGV. See Note 3. Acquisitions and Joint Venture for further information.
Financing Cash Flow
Cash was provided by financing activities in fiscal 2022 compared to used in financing activities in fiscal 2021, primarily due to a decrease in repayments of long-term debt obligations by $854.5 million, and net proceeds from short-term debt of $329.3 million in fiscal 2022, compared to net repayments of short-term debt obligations of $321.3 million in fiscal 2021.
The following is a summary of the maximum commitments and the net amounts available to us under different credit facilities as of October 31, 2022:
As of October 31, 2022, the Company was in compliance with all debt covenants. See Note 5. Financing Arrangements for additional information.
Considering recent market conditions and the COVID-19 pandemic crisis, we have re-evaluated our operating cash flows and cash requirements and continue to believe that current cash, cash equivalents, future cash flow from operating activities and cash available under our 2020 Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including working capital needs, capital expenditures and contractual obligations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Consolidated Financial Statements included in this quarterly report. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our liquidity needs such as that for acquisitions, share repurchases, cash dividends or other activities as we execute our business strategy, we anticipate that additional funds will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds; however, such financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all.
Share Repurchases
In December 2011, the Company's Board of Directors authorized the 2012 Share Repurchase Program and through subsequent amendments, the most recent in March 2017, the total repurchase authorization was increased from $500.0 million to $1.0 billion of the Company's common stock. The program has no expiration date and may be discontinued at any time. Purchases under the 2012 Share Repurchase Program are subject to a review of the circumstances in place at the time and may be made from time to time as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements.
In fiscal 2022, we repurchased 191,165 shares of our common stock for $78.5 million. At October 31, 2022, $256.4 million remained authorized for repurchase under the program. See Note 8. Stockholders’ Equity for additional information.
Dividends
In fiscal 2022 and 2021, the Company declared regular dividends of 6 cents per share (a semiannual dividend of 3 cents per share) and paid a total of $3.0 million in each fiscal year.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
As of October 31, 2022, we had the following contractual obligations:
(1) As of October 31, 2022, we had $100.4 million of income tax liabilities related to the one-time transition tax that resulted from the enactment of the 2017 US Tax Act, which is payable in annual installments through fiscal 2026. The installment for fiscal 2022 is classified as a current income tax payable on our consolidated balance sheet.
We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of future payments related to uncertain tax positions and have excluded $25.4 million of long-term income taxes payable from the table above. See Note 6. Income Taxes for additional information.
(2) Purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding and includes obligations for inventory, capital expenditures and other operating expense commitments.
The table above excludes future payments for operating leases, long-term debt, and our defined benefit plan. The minimum future payments for operating leases are disclosed in Note 2. Operating Leases and future maturities of long-term debt are disclosed in Note 5. Financing Arrangements. The expected future benefit payments for our Retirement Income Plan through 2032 are disclosed in Note 10. Employee Benefits.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management estimates and judgments are an integral part of financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that the critical accounting policies described in this section address the more significant estimates required of management when preparing the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP. We consider an accounting estimate critical if changes in the estimate may have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We believe that the accounting estimates employed are appropriate and resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results could differ from the original estimates, requiring adjustment to these balances in future periods.
We believe the followings represent our critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
•Revenue recognition - We recognize revenue from product sales when obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the goods to customers and/or when services are rendered. Our payment terms are typically between 30 to 120 days. Provisions for certain rebates, sales incentives, volume discounts, contractual pricing allowances and product returns are accounted for as variable consideration and recorded as a reduction in sales.
Product discounts, including certain rebates, sales incentives, and volume discounts are granted based on terms of the arrangement with direct distribution customers and at times the indirect end consumer. We evaluate contractual terms, historical experience, and perform internal analysis to estimate total product discounts at the time revenue is recognized. CooperSurgical rebates are predominately related to the Medicaid rebate provision that is estimated based upon contractual terms, historical experience, and trend analysis.
Sales returns are estimated and recorded based on historical sales return data. Promotional programs, such as cooperative advertising arrangements, are recorded in the same period as related sales. Reasonably likely changes to assumptions used to calculate the accruals for rebates, sales incentives, volume discounts, contractual pricing allowances and product returns are not anticipated to have a material effect on the financial statements. We currently disclose the impact of changes to assumptions in the quarterly or annual filing in which there is a material financial statement impact.
•Business combinations - We routinely consummate business combinations. Results of operations for acquired companies are included in our consolidated results of operations from the date of acquisition. We recognize separately from goodwill, the identifiable assets acquired, including acquired in-process research and development, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date fair values as defined by accounting standards related to fair value measurements. Key assumptions routinely utilized the allocation of purchase price to intangible assets include discount rates, and projected financial information such as revenue projections for companies acquired. As of the acquisition date, goodwill is measured as the excess of consideration given, over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Direct acquisition costs are expensed as incurred.
•Income taxes - Income taxes are estimated based on enacted income tax laws and the results of operations in each jurisdiction. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are estimated based on temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and income tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent it is more likely than not they are not expected to be realized. Long-term tax payable is estimated income tax to be paid for unrecognized tax benefits. A tax benefit is recognized if it is more likely than not a tax position will be sustained based on its technical merits in a tax authority examination, based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority.
Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1. Organization and Significant Accounting Policies.
THE COOPER COMPANIES, INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES