Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the information contained in our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto. The following discussion contains, in addition to the historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties (see discussion of “Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those factors set forth under Item 1A, Risk Factors, and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All dollar amounts presented herein are in millions, except per share data and other key metrics, unless otherwise noted.
Basis of Presentation
The below presentation discusses the results of the operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a leading servicer and originator of residential mortgage loans. Our purpose is to keep the dream of homeownership alive, and we do this by helping mortgage borrowers manage what is typically their largest financial asset, and by helping our investors maximize the returns from their portfolios of residential mortgages. We have a track record of significant growth, having expanded our servicing portfolio UPB from $10 billion in 2009 to $710 billion as of December 31, 2021. We believe this track record reflects our strong operating capabilities, which include a proprietary low-cost servicing platform, strong loss mitigation skills, a commitment to compliance, a customer-centric culture, a demonstrated ability to retain customers, growing origination capabilities, and significant investment in technology.
Our strategy to position the Company for continued, sustainable long-term growth includes initiatives to improve profitability and generate a return on tangible equity of 12% or higher. Key strategic initiatives include the following:
•Strengthen our balance sheet by building capital and liquidity, and managing interest rate and other forms of risk;
•Improve efficiency by driving continuous improvement in unit costs for Servicing and Originations segments, as well as by taking corporate actions to eliminate costs throughout the organization;
•Grow our servicing portfolio to $1 trillion in UPB by acquiring new customers and retaining existing customers;
•Achieve a refinance recapture rate of 60%;
•Delight our customers and keep Mr. Cooper a great place for our team members to work;
•Reinvent the customer experience by acting as the customer’s advocate and by harnessing technology to deliver user-friendly digital solutions;
•Sustain the talent of our people and the culture of our organization; and
•Maintain strong relationships with agencies, investors, regulators, and other counterparties and a strong reputation for compliance and customer service.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic introduces unprecedented uncertainty in the economy, including the risk of a significant employment shock and recessionary conditions, with implications for the health and safety of our employees, borrower delinquency rates, servicing advances, origination volumes, the availability of financing, and our overall profitability and liquidity. We have taken aggressive steps to address these risks, including moving in excess of 95% of our staff to work-from-home status as well as implementing other practices for mitigating the risk of the pandemic, including restrictions on non-essential travel and face-to-face meetings and enhanced sanitization of our facilities. We also implemented the provisions of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act), which makes available forbearance plans for up to one year for borrowers under government and government agency mortgage programs, which we have extended to borrowers in our private label mortgage servicing portfolio. As of January 31, 2022, approximately 1.5% of our customers were on a forbearance plan, down from a peak of 7.2% in July 2020. We include loans in forbearance related to the CARES Act, whereby no payments have been received from borrowers for greater than 90 days, in loans subject to repurchase right from Ginnie Mae in other assets and payables and other liabilities on a gross basis. The balance decreased to $1,301 as of December 31, 2021 from $5,879 loans as of December 31, 2020. See liquidity discussion related to the COVID-19 pandemic in Liquidity and Capital Resources section in MD&A.
31 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Anticipated Trends
In the fourth quarter of 2021, our MSR portfolio continued to grow due to strong execution across all channels, primarily through acquisitions. We expect to see continued portfolio growth entering 2022. We completed servicing acquisitions of $43 billion in UPB in the fourth quarter of 2021 and finished the quarter with a strong pipeline. Although we produced solid early-buyout revenues in the fourth quarter of 2021, we expect the revenues from early-buyout to decrease significantly in the first quarter of 2022 as the related forbearance programs have now largely expired.
Our Originations segment produced solid funding volumes in the direct-to-consumer channel in the fourth quarter of 2021. We expect the originations profit margins to compress quarter-over-quarter in the first quarter of 2022 and overall expect our margins to gradually decline towards the historical average as a result of continued pricing pressure.
Results of Operations
Table 1. Consolidated Operations
(1)Revenues - operational consists of total revenues, excluding mark-to-market.
The increase in income from continuing operations before income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by favorable mark-to-market adjustments primarily due to higher mortgage rates in 2021. In addition, the increase in income from continuing operations before income tax expense was also attributable to the completion of the sale of our Title, Valuations and Field Services businesses in 2021, which resulted in a decrease in expenses and a $528 gain recorded in total other income (expenses), net. See further discussions in Note 1, Nature of Business and Basis of Presentation, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Segment Results section of the MD&A.
Income tax expense on continuing operations increased in the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020. The effective tax rate for continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 24.3% from 23.1% in 2020, primarily attributable to an increase in state income tax adjustments and permanent differences such as nondeductible executive compensation.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 32
Segment Results
Our operations are conducted through two segments: Servicing and Originations.
•The Servicing segment performs operational activities on behalf of investors or owners of the underlying mortgages, including collecting and disbursing borrower payments, investor reporting, customer service, modifying loans where appropriate to help borrowers stay current, and, when necessary, performing collections, foreclosures, and the sale of REO.
•The Originations segment originates residential mortgage loans through our direct-to-consumer channel, which provides refinance options for our existing customers, and through our correspondent channel, which purchases or originates loans from mortgage bankers.
Refer to Note 20, Segment Information, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of segment results.
Servicing Segment
The Servicing segment’s strategy is to generate income by growing the portfolio and maximizing the servicing margin. We believe several competitive strengths have been critical to our long-term growth as a servicer, including our low-cost platform, our skill in mitigating losses for investors, our commitment to strong customer service and regulatory compliance, our history of successfully boarding new loans, and the ability to retain existing customers by offering attractive refinance options. We believe that our operational capabilities are reflected in our most recent, strong servicer ratings, which are reflected below.
Table 2. Servicer Ratings
(1)Fitch Rating Scale of 1 (Highest Performance) to 5 (Low/No Proficiency)
(2)Moody’s Rating Scale of SQ1 (Strong Ability/Stability) to SQ5 (Weak Ability/Stability)
(3)S&P Rating Scale of Strong to Weak
33 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the Servicing segment:
Table 3. Servicing Segment Results of Operations
(1)Calculated basis points (“bps”) are as follows: Annual dollar amount/Total average UPB X 10000.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 34
Table 4. Servicing - Revenues
(1)Calculated basis points (“bps”) are as follows: Annual dollar amount/Total average UPB X 10000.
(2)Certain ancillary and other non-base fees related to subservicing operations are separately presented as other subservicing revenues.
(3)MTM Adjustments includes the impact of negative modeled cash flows which have been transferred to reserves on advances and other receivables. The negative modeled cash flows relate to advances and other receivables associated with inactive and liquidated loans that are no longer part of the MSR portfolio. The impact of negative modeled cash flows was $35 and $28 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, MTM Adjustments included a negative $86 impact from MSR hedging activities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Servicing Segment Revenues
The following provides the changes in revenues for the Servicing segment:
Forward - Other ancillary revenues increased in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the $512 gain on sale associated with loans bought out of GNMA securitizations, modified and redelivered following GNMA guidelines.
Forward MSR amortization increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to higher prepayments driven by the low interest rate environment.
MSR MTM was positive during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to negative MSR MTM in 2020, primarily due to an increase in mortgage rates in 2021 versus a decrease in mortgage rates in 2020. The Excess spread/financing MTM decreased in 2021 when compared to 2020 primarily due to a lower magnitude of change in mortgage rates as well as change in direction in mortgage rates during each period. The change for MTM Adjustments in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to the growth of loan-related derivative activities.
Subservicing - Subservicing fees increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to higher average subservicing portfolio UPB.
Servicing Segment Expenses
There were no material changes for total expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
35 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Servicing Segment Other Income (Expenses), net
Total other expenses, net decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase in other interest income due to higher pandemic related buyouts.
Table 5. Servicing Portfolio - Unpaid Principal Balances
(1)Subservicing and other includes (i) loans we service for others, (ii) residential mortgage loans originated but have yet to be sold, and (iii) agency REO balances for which we own the mortgage servicing rights.
(2)The encumbered forward MSRs consist of residential mortgage loans included within our excess spread financing transactions and MSR financing liability.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 36
The following table provides a rollforward of our forward MSR and subservicing and other portfolio UPB:
Table 6. Forward Servicing and Subservicing and Other Portfolio UPB Rollforward
(1)Includes transfers to/from Subservicing and Other.
(2)Voluntary reductions are related to loan payoffs by customers.
(3)Involuntary reductions refer to loan chargeoffs.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our ending forward MSR UPB increased primarily due to originations volumes and acquisitions, partially offset by an increase in voluntary reductions in a low interest rate environment. During the year ended December 31, 2021, our subservicing and other portfolio ending UPB increased primarily driven by acquisitions, partially offset by higher voluntary reductions in the low interest rate environment.
37 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
The table below summarizes the overall performance of the forward servicing and subservicing portfolio:
Table 7. Key Performance Metrics - Forward Servicing and Subservicing Portfolio(1)
(1)Characteristics and key performance metrics of our servicing portfolio exclude UPB and loan counts acquired but not yet boarded and currently serviced by others.
(2)As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, loan count includes 54,462 and 199,118, respectively, of loans in forbearance related to the CARES Act.
(3)Average loan amount is presented in whole dollar amounts.
(4)The weighted average coupon amounts are only reflective of our owned forward MSR portfolio that is reported at fair value.
(5)Loan delinquency is based on the current contractual due date of the loan. In the case of a completed loan modification, delinquency is based on the modified due date of the loan. Loan delinquency includes loans in forbearance.
Delinquency is an assumption in determining the mark-to-market adjustment and is a key indicator of MSR portfolio performance. Delinquent loans contribute to lower MSR values due to higher costs to service and increased carrying costs of advances. Delinquency rates have begun to decrease as the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on the macroeconomic environment declines.
Table 8. Forward Loan Modifications and Workout Units
(1)Modifications consist of agency programs, including forbearance options under the CARES Act, designed to adjust the terms of the loan (e.g., reduced interest rates) .
(2)Workouts consist of other loss mitigation options designed to assist borrowers and keep them in their homes, but do not adjust the terms of the loan. Workouts exclude loans that did not miss a contractual payment during forbearance related to the CARES Act.
Total modifications and workouts during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in modifications related to loans impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which successfully exited their forbearance plans.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 38
Servicing Portfolio and Liabilities
The following table sets forth the activities of forwards MSRs:
Table 9. Forward MSRs - Fair Value Rollforward
(1)Amounts primarily represent negative fair values reclassified from the MSR asset to reserves as underlying loans are removed from the MSR and other reclassification adjustments.
See Note 4, Mortgage Servicing Rights and Related Liabilities and Note 17, Fair Value Measurements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information regarding the range of assumptions and sensitivities related to the fair value measurement of forward MSRs as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Excess Spread Financing
As further disclosed in Note 4, Mortgage Servicing Rights and Related Liabilities, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we have entered into sale and assignment agreements treated as financing arrangements whereby the acquirer has the right to receive a specified percentage of the excess cash flow generated from an MSR.
The servicing fees associated with an MSR can be segregated into (i) a base servicing fee and (ii) an excess servicing fee. The base servicing fee, along with ancillary income and other revenues, is designed to cover costs incurred to service the specified pool plus a reasonable margin. The remaining servicing fee is considered excess. We sell a percentage of the excess fee, as a method for efficiently financing acquired MSRs and the purchase of loans. We do not currently utilize these transactions as a primary source of financing due to the availability of lower cost sources of funding.
Excess spread financings are recorded at fair value, and the impact of fair value adjustments on future revenues and capital resources varies primarily due to (i) prepayment speeds and (ii) our ability to recapture prepayments through the origination platform. See Note 4, Mortgage Servicing Rights and Related Liabilities and Note 17, Fair Value Measurements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information regarding the range of assumptions and sensitivities related to the fair value measurement of the excess spread financing liability as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
39 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
The following table sets forth the change in the excess spread financing:
Table 10. Excess Spread Financing - Rollforward
Originations Segment
The strategy of our Originations segment is to originate or acquire new loans for the servicing portfolio at a more attractive cost than purchasing MSRs in bulk transactions and to retain our existing customers by providing them with attractive refinance options. The Originations segment plays a strategically important role because its profitability is typically counter cyclical to that of the Servicing segment. Furthermore, by originating or acquiring loans at a more attractive cost than would be the case in bulk MSR acquisitions, the Originations segment improves our overall profitability and cash flow. Our Originations segment is one way that we help underserved consumers access the financial markets. In 2021, our total originations included loans for 45,100 customers with low FICOs (<660), 68,761 customers with income below the U.S. median household income, 40,761 first-time homebuyers, and 22,601 veterans. The originations during this period included 72,250 Ginnie Mae loans, which are designed for first-time homebuyers and low- and moderate-income borrowers, comprising $17 billion in total proceeds. Once these loans are originated, these underserved borrowers become our servicing customers.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 40
The following table sets forth the results of operations for the Originations segment:
Table 11. Originations Segment Results of Operations
(1)Service related revenues, net - Originations refers to fees collected from customers for originated loans and from other lenders for loans purchased through the correspondent channel, and includes loan application, underwriting, and other similar fees.
(2)Net gain on loans originated and sold represents the gains and losses from the origination, purchase, and sale of loans and related derivative instruments. Gains from the origination and sale of loans are affected by the volume and margin of our originations activity and are impacted by fluctuations in mortgage rates.
(3)Capitalized servicing rights represent the fair value attributed to mortgage servicing rights at the time in which they are retained in connection with the sale of loans during the period.
41 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Table 12. Originations - Key Metrics
(1)Pull through adjusted volume represents the expected funding from locks taken during the period.
(2)Recapture percentage includes new loan originations from both purchase and refinance transactions where borrower retention and/or property retention occurs as a result of a loan payoff from our servicing portfolio. Excludes loans we are contractually unable to solicit.
(3)Refinance recapture percentage includes new loan originations for refinance transactions where borrower retention and property retention occurs as a result of a loan payoff from our servicing portfolio. Excludes loans we are contractually unable to solicit.
(4)Calculated on pull-through adjusted lock volume as revenue is recognized at the time of loan lock.
(5)Expenses include total expense and total other income (expenses), net.
(6)Calculated on funded volume as expenses are incurred based on closing of the loan.
Income before income tax expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to decreased revenues from net gain on loans originated and sold, which was primarily due to an unfavorable mark-to-market on interest rate locks and loan commitments in 2021 compared to a favorable mark-to-market in 2020. The Originations Margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased as compared to 2020 primarily due to a lower revenue ratio as a percentage of pull through adjusted lock volume driven by lower margins from a shift in channel mix from DTC to higher correspondent channel mix. Correspondent channel mix for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 52% compared to 45% in 2020.
Originations Segment Revenues
Total revenues decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to a decrease in net gain on loans originated and sold, as a result of unfavorable mark-to-market on interest rate locks and loan commitments and unfavorable fair value adjustment on loans held for sale, which were partially offset by favorable mark-to-market adjustments on loan derivatives and hedges. The decrease in net gain on loans originated and sold was partially offset by an increase in revenues from capitalized servicing rights. There were no material changes for repurchase reserves.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 42
Originations Segment Expenses
Total expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased when compared to 2020 primarily due to growth in origination volumes, which contributed to the increase in salaries, wages and benefits in connection with higher compensation and headcount related costs, and loan origination expenses. Expenses as a percentage of funded volume decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to improved cost efficiencies and scale.
Originations Segment Other Income, Net
Interest income relates primarily to mortgage loans held for sale. Interest expense is associated with the warehouse facilities utilized to finance newly originated loans.
There were no material changes for total other income, net during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
Corporate/Other
Corporate/Other represents unallocated overhead expenses, including the costs of executive management and other corporate functions that are not directly attributable to our operating segments, and interest expense on our unsecured senior notes. In the third quarter of 2021, we began presenting the Xome financial results under Corporate/Other and prior period amounts have been updated to reflect the change in segment presentation. See Note 20, Segment Information, for further details on change in reportable segments. Previously, Xome financial results were reported under the Xome segment, which ceased to be a reportable segment in the third quarter of 2021 due to the sale of our Title, Valuation and Field Services businesses. Xome continues to operate its REO exchange business, which facilitates the sale of foreclosed properties. We completed the sales of our Title, Valuations and Field Services businesses on June 30, 2021, August 31, 2021 and October 22, 2021, respectively. For more information, see Note 1, Nature of Business and Basis of Presentation in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following tables set forth the selected financial results for Corporate/Other:
Table 13. Corporate/Other Selected Financial Results
Total revenues and total expenses decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to the sale of our Title, Valuations and Field Services businesses in 2021.
Interest expense decreased in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to repayment and redemption in 2020 of the unsecured senior notes due 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2026, and the issuance in 2020 of the unsecured senior notes due 2027, 2028 and 2030 at lower interest rates. For further discussion, refer to Note 12, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The change in other income (expense), net, in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily a result of the total gain of $528 that was recorded in 2021 upon completion of the sale of our Title, Valuations and Field Services businesses. In addition, a loss of $138 was recorded in 2020 in connection with the redemption of the unsecured senior notes due 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2026.
43 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We measure liquidity by unrestricted cash and availability of borrowings on our MSR and other facilities. We held cash and cash equivalents on hand of $895 as of December 31, 2021 compared to $695 as of December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we bought back 16.9 million shares of our outstanding common stock as part of our stock repurchase program. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased and retired all of our outstanding preferred stock. We have sufficient borrowing capacity to support our operations. As of December 31, 2021, total available borrowing capacity was $16,880 of which we could borrow an additional $11,871.
The economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to result in an increase in servicing advances and liquidity demands related to the utilization of forbearance programs offered by the CARES Act. Forbearance rates have declined since the peak during the second quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2021, our total advance capacity was $1,715, of which $1,101 remained unused. For more information on our MSR and advance facilities, see Note 12, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Our primary sources of funds for liquidity include: (i) servicing fees and ancillary revenues; (ii) advance and warehouse facilities, other secured borrowings and unsecured senior notes; (iii) payments received in connection with the sale of excess spread.
Our primary uses of funds for liquidity include: (i) funding of servicing advances; (ii) originations of loans; (iii) payment of interest expenses; (iv) payment of operating expenses; (v) repayment of borrowings and repurchases or redemptions of outstanding indebtedness; (vi) payments for acquisitions of MSRs; (vii) payment of our technology expenses.
We believe that our cash flows from operating activities, as well as capacity through existing facilities, provide adequate resources to fund our anticipated ongoing cash requirements. We rely on these facilities to fund operating activities. As the facilities mature, we anticipate renewal of these facilities will be achieved. Future debt maturities will be funded with cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operating activities and, if necessary, future access to capital markets. We continue to optimize the use of balance sheet cash to avoid unnecessary interest carrying costs.
In addition, derivative instruments are used as part of the overall strategy to manage exposure to market risks primarily associated with fluctuations in interest rates related to originations. See Note 11, Derivative Financial Instruments, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, which is incorporated herein for a summary of our derivative transactions.
In the normal course of business, we enter into various types of on- and off-balance sheet transactions with special purpose entities (“SPEs”) determined to be variable interest entities (“VIEs”), which primarily consist of securitization trusts established for a limited purpose. Generally, these SPEs are formed for the purpose of securitization transactions in which we transfer assets to an SPE, which then issues to investors various forms of debt obligations supported by those assets. In these securitization transactions, we typically receive cash and/or other interests in the SPE as proceeds for the transferred assets. See Note 13, Securitizations and Financings, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, which is incorporated herein for a summary of our transactions with VIEs and unconsolidated balances, and details of their impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 44
Cash Flows
The table below presents cash flows information:
Table 14. Cash Flows
Operating activities
Cash generated from operating activities increased to $2,632 during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $331 in 2020. The increase was primarily related to continuing operations, driven by $2,675 in cash generated from origination net sales activities in 2021 compared to $161 of cash used in 2020, as a result of an increase in sale proceeds and loan payment proceeds for mortgage loans held for sale, partially offset by cash used of $380 for advances and other receivables, net in 2021 compared to $48 in 2020.
Investing activities
Our investing activities generated cash of $1,192 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash used of $134 in 2020. The change in cash attributable to investing activities was primarily driven by $1,629 in cash proceeds from the sale of the reverse servicing portfolio. Additionally, investing activities from continuing operations included $465 in cash proceeds from the sale of our Title, Valuations and Field Services businesses, net of cash divested, in 2021, offset by an increase of $792 in cash used for the purchase of forward mortgage servicing rights.
Financing activities
Our financing activities used cash of $3,696 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash generated of $104 in 2020. The change in cash attributable to financing activities was primarily related to continuing operations, driven by net repayment of $1,272 in 2021 compared to net borrowing of $1,861 in 2020 on our advance and warehouse facilities. Additionally, in 2021, we received $600 from the issuance of the 2031 unsecured senior note, whereas in 2020, we had a net cash outflow of $408 as a result of the issuance of the 2027, 2028 and 2030 unsecured senior notes and the repayment and redemption of the 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2026 unsecured senior notes. Further, we used cash of $572 for the repurchase of our common stock in 2021 compared to $58 in 2020.
Capital Resources
Capital Structure and Debt
We require access to external financing resources from time to time depending on our cash requirements, assessments of current and anticipated market conditions and after-tax cost of capital. If needed, we believe additional capital could be raised through a combination of issuances of equity, corporate indebtedness, asset-backed acquisition financing and/or cash from operations. Our access to capital markets can be impacted by factors outside our control, including economic conditions.
Financial Covenants
Our credit facilities contain various financial covenants which primarily relate to required tangible net worth amounts, liquidity reserves, leverage requirements, and profitability requirements, which are measured at our operating subsidiary, Nationstar Mortgage, LLC. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our required financial covenants.
Seller/Servicer Financial Requirements
We are also subject to net worth, liquidity and capital ratio requirements established by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (“FHFA”) for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Seller/Servicers, and Ginnie Mae for single family issuers, as summarized below. These requirements apply to our operating subsidiary, Nationstar Mortgage, LLC.
45 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Minimum Net Worth
•FHFA - a net worth base of $2.5 plus 25 basis points of outstanding UPB for total loans serviced.
•Ginnie Mae - a net worth equal to the sum of (i) base of $2.5 plus 35 basis points of the issuer’s total single-family effective outstanding obligations.
Minimum Liquidity
•FHFA - 3.5 basis points of total Agency Mortgage Servicing UPB plus incremental 200 basis points of total nonperforming Agency, measured at 90+ delinquencies, servicing in excess of 6% total Agency servicing UPB.
•Ginnie Mae - the greater of $1 or 10 basis points of our outstanding single-family MBS.
Minimum Capital Ratio
•FHFA and Ginnie Mae - a ratio of Tangible Net Worth to Total Assets greater than 6%.
Secured Debt to Gross Tangible Asset Ratio
•Ginnie Mae - a secured debt to gross tangible asset ratios no greater than 60%.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our seller/servicer financial requirements for FHFA and Ginnie Mae.
Since we have a Ginnie Mae single-family servicing portfolio that exceeds $75 billion in UPB, we are also required to obtain an external primary servicer rating and issuer credit ratings from two different rating agencies and receive a minimum rating of a B or its equivalent. We are permitted to satisfy minimum liquidity requirements using a combination of AAA rated government securities that are marked to market in addition to cash and certain cash equivalents. We met this requirement for all financial periods presented.
In addition, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac may require capital ratios in excess of stated requirements. Refer to Note 18, Capital Requirements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Table 15. Debt
Advance Facilities
As part of our normal course of business, we borrow money to fund servicing advances. Our servicing agreements require that we advance our own funds to meet contractual principal and interest payments for certain investors, and to pay taxes, insurance, foreclosure costs and various other items that are required to preserve the assets being serviced. Delinquency rates and prepayment speeds affect the size of servicing advance balances, and we exercise our ability to stop advancing principal and interest where the pooling and servicing agreements permit, where the advance is deemed to be non-recoverable from future proceeds. These servicing requirements affect our liquidity. We rely upon several counterparties to provide us with financing facilities to fund a portion of our servicing advances. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total borrowing capacity of $1,715, of which we could borrow an additional $1,101. The maturity dates of our advance facilities range from October 2022 to August 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we had $218 of borrowings outstanding under facilities maturing within less than one year and $396 of borrowings outstanding under facilities maturing within the next three years.
Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K 46
Warehouse and MSR Facilities
Loan origination activities generally require short-term liquidity in excess of amounts generated by our operations. The loans we originate are financed through several warehouse lines on a short-term basis. We typically hold the loans for approximately 30 days and then sell or place the loans in government securitizations in order to repay the borrowings under the warehouse lines. Our ability to fund current operations depends upon our ability to secure these types of short-term financings on acceptable terms and to renew or replace the financings as they expire. As of December 31, 2021, we had a total borrowing capacity of $14,055 and $1,110 for warehouse and MSR facilities, of which we could borrow an additional $9,930 and $840, respectively. The maturity dates for our warehouse facilities range from January 2022 to September 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we had $2,266 of borrowings outstanding under warehouse facilities maturing within less than one year and $1,859 of borrowings outstanding under warehouse facilities maturing within the next three years. The maturity dates for our MSR facilities range from August 2022 to November 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we had $270 of borrowing outstanding under MSR facilities maturing within the next three years.
Unsecured Senior Notes
In 2021, we completed an offering of an unsecured senior note with a maturity date of 2031. In 2020, we completed offerings of unsecured senior notes with maturity dates ranging from 2027 to 2030. We pay interest semi-annually to the holders of these notes at interest rates ranging from 5.125% to 6.000%. We are scheduled to pay a total of $1,180 of interest payments from these notes over the next ten years, of which $151 is due within less than one year.
As of December 31, 2021, the expected maturities of our unsecured senior notes based on contractual maturities are presented below:
Table 16. Contractual Maturities - Unsecured Senior Notes
Other contractual obligations
Our operating lease obligations were primarily incurred for office space and equipment. The average lease terms are generally for 1 to 8 years. As of December 31, 2021, the total future minimum lease payments for our operating lease obligations was $135, of which $24 is due within less than a year. For more information regarding lease obligations, see Note 8, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
47 Mr. Cooper Group Inc. - 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Various elements of our accounting policies, by their nature, are inherently subject to estimation techniques, valuation assumptions and other subjective assessments. In particular, we have identified the following policies that, due to the judgment, estimates and assumptions inherent in those policies, are critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements. These policies relate to fair value measurements, particularly those determined to be Level 3 as discussed in Note 17, Fair Value Measurements, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and valuation and realization of deferred tax assets. We believe that the judgment, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are appropriate given the factual circumstances at the time. However, given the sensitivity of our consolidated financial statements to these critical accounting policies, the use of other judgments, estimates and assumptions could result in material differences in our results of operations or financial condition. Fair value measurements considered to be Level 3 representing estimated values based on significant unobservable inputs include (i) the valuation of MSRs, (ii) the valuation of excess spread financing and (iii) the valuation of interest rate lock commitments (“IRLCs”).
MSRs at Fair Value
We generally retain the servicing rights for existing forward residential mortgage loans transferred to a third party. We recognize MSRs in such transfers that meet the requirements for sale accounting. Additionally, we may acquire the rights to service forward residential mortgage loans from third parties. We apply fair value accounting to this class of MSRs, with all changes in fair value recorded within revenues - service related, net in the consolidated statements of operations. We estimate the fair value of these MSRs using a discounted cash flow model, which incorporates prepayment speeds, discount rate, costs to service, delinquencies, ancillary revenues, recapture rates and other assumptions that management believes are consistent with the assumptions that other similar market participants use in valuing the MSRs. The key assumptions to determine fair value include prepayment speed, discount rate and cost to service. However, the discounted cash flow model is complex and uses asset-specific collateral data and market inputs for interest and discount rates. In addition, the modeling requirements of MSRs are complex because of the high number of variables that drive cash flows associated with MSRs. For the impact of changes in estimates on MSRs at fair value, see