ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
Corsair Partnering Corporation (the “Company”) was incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on December 29, 2020. The Company was formed for the purpose of identifying a company to partner with, in order to effectuate a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Partnering Transaction with one or more businesses (“Partnering Transaction”). The Company may pursue a Partnering Transaction in any business or industry but expect to focus on a business where the Company believes its strong network, operational background, and aligned economic structure will provide the Company with a competitive advantage. The Company has not generated revenue to date.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) as it is described below, although substantially all of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering are intended to be generally applied toward completing a Partnering Transaction. Furthermore, there is no assurance that the Company will be able to successfully complete a Partnering Transaction.
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on June 30, 2021. On July 6, 2021, the Company consummated its Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A Ordinary Shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $14.4 million, of which approximately $8.8 million and approximately $481,000 was for deferred underwriting commissions and offering costs allocated to derivate warrant liabilities, respectively. On July 15, 2021, the underwriters purchased an additional 3,090,000 Units (the “Option Units”) pursuant to the partial exercise of the over-allotment option. The Option Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating additional gross proceeds to the Company of $30.9 million. The Company incurred additional offering cost of approximately $1.7 million in connection with the over-allotment, of which approximately $1.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions and approximately $55,000 was offering costs allocated to derivative warrant liabilities.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,000,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $7.5 million). In connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option on July 15, 2021, the Sponsor purchased an additional 412,000 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds to the Company of $618,000.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $280.9 million ($10.00 per Unit, and including $30,900,000 in connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment option) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and of the Private Placement Warrants in the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”), located in the United States and will be invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Partnering Transaction and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
The Company must complete a Partnering Transaction with one or more partner candidate businesses having an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the taxes payable on the income earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the agreement to enter into the initial Partnering Transaction. However, the Company will only complete a Partnering Transaction if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the voting securities of the partner candidate or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the partner candidate sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
The Company’s Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association provides that, other than the withdrawal of interest earned on the funds that may be released to the Company for withdrawals to pay taxes including income and franchise taxes and to withdraw up to $100,000 in dissolution expenses in the event the Company does not complete the Partnering Transaction within the Partnering Period (as defined below), none of the funds held in the Trust Account will be released until the earlier of: (i) the completion of the Partnering Transaction; (ii) the redemption of any of the Public Shares by its holders (the “Public Shareholders”) properly tendering Public Shares in connection with a shareholder vote to amend certain provisions of the Company’s Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association prior to a Partnering Transaction or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the Public Shares if the Company does not complete a Partnering Transaction within the Partnering Period (defined below).
The Company, after signing a definitive agreement for a Partnering Transaction, will either (i) seek shareholder approval of the Partnering Transaction at a meeting called for such purpose in connection with which Public Shareholders may seek to redeem their Public Shares, regardless of whether they vote for or against the Partnering Transaction or do not vote at all, for cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account calculated as of two business days prior to the consummation of the initial Partnering Transaction, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its taxes, or (ii) provide the Public Shareholders with the opportunity to sell their shares to the Company by means of a tender offer (and thereby avoid the need for a shareholder vote) for an amount in cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account calculated as of two business days prior to commencement of the tender offer, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its taxes. As a result, such Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption were recorded at redemption amount and classified as temporary equity, in accordance with FASB, ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” The amount in the Trust Account was initially at $10.00 per Public Share. The decision as to whether the Company will seek shareholder approval of the Partnering Transaction or will allow shareholders to sell their shares in a tender offer will be made by the Company, solely in its discretion, and will be based on a variety of factors such as the timing of the transaction and whether the terms of the transaction would otherwise require the Company to seek shareholder approval. If the Company seeks shareholder approval, it will complete its Partnering Transaction only if a majority of the outstanding Ordinary Shares voted are voted in favor of the Partnering Transaction. However, in no event will the Company redeem its Public Shares in an amount that would cause its net tangible assets to be less than $5,000,001 immediately prior to or upon consummation of the Company’s initial Partnering Transaction. In such case, the Company would not proceed with the redemption of its Public Shares and the related Partnering Transaction, and instead may search for an alternate Partnering Transaction.
The Company will only have at most until October 6, 2023 to complete its initial Partnering Transaction (the “Partnering Period”). If the Company does not complete a Partnering Transaction within this period of time (and shareholders do not approve an amendment to the Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association to extend this date), it will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, of $10.00, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
The holders of the Founder Shares immediately prior to the Initial Public Offering entered into a Letter Agreement with the Company, pursuant to which they agreed to (i) waive their redemption rights with respect to any Founder Shares and Public Shares they hold in connection with the completion of the Partnering Transaction, (ii) waive their redemption rights with respect to any Founder Shares and Public Shares they hold in connection with a shareholder vote to approve an amendment to the Company’s Amended and Restated Memorandum and Articles of Association, to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company has not consummated a Partnering Transaction within the Partnering Period or with respect to any other material provisions relating to shareholders’ rights or pre-Partnering Transaction activity and (iii) waive their rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Founder Shares they hold if the Company fails to complete the Partnering Transaction within 24 months of the Partnering Period (although they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Public Shares they hold if the Company fails to complete the Partnering Transaction within the Partnering Period).
Pursuant to the Letter Agreement, the Sponsor agreed that it will be liable to the Company if and to the extent any claims by a third party for services rendered or products sold to the Company, or a prospective target business with which the Company has entered into a written letter of intent, confidentiality or other similar agreement or Partnering Transaction agreement, reduce the amount of funds in the Trust Account to below the lesser of (i) $10.00 per Public Share and (ii) the actual amount per Public Share held in the Trust Account as of the date of the liquidation of the Trust Account, if less than $10.00 per Public Share due to reductions in the value of the Trust assets, less taxes payable, provided that such liability will not apply to any claims by a third party or prospective target business who executed a waiver of any and all rights to the monies held in the Trust Account (whether or not such waiver is enforceable) nor will it apply to any claims under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act.
Prior to the Partnering Transaction or the liquidation, the Company agreed to pay the Sponsor up to $15,000 per month for office space, administrative support and other services provided to members of the Company’s management team. In addition, the Sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on the Company’s behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Partnering Transactions. The audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by the Company to the Sponsor, officers or directors, or the Company’s or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial Partnering Transaction will be made from funds held outside the Trust Account. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $2,000 in due to related party for such expense reimbursement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $882,000 in its operating bank account and working capital of approximately $1.1 million.
The Company’s liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from related parties to cover for certain expenses on the Company’s behalf in exchange for issuance of Founder Shares and Performance Shares, a loan from the Sponsor under the Note of approximately $231,000, and an advance from the Sponsor of $750,000 to be used in case the over-allotment option was exercised in full by the underwriters. The Company repaid the Note balance of approximately $231,000 on July 6, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Partnering Transaction, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Partnering Transaction or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Partnering Transaction candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Partnering Transaction.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from January 1, 2021 (commencement of operations) through December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since the Initial Public Offering, our search for a Partnering Transaction. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Partnering Transaction.
For the period from January 1, 2021 (commencement of operations) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $1,815,000, which consisted of a non-cash loss of approximately $591,000 for the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $739,000 of general and administrative expenses, and approximately $535,000 in offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, offset by approximately $51,000 of income from investments held in the Trust Account.
Contractual Obligations
Forward Purchase Agreement
On June 30, 2021, the Company entered into a Forward Purchase Agreement with an affiliate, Corsair V Financial Services Capital Partners L.P. (the “Forward Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Forward Purchaser agreed to purchase in the aggregate, up to 10,000,000 Units, with each Unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-third of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, at a purchase price of $10.00 per Unit, in private placements to occur concurrently, and only in connection with, the closing of the initial Partnering Transaction. The obligations of the Forward Purchaser under the Forward Purchase Agreement will not depend on whether any Class A Ordinary Shares are redeemed by the Public Shareholders. The obligations of the Forward Purchaser to purchase the Forward Purchase Securities are subject to the approval, prior to the Company entering into a definitive agreement for the initial Partnering Transaction, of its investment committee and the Forward Purchase Agreement contains customary closing conditions. The Forward Purchase Agreement is not a firm commitment by either party to the agreement. The proceeds from the sale of Forward Purchase Securities, if any, may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Partnering Transaction, expenses in connection with the initial Partnering Transaction or for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Performance Shares, Forward Purchase Securities, Private Placement Warrants and Private Placement Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A Ordinary Shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants, and Private Placement Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares and the Performance Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring the Company to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the Partnering Transaction. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement, in the event of a sale, if any, of the Forward Purchase Securities, the Company expects to agree to use its reasonable best efforts (i) to file within 30 days after the closing of the initial Partnering Transaction a registration statement with the SEC for a secondary offering of the Forward Purchase Shares and the Forward Purchase Warrants (and underlying Class A Ordinary Shares), (ii) to cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than 60 days after the initial filing, (iii) to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which the Forward Purchasers or its assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 under the Securities Act and (iv) after such registration statement is declared effective, to cause the Company to conduct firm commitment underwritten offerings, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the Forward Purchase Agreement provides for certain “piggy-back” registration rights to the holders of Forward Purchase Securities to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 3,750,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On July 15, 2021, the underwriters purchased an additional 3,090,000 Option Units pursuant to the partial exercise of the over-allotment option. The Option Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating additional gross proceeds to the Company of $30,900,000. Except for the 1,000,000 Units purchased by certain parties in the Initial Public Offering, the underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $5.4 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and exercise of the over-allotment option.
In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.8 million in the aggregate, will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Partnering Transaction, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued share purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering were estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. The fair value of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is determined using Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A Ordinary Shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A Ordinary Shares (including Class A Ordinary Shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A Ordinary Shares is classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A Ordinary Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 28,090,000 Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option), we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have three classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A Ordinary Shares, Class B Ordinary Shares, and Class F Ordinary Shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the three classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of Ordinary Shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option) and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,775,333 Class A Ordinary Shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the period from January 1, 2021 (commencement of operations) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A Ordinary Shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.