Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Unless the context indicates otherwise, references in this Item to “Core,” “we,” “us,” “our” and similar terms refer to Core Scientific Holding Co. and its subsidiaries prior to the consummation of the Business Combination and Core Scientific, Inc. (f/k/a Power & Digital Infrastructure Acquisition Corp.) and its subsidiaries after the consummation of the Business Combination. References to “XPDI” refer to the predecessor registrant prior to the consummation of the Business Combination. The following discussion and analysis provides information which we believe is relevant to an assessment and understanding of XPDI’s results of operations and financial condition. This discussion and analysis should be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes of XPDI that are included elsewhere in this Report.. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See the sections entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Report. Actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and prior to the Business Combination, XPDI was a blank check company incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. For more information on the Business Combination, see the section entitled “Explanatory Note” elsewhere in this Report.
Following the Business Combination, Core is a best-in-class
large-scale operator of dedicated, purpose-built facilities for digital asset mining and a premier provider of blockchain infrastructure, software solutions and services. We mine digital assets for our own account and provide hosting services for other large-scale miners. We are one of the largest blockchain infrastructure, hosting provider and digital asset mining companies in North America, with approximately 457MW of power as of December 31, 2021, and 497MW as of January 31, 2022. We mine Bitcoin, Ethereum and other digital assets for third-party hosting customers and for our own account at our six fully operational data centers in North Carolina (2), Georgia (2), North Dakota (1) and Kentucky (1). In addition, in October 2021, we announced the entry of an agreement with the City of Denton, Texas and an affiliate of Tenaska Energy, Inc. to develop our seventh facility, a blockchain data center in Denton, Texas, which became operational in February 2022 with an initial operating capacity approaching 22 MW and is expected to have 300MW of power when completed. In February 2022, the Muskogee City-County Port Authority announced an agreement with us to develop a 500MW data center at the Port of Muskogee John T. Griffin Industrial Park.
Our Business Model After the Business Combination
Company Overview
Core is a blockchain technology company with industrial scale digital asset mining, equipment sales and hosting operations. Our operations are currently conducted in the United States at state-of-the-art
facilities specifically designed and constructed for housing advanced mining equipment, which utilize non- or low carbon emitting sources for over 50% of our energy requirements as of December 31, 2021. The Company’s primary business is self-mining and hosting third-party equipment used in mining of digital asset coins and tokens, including bitcoin. Core continues to evaluate investments in related blockchain technologies and ancillary businesses.
Our rapidly growing digital asset mining operation is focused on the generation of digital assets by solving complex cryptographic algorithms to validate transactions on specific digital asset network blockchains, which is commonly referred to as “mining.” Our digital asset self-mining activity competes with myriad mining
operations throughout the world to complete new blocks in the blockchain and earn the reward in the form of an established unit of a digital asset. While the Company sells or exchanges a portion of the digital assets it mines to fund its growth strategies or for general corporate purposes, we will hold a portion of our digital assets as investments in anticipation of continued adoption of digital assets as a “store of value” and a more efficient medium of exchange than traditional fiat currencies. Following the Blockcap acquisition, Core significantly expanded its self-mining operation and consequently reevaluated its digital asset investment policy. In 2021, the Company adopted an investment policy pursuant to which an investment committee consisting of corporate officers use common risk management techniques to manage our assets in light of specified liquidity criteria. Liquidity will be maintained through management of a portfolio of money market instruments, obligations of the U.S. government, bank deposits, commercial paper, and certain digital asset currencies and digital asset instruments, each of which must satisfy certain risk criteria. The investment committee will retain the discretion to manage these approved investment instruments, including digital asset currencies and instruments, in accordance with the investment policy, which may involve opportunistic sales or conversions of digital asset currencies and instruments in light of market and other conditions.
As one of the largest blockchain hosting providers in North America, we focus on clients with large- scale deployments and provide power, racks, proprietary thermodynamic management (heat dissipation and airflow management), redundant connectivity, 24/7 security as well as our proprietary software platforms, MinderTM and MinderOSTM, which provide infrastructure management and custom firmware that boost performance and energy efficiency. Our blockchain business is one of the only large-scale vertically integrated digital asset mining and blockchain infrastructure and hosting solutions business in North America.
Our proprietary data centers in North Carolina, Georgia, Kentucky and North Dakota are purpose-built facilities optimized for the unique requirements of high density blockchain computer servers. These facilities have long-term power contracts at approximately 457MW of power as of December 31, 2021, and 497MW as of January 31, 2022. In addition, we opened a new facility in Denton, Texas in February 2022 with an initial operating capacity approaching 22 MW and expect to achieve full capacity of 300MW when completed. In February 2022, the Muskogee City-County Port Authority announced an agreement with us to develop a 500MW data center at the Port of Muskogee John T. Griffin Industrial Park. Our existing completed facilities leverage our specialized construction proficiency by employing high-density, low-cost
engineering and power designs. Our North Dakota facility is expected to benefit from our operational mining experience and techniques to maximize operational efficiency. As the demand for digital assets increases and digital assets become more widely accepted, there is an increasing demand for professional-grade, scalable infrastructure to support growth of the blockchain ecosystem. We continually evaluate our mining performance, including our ability to access additional megawatts of electric power and to expand our total self-mining and customer and related party hosting hash rates. We may explore additional mining facilities and mining arrangements in connection with our short-, medium- and long-term strategic planning.
Segments
We have two operating segments: “Equipment Sales and Hosting” which consists primarily of our blockchain infrastructure and third-party hosting business and equipment sales to customers, and “Mining” consisting of digital asset mining for our own account. The blockchain hosting business generates revenue through the sale of consumption-based contracts for our hosting services which are recurring in nature. Equipment sales revenue is derived from our ability to leverage our partnerships with leading equipment manufacturers to secure equipment in advance, which is then sold to our customers when they are unable to obtain them otherwise. The digital asset mining operation segment generates revenue from operating our owned computer equipment as part of a pool of users that process transactions conducted on one or more blockchain networks. In exchange for these services, we receive digital currency assets.
Mining Equipment
We own and host specialized computers (“miners”) configured for the purpose of validating transactions on multiple digital asset network blockchains (referred to as, “mining”), predominantly the Bitcoin network.
Substantially all of the miners we own and host were manufactured by Bitmain and incorporate application-specific integrated circuit (“ASIC”) chips specialized to solve blocks on the bitcoin blockchains using the 256-bit
secure hashing algorithm (“SHA-256”)
in return for bitcoin digital asset rewards.
We have entered into and facilitated agreements with vendors to supply mining equipment for our and our users’ digital asset mining operations. We pre pay a significant portion of the purchase price for these new miners as partially refundable deposits, with delivery scheduled to occur in monthly installments through December 2022, and the remainder of the purchase price for these new miners is payable in installments, with payment due in advance of the scheduled delivery dates set forth in the applicable purchase agreement.
Performance Metrics
Hash Rate
Miners perform computational operations in support of digital asset blockchains measured in “hash rate” or “hashes per second.” A “hash” is the computation run by mining hardware in support of the blockchain; therefore, a miner’s “hash rate” refers to the rate at which it is capable of solving such computations. The original equipment used for mining bitcoin utilized the Central Processing Unit (“CPU”) of a computer to mine various forms of digital assets. Due to performance limitations, CPU mining was rapidly replaced by the Graphics Processing Unit (“GPU”), which offers significant performance advantages over CPUs. General purpose chipsets like CPUs and GPUs have since been replaced as the standard in the mining industry by ASIC chips such as those found in the S17 and S19 miners Core and its customers use to mine bitcoin. These ASIC chips are designed specifically to maximize the rate of hashing operations.
Network Hash Rate
In digital assets mining, hash rate is a measure of the processing speed by a mining computer for a specific digital asset. A participant in a blockchain network’s mining function has a hash rate total of its miners seeking to mine a specific digital asset and, system-wide, there is a total hash rate of all miners seeking to mine each specific type of digital asset. A higher total hash rate relative to the system-wide total hash rate generally results over time in a corresponding higher success rate in digital asset rewards as compared to mining participants with relatively lower total hash rates.
However, as the relative market price for a digital asset, such as bitcoin, increases, more users are incentivized to mine that digital asset, which increases the network’s overall hash rate. As a result, a mining participant must increase its total hash rate in order to maintain its relative possibility of solving a block on the network blockchain. Achieving greater hash rate power by deploying increasingly sophisticated miners in ever greater quantities has become one of the Bitcoin mining industry’s great sources of competition. Our goal is to deploy a powerful fleet of self- and hosted-miners, while operating as energy-efficiently as possible.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the global outbreak of COVID-19
to be a pandemic. We continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19.
COVID-19
has had and continues to have an adverse impact on our business and operations, particularly as a result of preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses, and governments are taking. Refer to “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Report for more information.
On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed into law the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act.” The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, increased limitations on qualified charitable contributions, and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property.
It also allocated funds for the U.S. Small Business Administration’s (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans that are forgivable in certain situations to promote continued employment, as well as Economic Injury Disaster Loans to provide liquidity to small businesses harmed by COVID-19.
In April 2020, Legacy Core received a loan of $2.2 million from the PPP through the SBA. The loan was unsecured and bore interest at a rate per annum of 1% and monthly payments of principal were to begin in July 2021. The loan was due in full in April 2022, however in July 2021, Legacy Core repaid the loan in full.
We are unable to predict the full impact that the COVID-19
pandemic, including variant strains of COVID-19,
will have on our future results of operations, liquidity and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic and the actions that may be taken by government authorities across the United States. However, COVID-19,
including variant strains of COVID-19,
is not expected to result in any significant changes in costs going forward. We will continue to monitor the performance of our business and assess the impacts of COVID-19 and the emergence of new variant strains of COVID-19,
including potential constraints on the supply of new miners.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance After the Business Combination
Market Price of Digital Assets
Our business is heavily dependent on the spot price of bitcoin, as well as other digital assets. The prices of digital assets, specifically bitcoin, have experienced substantial volatility, which may reflect “bubble” type volatility, meaning that high or low prices may have little or no relationship to identifiable market forces, may be subject to rapidly changing investor sentiment, and may be influenced by factors such as technology, regulatory void or changes, fraudulent actors, manipulation, and media reporting. Bitcoin (as well as other digital assets) may have value based on various factors, including their acceptance as a means of exchange by consumers and others, scarcity, and market demand.
Our financial performance and continued growth depend in large part on our ability to mine for digital assets profitably and to attract customers for our hosting services. Increases in power costs, inability to mine digital assets efficiently and to sell digital assets at favorable prices will reduce our operating margins, impact our ability to attract customers for our services, may harm our growth prospects and could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Over time, we have observed a positive trend in the total market capitalization of digital assets which suggests increased adoption. However, historical trends are not indicative of future adoption, and it is possible that the adoption of digital assets and blockchain technology may slow, take longer to develop, or never be broadly adopted, which would negatively impact our business and operating results.
Network Hash Rate
Our business is not only impacted by the volatility in digital asset prices, but also by increases in the digital asset, primarily Bitcoin blockchain’s network hash rate resulting from the growth in the overall quantity and quality of miners working to solve blocks on the Bitcoin blockchain and the difficulty index associated with the secure hashing algorithm employed in solving the blocks.
Difficulty
The increase in digital assets, primarily, Bitcoin difficulty and hash rate reduces the mining proceeds of the equipment proportionally and eventually requires Bitcoin miners to upgrade their mining equipment to remain profitable and compete effectively with other miners.
The table below provides a summary of the impact to revenue from the increase or decrease in the market price of Bitcoin, difficulty and our hash rate. The impact to revenue in each scenario assumes only one driver increases or decreases and all others are held constant.
Impact to Revenue
Driver
Increase in Driver
Decrease in Driver
Market Price of Bitcoin
Favorable
Unfavorable
Difficulty
Unfavorable
Favorable
Core Scientific Hash Rate
Favorable
Unfavorable
Halvening
Further affecting the industry, and particularly for the Bitcoin blockchain, the digital asset reward for solving a block is subject to periodic incremental halvening. Halvening is a process designed to control the overall supply and reduce the risk of inflation in digital assets using a proof of work consensus algorithm. At a predetermined block, the mining reward is reduced by half, hence the term “halvening.”
For bitcoin, our most significant digital asset to which the majority of our mining power is devoted, the reward was initially set at 50 bitcoin currency rewards per block. The Bitcoin blockchain has undergone halvening three times since its inception as follows: (1) on November 28, 2012 at block 210,000; (2) on July 9, 2016 at block 420,000; (3) on May 11, 2020 at block 630,000, when the reward was reduced to its current level of 6.25 bitcoin per block. The next halvening for the Bitcoin blockchain is anticipated to occur in early 2024 at block 840,000. This process will repeat until the total amount of bitcoin currency rewards issued reaches 21 million and the theoretical supply of new bitcoin is exhausted, which is expected to occur around 2140. Many factors influence the price of bitcoin and the other digital assets we mine for, and potential increases or decreases in prices in advance of or following a future halvening are unknown.
Electricity Costs
Electricity cost is the major operating cost for the mining fleet, as well as for the hosting services provided to customers and related parties. Energy costs and availability are vulnerable to seasonality, with increased costs primarily in the summer months and risks of outages and power grid damage as a result of inclement weather, animal incursion, sabotage and other events out of our control.
Equipment Costs
As the market value of digital assets has increased, the demand for the newest, most efficient miners has also increased, leading to scarcity in the supply of and thereby a resulting increase in the price of miners. As a result, the cost of new machines can be unpredictable, and could also be significantly higher than our historical cost for new miners.
Similarly, as bitcoin prices have risen, we have observed a significant increase in the demand for miners. As a result, at times, we may obtain Bitmain miners and other hardware from Bitmain or from third parties at higher prices, to the extent they are available. For example, in the second half of 2020 and continuing into 2021, we have observed a significant appreciation in the market price of bitcoin, as well as an increase in the per-unit
price of the new Bitmain Antminer model S19-Pro
and S19j-Pro
miners we purchased during this same period. While we cannot know definitively if these two phenomena are linked, we have seen a measurable increase in the prices for new miners offered by Bitmain.
Our Customers
In addition to factors underlying our mining business growth and profitability, our success greatly depends on our ability to retain and develop opportunities with our existing customers and to attract new customers. On July 30, 2021, we acquired an existing hosting customer, Blockcap, and thereby increased our self-mining operations.
Our business environment is constantly evolving, and digital asset miners can range from individual enthusiasts to professional mining operations with dedicated data centers. The Company competes with other companies that
focus all or a portion of their activities on mining activities at scale. We face significant competition in every aspect of our business, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of new miners, the ability to raise capital, obtaining low-cost
electricity, obtaining access to energy sites with reliable sources of power, and evaluating new technology developments in the industry.
At present, the information concerning the activities of these enterprises may not be readily available as the vast majority of the participants in this sector do not publish information publicly or the information may be unreliable. Published sources of information include “bitcoin.org” and “blockchain.info”; however, the reliability of that information and its continued availability cannot be assured.
We believe, based on available data, that the trend of increasing market prices for bitcoin and other major digital assets we observed beginning in the third fiscal quarter of calendar year 2020 has resulted in an increase in the scale and sophistication of competition in the digital asset mining industry, with new entrants and existing competitors gaining access to substantial capital resources to build larger and larger mining operations. If this trend of increasing market prices for bitcoin and other digital assets continues, which has occurred (though with significant volatility) throughout calendar year 2021, we believe many new and existing competitors may be encouraged to build or expand their Bitcoin mining operations.
Despite this trend, we believe, based on available data and assuming full deployment of the miners we have ordered from Bitmain, we have and will continue to maintain a competitive hash rate capacity among both public and private Bitcoin miners. However, to remain competitive in our evolving industry, both against new entrants into the market and existing competitors, we anticipate that we will have to continue to expand our existing miner fleet by purchasing the latest generation of miners, as well as innovating to develop and implement new technologies and mining solutions.
We believe that our integrated blockchain service portfolio, as well as our differentiated customer experience and technology, are keys to retaining and growing revenue from existing customers and to acquiring new customers. For example, we believe our significant build-out
and ready power along with our MinderTM software layer represent meaningful competitive advantages favorable to our business.
Differentiation, Innovation and Expansion of Our Platform
Our investments in research and development drive differentiation of our service offerings, core technology innovation and our ability to bring new products to market.
We believe that we differentiate ourselves by offering premium products and services including our ability to manage our electricity sourcing, construct proprietary passive cooled data centers, and enable the efficient performance of commercially available mining equipment through our management software.
We intend to continue to invest in our research and development capabilities to extend our platform management and software solutions across the blockchain in order to manage our mining fleet more efficiently, expand within existing accounts, and gain new customers by offering differentiated blockchain products and services.
Grow Our Go-to-Market
and Partnership Ecosystem
In addition to the activities of our sales organization, our success in our mining business as well as in retaining and attracting new customers will depend on our ability to expand our ecosystem of strategic partners.
For blockchain, strategic partners include OEM manufacturers of mining equipment, including Bitmain and others. Our blockchain business requires access to the latest generation miners. Our management team constantly evaluates current and future hardware for reliability, performance, and cost efficiency. These partnerships enable at-scale
access to new equipment at competitive prices, which in turn helps secure the profitability of our fleet for the long term as well as provide our customers access to leading-edge mining technology.
Regulation
Our financial prospects and continued growth depend in part on our ability to continue to operate in a compliant manner with all rules and regulations. Our business is subject to the oversight of numerous regulatory agencies in the United States and other jurisdictions. Our strategy is to continue to invest in our finance, legal, compliance, and security functions in order to remain at the forefront of crypto policy initiatives and regulatory trends. As the industry matures, we may experience fluctuations in our operating results as a result of changes in the law and regulations that are applicable to our business, which may limit our ability to support new blockchains and digital assets, onboard customers, and offer our products and services across jurisdictions.
Strategic Acquisitions and Investments
We intend to continue growing our platform through strategic acquisitions and investments. We plan to acquire and invest in companies with complementary products and technologies. Our strategic acquisitions may affect our future financial results. We will also continue to enter into strategic partnerships with various companies to scale our business, provide best-in-class
blockchain infrastructure and hosting to our clients, grow our digital asset mining practice, and pioneer innovative financial products and services through blockchain technology.
2021 Acquisitions
In July 2021, we acquired Blockcap, a Nevada corporation engaged in the business of digital asset mining and through its subsidiary, RADAR, an early stage company focused on technology enhancement and development in the digital asset industry. Pursuant to the Core/Blockcap merger agreement, each eligible share of Blockcap was converted into shares of Core common stock in accordance with a determined ratio, and Blockcap was merged with a wholly owned subsidiary of Legacy Core. As a result of the merger we acquired for self-mining all of the digital asset mining machines owned by Blockcap and hosted by us in our facilities. As a result, the existing hosting agreement between Legacy Core and Blockcap was terminated. We intend to utilize RADAR’s business assets and the technical expertise of its principals in enhancing our existing blockchain mining technology and software and in further strengthening our leadership position and value creation potential through the development of DeFi products and services.
2020 Acquisitions
Through December 31, 2020 we have completed and substantially integrated two asset acquisitions primarily related to software and patents, Atrio and RStor. We routinely evaluate potential acquisitions that align with our growth strategy. Our acquisitions in any period may impact the comparability of our results with prior and subsequent periods. The integration of acquisitions also requires dedication of substantial time and resources, and we may never fully realize synergies and other benefits that we expect.
Recent Developments
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement and that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 1, 2021, as amended on January 14, 2022, by and among XPDI, Legacy Core, Merger Sub 3 and Blockcap, the Business Combination was effected by (i) the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Core, which occurred on January 19, 2022, with Legacy Core surviving the First Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of XPDI, (ii) the merger of Legacy Core with and into XPDI, which occurred on January 20, 2022, with XPDI surviving the Second Merger and (iii) following the closing of the Second Merger on January 20, 2022, the merger of Blockcap with and into Merger Sub 3, with Merger Sub 3 surviving the Third Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of XPDI under the name “Core Scientific Acquired Mining LLC.” In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, we changed our name from Power & Digital Infrastructure Acquisition Corp. to Core Scientific, Inc.
In connection with the Special Meeting and the Business Combination, holders of 12,347,077 of the 34,500,000 then-outstanding shares of Class A common stock exercised their right to redeem their shares for cash at a redemption price of approximately $10.00 per share, for an aggregate redemption amount of $123,483,147.34.
As a result of the Business Combination, all of the Class A common stock and Class B common stock automatically converted into shares of Common Stock on a one-for-one
basis. The public warrants and private placement warrants became warrants to purchase Common Stock.
Results of Operations of XPDI
XPDI’s entire activities since inception through December 31, 2021 related to its formation and the preparation for the IPO, and since the closing of the IPO, identifying a target company for a prospective initial business combination and consummating the Business Combination. As of December 31, 2021, XPDI had neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues. XPDI generated non-operating income
in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents and on marketable securities held in a trust account (the “Trust Account”). XPDI incurred expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence and merger and acquisition expenses in connection with completing its initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, XPDI had a net loss of approximately $32.5 million, which consisted of a non-operating
loss from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $26.2 million and operating losses of approximately $5.2 million, comprised of approximately $4.8 million of general and administrative expenses, $220,000 of related party general and administrative expenses and approximately $200,000 of franchise tax expenses, partially offset by approximately $35,000 of income from investments held in Trust Account.
For the period from December 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had cash and deferred offering costs of approximately $15,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources of XPDI
On February 9, 2021, XPDI consummated its IPO of 34,500,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, including 4,500,000 units (the “over-allotment units”) issued pursuant to the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, generating total gross proceeds of $345.0 million and incurring offering costs of approximately $19.2 million, inclusive of approximately $12.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions. Simultaneous with the consummation of the IPO, pursuant to the securities subscription agreements that XPDI entered into with the Sponsor and the anchor investors, XPDI completed the private sale of an aggregate of 6,266,667 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating total proceeds of $9.4 million (the “Private Placement”).
Upon the closing of the IPO and the Private Placement on February 12, 2021, $345.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the IPO, including proceeds from the sale of the over-allotment units and certain of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants, were deposited into the segregated Trust Account, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee, and approximately $2.5 million of such net proceeds were deposited in XPDI’s operating account to pay expenses in connection with the closing of the IPO and for working capital following IPO.
As of December 31, 2021, XPDI had approximately $0.9 million in its operating bank account, and working capital deficit of approximately $2.7 million. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, XPDI used such funds not held in the Trust Account structuring, negotiating and consummating its initial business combination.
Prior to the Business Combination, XPDI’s liquidity needs were satisfied through (i) a payment of $25,000 by the Sponsor to cover certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares to the Sponsor and
(ii) the loan under a promissory note with the Sponsor of approximately $90,000 and (iii) the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. XPDI fully repaid the promissory note on February 15, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, XPDI’s officers, directors and initial stockholders were permitted, but were not obligated, to provide XPDI working capital loan(s) as may have been required. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan, and no working capital loans were provided in connection with the Business Combination.
Contractual Obliga
tions of XPDI
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the effective date of the registration statement for the IPO through the earlier of the consummation of its initial business combination and liquidation, XPDI agreed to pay affiliates of the Sponsor a total of $20,000 per month for office space and administrative and support services. XPDI incurred $220,000 in “General and administrative expenses-related party” in the accompanying audited statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to such services. The administrative services agreement was terminated upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Advisory Services Agreements
In September and October of 2021, XPDI entered into advisory services agreements with four unaffiliated financial advisors, pursuant to which payments of up to $0.8 million in the aggregate was paid upon the closing of the merger in the first quarter of 2022.
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may have been issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the working capital loans and upon conversion of the founder shares), were entitled to registration rights pursuant to that certain Registration Rights Agreement, dated February 9, 2021, signed upon the consummation of the IPO (the “Registration Rights Agreement”). These holders were entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the Registration Rights Agreement provided that XPDI would not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up
period. Under the Registration Rights Agreement, XPDI were obligated to bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statement.
On the Closing Date, the Registration Rights Agreement was amended and restated, and XPDI, certain persons and entities receiving shares of Common Stock pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the anchor investors and the Sponsor entered into the Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement (the “A&R Registration Rights Agreement”). The A&R Registration Rights Agreement provides for customary “demand” and “piggyback” registration rights for certain stockholders. Under the A&R Registration Rights Agreement, stockholders party to the A&R Registration Rights Agreement may request to sell all or any portion of their registrable securities in an underwritten offering under the terms and conditions set forth in the A&R Registration Rights Agreement. The A&R Registration Rights Agreement also provides that Core will pay certain expenses relating to such registrations and indemnify the registration rights holders against (or make contributions in respect of) certain liabilities which may arise under the Securities Act.
Underwriting Agreement
XPDI granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the final prospectus that formed a part of the registration statement for the IPO to purchase the over-allotment units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the IPO
price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 12, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their option to purchase the over-allotment units. The underwriters did not earn any upfront underwriting commission in connection with 2,760,000 units, including the 2,405,700 units sold to the anchor investors. Except for those units, the underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit sold in the IPO on 31,740,000 units, or approximately $6.3 million, paid upon the closing of the IPO. An additional fee of $0.35 per unit sold in the IPO, or approximately $12.1 million in the aggregate, would be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee was payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we completed a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On the Closing Date, the deferred fee was paid from the amounts held in the Trust Account.
Critical Accounting Policies Before the Business Combination
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as being our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. Management evaluates all of XPDI’s financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815-40,
“Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Stock” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be classified as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at
the end of each reporting period.
The 8,625,000 public warrants issued in the IPO and the 6,266,667 private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at
each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in XPDI’s statements of operations. The initial estimated fair value of the public warrants is measured using a Monte Carlo simulation. The initial and subsequent fair value estimates of the private placement warrants are measured using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. Beginning in April 2021, the estimated fair value of the private placement warrants is based on the listed price in an active market for such warrants.
Shares of Class
A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for shares of our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Shares of our Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within
the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Shares of our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 34,500,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our condensed balance sheets. There was no Class A common stock issued or outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Effective with the closing of the IPO (including exercise of the over-allotment option), we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of share, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the public warrants and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 14,891,667 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because the exercise of such warrants is contingent upon future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt
with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and
Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting
for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which
simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. ASU 2020-06 also
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on
January 1, 2021. Adoption of ASU 2020-06 did
not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying audited financial statements of XPDI included in this Report.
Off-Balance Sheet
Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet
arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies After the Business Combination
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those accounting policies and estimates that are both the most important to the portrayal of our net assets and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or
complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These estimates are developed based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Critical accounting estimates are accounting estimates where the nature of the estimates are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and the impact of the estimates on financial condition or operating performance is material.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
Hosting and Equipment Sales
We may enter into contracts with more than one performance obligation. For example, we regularly enter into contracts that include both hosting services, for which revenue is recognized as services are performed on a consumption basis, and sales of computer equipment to those same customers, for which revenue is recognized at the point in time when control of the equipment is transferred to the customer (typically at the start of the contract period). For these contracts, revenue is recognized based on the relative standalone selling price of each performance obligation in the contract. The determination of the standalone selling price for contracts that involve more than one performance obligation can have a significant impact on the timing of revenue recognition and may require significant judgment, such as when the selling price of a good or service is not readily observable.
Stock-Based Compensation
We used Black-Scholes to evaluate our awards, and will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
In addition, for awards with performance conditions, primarily restricted stock unit awards, we recognize the estimated fair value of the awards based on management’s judgment as to whether or not it is probable that the performance conditions will be achieved.
Common Stock Valuations
In valuing the fair value of our common stock, we use the most observable inputs available. We use the market approach, which estimates the value of our business by applying valuation multiples derived from the observed valuation multiples of comparable public companies to our expected financial results.
When observable inputs are not available, we may use the income approach. This approach typically projects cash flows for the forecast period and uses the perpetuity growth method to calculate terminal values. These cash flows and terminal values are then discounted using an appropriate discount rate. Projections of cash flows are based on management’s earnings forecasts.
Applying these valuation and allocation approaches involves the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding the Company’s expected future revenue, expenses and cash flows, as well as discount rates, valuation multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and the probability of future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions, or the relationships between these assumptions, impact the Company’s valuation as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of the Company’s common stock and common stock warrants issued with the Company’s debt and equity instruments.
Business Combinations and Goodwill
The total purchase price of any of our acquisitions is allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over those fair values is recorded as goodwill. The fair value assigned to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on estimates and assumptions around the valuation of our common stock at the time of the acquisition.
We do not amortize goodwill, but tests it for impairment annually as of October 31, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. We have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting units are less than their carrying amounts as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or chooses not to perform a qualitative assessment, then the quantitative goodwill impairment test will be performed. The quantitative test compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value is recognized as an impairment loss, and the resulting measurement of goodwill becomes its new cost basis. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the carrying amount of Goodwill was $58.2 million. There were no accumulated impairment losses as of January 1, 2019, and no impairment losses were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Long-Lived Assets
We test long-lived assets for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances have occurred that may affect the recoverability or the estimated useful lives of long-lived assets. Long-lived assets include intangible assets subject to amortization. A long-lived asset may be impaired when the estimated future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset. If that comparison indicates that the asset’s carrying value may not be recoverable, the impairment is measured based on the difference between the carrying amount and the estimated fair value of the asset. This evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which separately identifiable cash flows exist. Long-lived assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or estimated fair value less costs to sell.
In April 2019, management approved a plan to actively market and sell certain digital currency mining equipment. In April 2019, we recognized an impairment loss of $0.9 million representing the excess of the equipment’s carrying value over its estimated fair value less costs to sell, based on a quotation for the salvage value of the equipment. We completed the sale in October 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized losses of $2 thousand and $0.6 million, respectively, on sales of property, plant and equipment, primarily digital currency mining equipment. We have included these amounts for impairments of long-lived assets and losses on disposals of property, plant and equipment within general and administrative expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Digital Currency Assets
Our digital currency assets are accounted for as intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. We initially recognize digital currency assets that are received as digital asset mining income based on the fair value of the digital currency assets. Digital currency assets that are purchased in an exchange of one digital currency asset for another digital currency asset are recognized at the fair value of the asset received. The Company recognizes realized gains or losses when digital currency assets are sold in an exchange for other digital currency assets or for cash using a first-in
first-out
method of accounting. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized net gains of $0.1 million and $0.4 million, respectively, on sales of digital currency assets. We classified digital currency assets within current assets because we expected to sell the assets shortly after acquisition. We classify cash flows from digital currency assets within cash flows from operating activities.
Foreign Currency and Exchange Risk
Substantially all revenue and operating expenses are denominated in U.S. dollars.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth
companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions, we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.