Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Note About Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, impacts on our business and general economic conditions due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, those identified below, those discussed in “Note About Forward-Looking Statements” and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal 2022 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2022 and 2021. Discussions of fiscal 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021.
Overview
We are a leading provider of Business Spend Management (“BSM”) solutions. We offer a comprehensive, cloud-based BSM platform that has connected our customers with more than seven million suppliers globally. Our platform provides greater visibility into and control over how companies spend money, optimize supply chains, and manage liquidity. Using our platform, businesses are able to achieve real, measurable value and savings that drive their profitability.
We refer to the process companies use to purchase goods and services as business spend management and to the money that they manage with this process as spend under management. Our BSM platform delivers a broad range of capabilities that would typically require the purchase and use of multiple disparate point applications. The core of our platform consists of procurement, invoicing, expense management, and payment solutions that form the transactional engine for managing a company’s business spend. In addition, our platform offers specialized solutions targeted for power users, to help companies manage more technical and strategic areas of BSM, including areas such as strategic sourcing, contract management, contingent workforce, supplier risk management, supply chain design and planning, treasury management, and spend analysis.
We also provide purchasing programs, such as Coupa Advantage, which offers access to pre-negotiated discounts from various suppliers, and Source Together, which connects community members to engage in group sourcing events, allowing them to leverage pooled buying power to achieve better contracting terms and capture greater savings. Moreover, through our Coupa Open Business Network, suppliers of all sizes can list their goods and services, establish pricing, and interact with buyers electronically, thus significantly reducing paper, improving operating efficiencies, and reducing costs.
We offer access to our platform under a Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) business model. At the time of initial deployment, our customers often make a set of common functions available to the majority of their licensed employees, as well as incremental solutions for select employees and procurement specialists, whom we refer to as power users. Therefore, we are typically able to capture a majority of the expected annual recurring revenue opportunity at the inception of our customer relationships, rather than targeting specific power users at the outset of the customer relationship with the intention of expanding and capturing more annual recurring revenue at later stages of the customer relationship. Customers can rapidly implement our platform, with implementation periods typically ranging from a few weeks to several months. Customers also benefit from software updates that typically require little downtime.
We market and sell our solutions to a broad range of enterprises worldwide. We have a diverse, multi-national customer base spanning various sizes and industries and no significant customer concentration. No single customer accounted for more than 10% of our total revenues for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We market our platform primarily through a direct sales force and also benefit from leveraging the referral resources of our partner ecosystem. Our initial contract terms are typically three years, although some customers commit for longer or shorter periods. The large majority of our customers pay annually, one year in advance. Our subscription fee includes access to our service, technical support and management of the hosting infrastructure. We generally recognize revenues from our subscription fees ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement. We do not charge suppliers who are on our platform to transact with our customers. We believe this approach helps attract more suppliers to our platform and increases the value of our platform to customers.
We have continued to make significant expenditures and investments for long-term growth, including investment in our platform and infrastructure to deliver new functionality and solutions to meet the evolving needs of our customers and to take advantage of our market opportunity. We intend to continue to increase our investment in sales and marketing, as we further expand our sales teams, increase our marketing activities, and grow our international operations. Internationally, we currently offer our platform in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Latin America and Asia-Pacific, including Japan. The combined revenues from non-U.S. regions, as determined based on the billing address of our customers, constituted 40%, 38% and 36%, respectively, of our total revenues for the years ended January 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020. We believe there is further opportunity to increase our international revenues in absolute dollars and as a percentage of our total revenues. As a result, we are increasingly investing in our international operations and we intend to expand our footprint in international markets.
Operating in international markets requires significant resources and management attention and will subject us to regulatory, economic and political risks that are different from those in the United States. While we are gaining additional experience with international operations, our international expansion efforts may not be successful in creating additional demand for our platform outside of the United States or in effectively selling subscriptions to our platform in any or all of the international markets we enter.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition or results of operations in future periods remains uncertain. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. We may experience decreased customer demand, reduced customer spend, customer bankruptcies and other non-payment situations, shorter contract duration, longer sales cycles and extended payment terms, any of which could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. The extent and continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend in part on future developments and conditions, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and ongoing variants; government responses to the pandemic; the impact on our customers and our sales cycles; extent of delays in hiring and onboarding new employees; and effect on our partners, vendors and supply chains, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict. The spread of COVID-19 has also caused us to modify our business practices. Working remotely has made our workforce more reliant on certain cloud-based communication and collaboration services, and any disruption to these services would likely have an adverse impact on employee productivity. The impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement is uncertain, but changes we have implemented to date have not materially impaired and are not expected to materially impair our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures. See the section “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Recent Business Developments
In February 2021, we acquired all of the equity interest in Pana Industries, Inc. (“Pana”), a corporate travel booking solution company. The purchase consideration was approximately $48.5 million in cash (of which $7.1 million is being held in escrow for fifteen months after the transaction closing date). In addition, we issued 23,822 shares of unvested common stock with an approximate fair value of $7.6 million to two of Pana's shareholders. These shares are subject to service-based vesting conditions including continued employment with us.
In March 2021, we established a joint venture with Japan Cloud Computing L.P. and M30 LLC in Japan (“Coupa K.K.”). This joint venture is intended to enable us to support the growing number of Japanese companies looking to gain greater efficiency and agility through BSM. As of January 31, 2022, we had a 51% controlling ownership interest in the joint venture.
In fiscal 2022, we announced the launch of Coupa Ventures, a fund to foster innovation in BSM. Coupa Ventures will invest in early and growth-stage companies that we believe are breaking down inefficiencies in how businesses manage their spend, aligning processes and decisions across supply chain, procurement, and finance. As of January 31, 2022, we have invested a total of approximately $10.0 million principal amount in portfolio companies.
Our Business Model
Our business model focuses on maximizing the lifetime value of a customer relationship, and we continue to make significant investments in order to grow our customer base. Due to our subscription model, we recognize subscription revenues ratably over the term of the subscription period. As a result, the profitability of a customer to our business in any particular period depends in part upon how long a customer has been a subscriber on our platform. In general, the associated upfront costs with respect to new customers are higher in the first year than the aggregate revenues we recognize from those new customers in the first year. We believe that, over time, as our customer base grows and a relatively higher percentage of our subscription revenues are attributable to renewals versus new customers or upsells to existing customers, associated sales and marketing expenses and other allocated upfront costs as a percentage of revenues will decrease, subject to investments we plan to make in our business. Over the lifetime of the customer relationship, we also incur sales and marketing costs to manage the account, renew or upsell the customer to more solutions and more users. However, these costs are significantly less than the costs initially incurred to acquire the customer. We calculate the lifetime value of our customers and associated customer acquisition costs for a particular year by comparing (i) gross profit from net new subscription revenues for the year multiplied by the inverse of the estimated subscription renewal rate to (ii) total sales and marketing expense incurred in the preceding year. On this basis, we estimate that for each of fiscal 2022 and 2021, the calculated lifetime value of our customers has exceeded six times the associated cost of acquiring them. Other companies may calculate lifetime value and customer acquisition costs differently than our chosen method and, therefore, may not be directly comparable.
Key Metrics
We review the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions:
Cumulative Spend Under Management
Cumulative spend under management represents the aggregate dollar value of transactions through our core platform for all of our customers collectively since we launched our core platform. We define our core platform for purposes of this metric as our procurement, invoicing and expense management modules. We calculate this metric by aggregating the actual transaction data for purchase orders, invoices and expenses from customers using our core platform. Cumulative spend under management does not include spending data or transactions associated with modules from acquired companies. We regularly review our process for calculating this metric and periodically make adjustments to improve its accuracy. We believe that any such adjustments are immaterial unless otherwise stated.
The cumulative spend under management metric presented above does not directly correlate to our revenue or results of operations because we do not generally charge our customers based on actual usage of our core platform. However, we believe the cumulative spend under management metric does illustrate the adoption, scale and value of our platform, which we believe enhances our ability to maintain existing customers and attract new customers.
Remaining Performance Obligations and Deferred Revenue
Remaining performance obligations represent the amount of consideration allocated to unsatisfied performance obligations related to non-cancelable contracts, which includes both the deferred revenue balance and amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. In calculating the remaining performance obligation amount, we elected to apply the two expedients under the revenue standard to exclude remaining performance obligations amounts related to contracts that are twelve months or less and contracts where revenue is being recognized under the as-invoiced method.
We generally execute multiple year subscription contracts for our platform and invoice an initial amount at contract signing followed by subsequent annual invoices. At any point in the contract term, there might be amounts that are not due for billing yet. These amounts are not recorded in our consolidated financial statements, and are considered to be part of the remaining performance obligations amount.
The remaining performance obligations amount is intended to provide visibility into future revenue streams. We expect remaining performance obligations to fluctuate up or down from period to period for several possible reasons, including amounts, timing, and duration of customer contracts (including changes that we may see to customer contracts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic), as well as the timing of billing cycles for each order.
Our deferred revenue consists of non-cancelable amounts that have been invoiced but not yet recognized as revenues as of the end of a reporting period. The majority of our deferred revenue balance consists of subscription revenues that are recognized ratably over the related contractual period.
Trailing Twelve Months Calculated Billings
Trailing twelve months calculated billings represents total revenues recognized during the period of consecutive twelve months ended January 31, 2022 and 2021 plus the change in deferred revenue for each of those same periods. Trailing twelve month calculated billings is comprised of subscription contracts with existing customers (including renewal contracts and add-on contracts), subscription contracts with new customers, term-based license contracts, and contracts for professional services, training and other revenues.
The trailing twelve months calculated billings is intended to provide information about our subscription revenue growth over time, and can typically be seen as an early indicator of trends in revenue growth. While trailing twelve months calculated billings can increase as our revenues grow, it may fluctuate up or down from period to period for several reasons, including amounts, timing, and duration of customer contracts, as well as the timing of billing cycles for each order.
Customers with Annualized Subscription Revenue Above $100,000
We define customers with annualized subscription revenue above $100,000 as the total number of customers that contributed subscription revenues in excess of $25,000 during the relevant fiscal quarter, which corresponds to $100,000 on an annualized basis. For purposes of this metric, we generally define a customer as a separate and distinct entity (such as a company or an educational or government institution), a distinct business unit of a large corporation or a partner organization, in each case that has a distinctive active contract with us to access our services. Most of the subscription revenue we recognize each quarter is attributable to customers that accounted for more than $25,000 of that revenue during the quarter, and our sales and marketing strategy focuses heavily on the acquisition of customers that have the potential to contribute at least $100,000 in subscription revenues annually. Accordingly, we believe that this metric is a useful tool to aid investors in understanding a key factor that drives changes in our subscription revenues from period to period and in assessing trends in our growth, penetration of our core customer market, and our overall performance. Because the dollar threshold is tied to the actual revenue recognized during a particular quarter, customers that we acquired midway through or at the end of the quarter may not yet be included in this count, even if they have placed orders representing more than $100,000 in annual subscription revenue.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We primarily offer subscriptions to our cloud-based BSM platform, including procurement, invoicing and expense management and pay. We derive our revenues primarily from subscription fees, professional services fees and other.
Subscription revenues consist primarily of fees to provide our customers access to our cloud-based platform, which includes routine customer support at no additional cost. Term-based licenses are sold as bundled arrangements that include the rights to a term license and post-contract customer support (“PCS”). Accordingly, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation. The revenues related to the amount allocated to PCS are included in subscription revenue, which are recognized ratably over the contract term beginning on the license delivery date. Professional services fees and other include deployment services, optimization services, training, and revenues allocated to license component for the sales of term-based licenses. Subscription revenues are a function of renewal rates, the number of customers, the number of users at each customer, the number of solutions subscribed to by each customer, and the price of our solutions.
Generally, subscription fees are recognized ratably as revenues over the contract term beginning on the date the application is made available to the customer. Our new business subscriptions typically have a term of three years, although some customers commit for longer or shorter periods. We generally invoice our customers in annual installments at the beginning of each year in the subscription period. Amounts that have been invoiced are initially recorded as deferred revenue and are recognized ratably over the subscription period. Amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods are reflected as remaining performance obligations within the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Professional services revenues and other consist primarily of fees associated with the implementation and configuration of our subscription service and revenues allocated to the license component for sales of term-based licenses. Professional services are generally sold on a time-and-materials or fixed-fee basis. Revenue for both time-and-material and fixed-fee arrangements are recognized over-time as the services are performed. We have the ability to reasonably measure progress towards completion of the professional services arrangements. For fixed-fee and time-and-material arrangements, we recognize revenue on the basis of performed hours relative to the total estimated hours to complete satisfaction of the professional service arrangement. For the license component from the sales of term-based licenses, we recognize revenues at the start of the license term when delivery is complete.
Our professional services engagements typically span from a few weeks to several months. For this reason, our professional services revenues may fluctuate significantly from period to period. The terms of our typical professional services arrangements provide that our customers pay us within 30 days from the invoice date. Fixed-fee services arrangements are generally invoiced in advance. We have made significant investments in our professional services business that are designed to ensure customer success and adoption of our platform. We are continuing to invest in expanding our professional services partner ecosystem to further support our customers. As the professional services practices of our partner firms continue to develop, we expect them to increasingly contract directly with our subscription customers and we incentivize our sales force to further this objective.
Cost of Revenues
Subscription
Cost of subscription consists primarily of expenses related to hosting our service and providing customer support. Significant expenses are comprised of data center capacity costs; personnel and related costs directly associated with our cloud infrastructure and customer support, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation; allocated overhead; and amortization of acquired developed technology and capitalized software development costs.
Professional Services and Other Cost of Revenues
Cost of professional services and other cost of revenues consist primarily of personnel and related costs directly associated with our professional services and training departments, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation; the costs of contracted third-party vendors, amortization of acquired developed technology; and allocated overhead. These costs are generally expensed in the period incurred.
Professional services associated with the implementation and configuration of our subscription platform are performed directly by our services team, as well as by contracted third-party vendors. In cases in which third-party vendors invoice us for services performed for our customers, those fees are accrued over the requisite service period.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of our development team, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense and allocated overhead costs. Our cycle of frequent updates has facilitated rapid innovation and the introduction of new solutions throughout our history. We have aggressively invested, and intend to continue to invest, in developing technology to support our growth. We capitalize certain software development costs that are attributable to developing new solutions and features and adding incremental functionality to our platform, and we amortize such costs as costs of subscription revenues over the estimated life of the new application or incremental functionality, which is typically three years.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related costs directly associated with our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions and stock-based compensation. Commissions earned by our sales force that are considered incremental costs for obtaining a non-cancelable subscription contract are deferred and amortized over a period of benefit that we have determined to be five years. For commissions earned from the sale of term-based license contracts, we allocate the costs of commission in proportion to the allocation of the transaction price of license and PCS performance obligations. Commissions associated with the license component are expensed at the time the related revenue is recognized. Commissions allocated to PCS are deferred and then amortized over five years. Other sales and marketing costs include promotional events to promote our brand, including our Inspire conferences, web advertising, television media, events, allocated overhead and amortization of customer relationships and trademark.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs and related expenses for executive, finance, legal, human resources, recruiting, and administrative personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense; professional fees for external legal, accounting, recruiting and other consulting services and allocated overhead costs. During fiscal 2021, general and administrative expenses included a benefit of $12.5 million related to the reversal of the Yapta contingent consideration payable. Refer to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended January 31, 2021 for details of the contingent consideration payable.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense associated with our outstanding convertible senior notes.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on our investments in marketable securities and cash and cash equivalents, and gain or loss on conversion of convertible senior notes, in addition to the effects of exchange rates on our foreign currency-denominated asset and liability balances which are recorded as foreign currency gains (losses) in the consolidated statements of operations.
Benefit From Income Taxes
Benefit from income taxes is primarily related to the reversal of U.S. and foreign deferred tax liabilities as a result of current year intangible and convertible note original issue discount amortization, foreign excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation, and remeasurement of deferred tax assets due to tax rate changes in the UK, partially offset by income taxes related to foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets of our U.S. entities as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be utilized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenues for each of the periods indicated:
Fiscal Years Ended January 31, 2022 and 2021
Revenues
Total revenues were $725.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $541.6 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $183.6 million, or 34%. Subscription revenues were $634.0 million, or 87% of total revenues, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $470.3 million, or 87% of total revenues, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. This increase in absolute dollars was predominantly driven by the increase in the number of customers with annualized subscription revenue above $100,000, which was 1,370 as of January 31, 2022, compared to 1,082 as of January 31, 2021. Professional services and other revenues were $91.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $71.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The increase of $20.0 million, or 28%, was primarily due to increases in implementation services provided to our customers.
We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on our customers and customer acquisitions.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of subscription was $209.8 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $147.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $62.4 million, or 42%. The increase in cost of subscription was primarily due to an increase of $27.7 million in amortization of developed technology assets related to acquisitions, an increase of $12.5 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount, including stock-based compensation costs, an increase of $8.9 million in hosting fees to accommodate increased customer spend, an increase of $6.2 million in software costs to manage our platform, an increase of $2.7 million in amortization of capitalized development costs, and an increase of $4.4 million in third party services and other costs driven by our overall growth.
Cost of professional services was $103.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $74.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $29.1 million, or 39%. The increase in cost of professional services was primarily due to an increase of $16.7 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount, including stock-based compensation costs, an increase of $11.1 million in amortization of developed technology assets related to acquisitions, an increase of $2.8 million in other costs driven by our overall growth, partially offset by a decrease of $1.5 million in third party implementation services.
We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on our cost profile in providing hosting solutions and services to our customers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $412.1 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $319.9 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $92.1 million, or 29%. Gross margin was 57% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to 59% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to the increase in amortization of developed technology assets related to acquisitions.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $166.5 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $133.8 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $32.6 million, or 24%. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $27.3 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount, including stock-based compensation costs, an increase of $2.8 million in hosting fees, and an increase of $2.5 million in other costs driven by our overall growth.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses were $327.8 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $236.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $91.5 million, or 39%. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $40.3 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount, including stock-based compensation costs, an increase of $31.9 million in amortization of customer relationship assets related to acquisitions, an increase of $12.5 million primarily related to advertising campaigns and marketing events, and an increase of $6.8 million in other costs driven by our overall growth.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $161.9 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $116.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, an increase of $45.5 million, or 39%. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $29.9 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount, including stock-based compensation costs, a non-recurring prior year benefit of $12.5 million arising from the reversal of the Yapta contingent consideration liability, an increase of $4.4 million in third party services, such as recruiting expenses and legal service fees, an increase of $2.0 million in other costs driven by our overall growth, partially offset by a release of allowances for credit losses of $3.3 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $122.7 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to $91.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The $31.5 million increase in interest expense was primarily due to amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs on the 2026 Notes issued in the middle of the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net was $4.9 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to other income, net of $13.3 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The fluctuation of $18.2 million was primarily due to $9.2 million in unfavorable fluctuations related to foreign currency exchange rates, a decrease of $5.5 million in income earned from our investments in marketable securities and money market funds primarily as a result of a lower market yield and reduced amount of investments, a decrease of $3.5 million in gains from early conversions on the 2023 Notes.
Benefit From Income Taxes
The benefit from income taxes was $2.6 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, compared to a tax benefit of $64.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The $61.8 million decrease in benefit from income taxes was primarily due to the significant income tax benefits recorded in fiscal 2021 related to acquisitions completed during the year. We maintain a full valuation allowance on net deferred tax assets of our U.S. entity as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be utilized.
Fiscal Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 18, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, and cash generated from operations. As of January 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $506.5 million, and marketable securities of $223.0 million.
Our cash equivalents are comprised primarily of bank deposits and money market funds. Cash from operations could be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled “Risk Factors.” However, we believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations consists of our Convertible Notes, obligations under operating leases for office space, and contractual purchase obligations for hosting services and other services to support the Company's business operations.
We had outstanding 2023 Notes, 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes with principal amounts of $1.8 million, $805.0 million and $1,380.0 million, respectively, as of January 31, 2022. We have the ability to settle the Convertible Notes in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock at our own election. As of January 31, 2022, there were no unsettled conversion requests. It is our current intent to settle conversions of the remaining 2023 Notes, 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes through combination settlement, which involves repayment of the principal portion in cash and any excess of the conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock.
In conjunction with the issuance of the Convertible Notes, we entered into capped call transactions that reduce our exposure to additional cash payments above principal balances in the event of a cash conversion of the Convertible Notes. We may owe additional cash to the noteholders upon early conversion if our stock price exceeds $63.821 per share for the 2023 Notes, $295.550 for the 2025 Notes, or $503.415 for the 2026 Notes. Although our incremental exposure to the additional cash payment above the principal amount of the Convertible Notes is reduced by the capped calls, conversion of the Convertible Notes by noteholders and our related settlement of any portion thereof in shares of our common stock may cause dilution to the ownership interests of existing stockholders. As of January 31, 2022, all the capped calls for the 2023 Notes, 2025 Notes and 2026 Notes remained outstanding.
We lease office space under non-cancelable operating leases with various expiration dates through February 2030. As of January 31, 2022, the value of our current and noncurrent operating lease obligations was approximately $15.7 million and $34.9 million, respectively. Our non-cancelable purchase obligations consists of hosting services and other services that support our business operations. As of January 31, 2022, the value of our current and noncurrent purchase obligations was approximately $44.5 million and $160.7 million, respectively. Information regarding our operating lease obligations and contractual purchase obligations can be found in Note 11, “Commitments and Contingencies” in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our pace of growth, subscription renewal activity, the timing and extent of spend to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced services offerings and the continuing market acceptance of our services. We continually assess potential acquisitions and expect to continue to pursue acquisitions of or investments in complementary businesses, services and technologies and intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 was $168.1 million compared to $78.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by cash collections from customers.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 of $12.7 million was primarily related to $47.3 million in cash used for acquisitions, $13.9 million for the purchases of property and equipment, and $10.0 million for other investments, partially offset by $58.5 million of net cash receipts from purchases, maturities and sales of short-term marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 of $27.5 million was primarily due to approximately $31.1 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the ESPP and exercise of stock options, and $2.2 million of cash received from the non-controlling shareholder of Coupa K.K., partially offset by $5.8 million of repayments for the conversions of the 2023 Notes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 “Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates and therefore involve a greater degree of estimation uncertainty.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues primarily from subscription fees, professional services fees and other. Revenues are recognized when control of these services are transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Revenues are recognized net of applicable taxes imposed on the related transaction.
Subscription Revenues
We offer subscriptions to our cloud-based business spend management platform, including procurement, invoicing, and expense management. Subscription revenues consist primarily of fees to provide our customers access to our cloud-based platform, which includes routine customer support. Subscription contracts do not provide customers with the right to take possession of the software, are in general, non-cancelable, and do not contain general rights of return. Generally, subscription revenues are recognized ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement, beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer. Subscription contracts typically have a term of three years with invoicing occurring in annual installments at the beginning of each year in the subscription period.
Term-based licenses are sold as bundled arrangements that include the rights to a term license and post-contract customer support (“PCS”). Accordingly, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation. The revenues related to the amount allocated to PCS are included in subscription revenue, which are recognized ratably over the contract term beginning on the license delivery date.
Professional Services Revenues and Other
We offer professional services which primarily include deployment services, optimization services, and training. Professional services are generally sold on a fixed-fee or time-and-materials basis. For services billed on a fixed-fee basis, invoicing typically occurs in advance, and revenue is recognized over time based on the proportion performed. For services billed on a time-and-materials basis, revenue is recognized over time as services are performed.
Term-based licenses are sold as bundled arrangements that include the rights to a term license and PCS. Accordingly, we allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation. The revenues related to the amount allocated to term-based licenses are included in other revenue, which is recognized at the start of the license term when delivery is complete.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. Subscription services, professional services, term-based licenses, and related post-contract customer support are distinct performance obligations that are accounted for separately. In contracts with multiple performance obligations, we assess each promise separately and allocate the transaction price on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. Evaluating the terms and conditions included within our customer contracts for appropriate revenue recognition and determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgement.
The determination of standalone selling price for each distinct performance obligation requires judgment. We determine SSP for performance obligations based on overall pricing objectives, which take into consideration market conditions and entity-specific factors. This includes a review of historical data related to the size of arrangements, the applications being sold, customer demographics and the numbers and types of users within the arrangements. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP for performance obligations. There is typically more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by considerations such as size and sales regions.
Deferred Commissions
Commissions are earned by sales personnel upon the execution of the sales contract by the customer, and commission payments are made shortly after they are earned. Commission costs can be associated specifically with subscription, professional services, and license arrangements. Commissions earned by our sales personnel are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. These costs are deferred and then amortized over a period of benefit of five years. Determining the period of benefit requires judgement for which we take into consideration our past experience with customers, future cash flows expected from customers, industry peers and other available information.
Business Combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions at the acquisition date, including estimated fair value of acquired intangible assets, and related amortization period. The estimates of fair value require management to also make estimates of, among other things, future expected cash flows, discount rates, expected costs to reproduce an asset or the determination of the useful life of finite-live intangible assets. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, these estimates are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of operations.
Convertible Notes
We account for the issued convertible senior notes (“Convertible Notes”) as separate liability and equity components associated with the conversion feature. The valuation of the conversion feature in the Convertible Notes involves estimation of the fair value of the liability component of the Convertible Notes on a stand-alone basis. The fair value of the liability component is calculated by measuring the fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature using a discounted cash flow model with a discount rate associated with each convertible note. In addition, for the 2026 Notes, the Company also used lattice models to determine the discount rate. Determining discount rates require judgement, and the fair value of the liability component is sensitive to changes in the discount rate.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for analysis of recent accounting pronouncements that are applicable to our business.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance:
•Non-GAAP operating income;
•Non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated; and
•Adjusted free cash flows.
We regularly review and consider these measures when we evaluate our business and for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of loss from operations to non-GAAP operating income, from net loss attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated to non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated, and from net cash provided by operating activities to adjusted free cash flows (in thousands):
(1)During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, the Company identified that it had incorrectly calculated its quarterly non-GAAP income tax adjustment associated with the amortization of acquired intangible assets. In the consolidated financial statements for the year ended January 31, 2022, the Company corrected the $2.3 million cumulative impact of such prior-period error as an out-of-period adjustment.
We define non-GAAP operating income as loss from operations before stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, and the change in fair value of contingent consideration related to an acquisition. We define non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated as net loss attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated before stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangible assets, the change in fair value of contingent consideration related to an acquisition, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, gain or loss on conversion of convertible senior notes, the adjustment attributable to redeemable non-controlling interests, and related tax effects, including non-recurring income tax adjustments. We define adjusted free cash flows as net cash provided by operating activities, less purchases of property and equipment, plus repayments of convertible senior notes attributable to debt discount, plus one-time payout of legacy unvested equity awards accelerated in conjunction with a business combination.
We believe non-GAAP operating income and non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated provide investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitate period to period comparisons of operations. We believe non-GAAP operating income and non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated are also useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as these metrics generally eliminate the effects of certain items that may vary between companies for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
We believe adjusted free cash flows provides useful information to investors because it is an indicator of our capital strength and liquidity, and we also use it to measure performance of our business operations. We exclude repayment of convertible senior notes attributable to debt discount in calculating this measure in part because our use of cash to satisfy this obligation (relating to the Convertible Notes) was discretionary, and we have the ability to satisfy similar obligations in the near future through shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. However, you should bear in mind that this measure does not reflect any reduction for cash settlements of our debt obligations, nor does it represent our residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. In calculating this metric, we also excluded one-time payout of legacy unvested equity awards accelerated in conjunction with a business combination that occurred in November 2020, primarily because it was not a normal recurring cash operating activity necessary for our business operations. In addition, other companies in our industry may calculate similarly titled measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures. Due to these and other limitations, you should not consider this non-GAAP measure in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities.
We use non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated and adjusted free cash flows in conjunction with traditional GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance and liquidity, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance and liquidity. Our definitions may differ from the definitions used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. In addition, other companies may not publish these or similar metrics. Thus, our non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated and adjusted free cash flows should be considered in addition to, not as substitutes for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We compensate for these limitations by providing investors and other users of our financial information a reconciliation of non-GAAP operating income to loss from operations, non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated to net loss attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated, and adjusted free cash flows to net cash provided by operating activities. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view non-GAAP operating income, non-GAAP net income attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated, and adjusted free cash flows in conjunction with loss from operations, net loss attributable to Coupa Software Incorporated, and the consolidated statements of cash flows.