Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Rule 175 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 3b-6 of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs and our assumptions. Words such as “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and summary of selected financial data for Corporate Universe, Inc. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
Management’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition (“MD&A”) is a supplement to the accompanying condensed financial statements and provides additional information on Corporate Universe, Inc.’s (“COUV” or the “Company’) business, current developments, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations.
DESCRIPTION OF COMPANY
Carbon Ion is developing next generation supercapacitor technology aimed at the grid and other energy storage applications.
We see ‘Hybrid’ solutions, by combining the best in class battery solutions with super capacitors, as the way forward to deliver sustainable energy for the next three decades and a grid which is fit for the future. Super Capacitors are different but complimentary technology to batteries.
We are at the beginning of a forecasted once-in-a-century shift in moving away from fossil fuels to power our energy requirements across all demands for electricity.
For example, while current battery technology has demonstrated the benefits of EVs, principally in the premium passenger car market, there are fundamental limitations inhibiting widespread adoption of battery technology. They can catch fire easily, they use rare earth materials and have limited life span and the power delivery is compromised. They are not a universally applicable energy store.
Lamborghini recognised this in their recently launched supercar costing $3.5m the ‘Sian’ that has adopted regenerative braking using super capacitors as their first move to electric powertrains. Supercapacitors can deliver more power, more quickly than a battery solution. As part of the VW Group, Lamborghini elected to go a different route to the rest with their first ever hybrid car, and not follow the industry orthodoxy of a Lithium battery solution. As a result, we believe a hybrid solution using new super capacitor technology with complimentary battery technology represents the most promising path to unlock a mass market shift. A super capacitor can provide that immediate fast delivery (kick) mechanism and then once momentum and velocity is achieved the system moves over to battery power. In this way, the system can be better optimised for both cost and performance.
After 30 years of gradual improvements in conventional lithium-ion batteries we believe (like others in the industry) the market needs a step change in battery technology to make mass market EVs competitive with the fossil fuel alternative. We have gone, like Lamborghini’s terzo millenio does, down a direct route to achieve this goal.
We have spent the last decade developing a proprietary supercapacitor technology to meet this challenge. We believe that our technology enables a new category of supercapacitor that meets the requirements for broader market adoption. The Carbon-ion (C-ion) Super Capacitor technology that we are developing is being designed to offer greater energy density, , and safety when compared to today’s conventional super capacitors and longer life and faster charging than batteries.
We are focused on energy storage applications, which have a stringent set of requirements for super capacitor butour super capacitor technology also has applicability in other large and growing markets such as frequency response and fast recovery storage. Supercapacitors are best used when you need energy fast.
We will continue developing our C-ion super capacitor carbon-ion technology with the goal of beginning transfer to commercial production in the first half of 2025. We have evaluated each of the elements required for initial success and calculated the high performance which we expect from their combination. We are now working to combine and optimize all components of the cell. We will then further develop volume manufacturing processes to enable high volume manufacturing and minimize manufacturing costs.
We are looking to raise funds that will enable us to expand and accelerate research and development activities and undertake additional initiatives. As well as continuing to develop our scientific and engineering capabilities iat Milton Park Abingdon England, we will use third party pilot lines, to achieve our goal of being prepared to begin the transition to high volume manufacturing capability from 2025.
We intend to work closely with original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) to make our cells widely available over time. We recognize that our super capacitor technology has applicability in other large and growing markets including energy storage and other electricity grid type environments such a frequency response. We expect that the heavy transport industries such a shipping, trains, planes and nascent infrastructure charging will also feature.
Our technology enables a variety of business models. In addition to joint ventures, we may look to operate solely-owned manufacturing facilities or license technology to other manufacturers. Where appropriate, we may sell know how, electrodes or other subassemblies rather than complete super capacitor cells. We intend to continue to invest in research and development beyond Gen 4.0 to improve super capacitor cell performance, improve manufacturing processes, and reduce cost subject to having raised sufficient funds to do this.
Carbon-Ion was founded to develop a new class of energy storage device with considerable functional improvements over commercially available supercapacitors or ‘ultracapacitors’.
The C-Ion cell will provide specific power characteristics much higher than a Li-ion cell. It is designed to be classified as non-flammable and non-hazardous for transport, allowing the product to be shipped easily and to comply with both current and future regulations.
Due to the method of energy storage, the cell has fewer moving parts electrochemically and can go through significantly more charge/discharge cycles and/or operate for many years of normal use.
The C-Ion cell is being designed for manufacture using technologies well known in high volume manufacture. This will enable Carbon-Ion to quickly scale-up production. Carbon-ion allows new products to be made and extra functions to be added to existing products, for example:
·
Improved energy storage allows the cell to be used as the principal method of energy storage in a far wider range of technologies than conventional supercapacitors
·
High specific power allows very fast charging
·
High specific power enables the extension of Li-ion battery lifetimes and reduction in battery size through peak shaving in hybrid applications
·
Improved safety protects customers, allows easy shipping and opens up applications in hazardous areas
·
Long cycle life allows energy storage to be installed for the entire lifetime of the device, reducing design complexity, eliminating service intervals and saving money
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by our management, and such judgments are reflected in the amounts reported in our condensed consolidated financial statements. In applying these policies, our management uses judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of market trends, information provided by our strategic partners and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results may differ significantly from the estimates contained in our condensed consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 vs. December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $0 as compared with $0 for the comparable prior year period, a change of $0, or 0%. The lack of revenue is due to the fact that the Company did not generate any sales in 2021 and 2020 from its supercapacitor technology.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $3,066,229 as compared with $476,746 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of $2,589,483. The increase in operating expenses is due to the recommencement of business operations in 2021 following a period in which the Company was dormant under prior management, resulting in a $537,005 increase in officers’ salaries, a $1,167,016 increase in salaries and wages, $150,706 increase in payroll taxes, $627,142 increase in legal and professional fees, and an $107,614 increase in general and administrative expenses compared to the comparable prior year period.
Operating Loss
The net operating loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $3,066,229 as compared with $476,746 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of $2,589,483. The increase in net operating loss is primarily due to the increase in operating expenses recorded in the current period due to the commencement of operations in 2021 compared to the comparable prior year period.
Other Income (Expenses)
Our other income (expenses) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $51,693 as compared to ($34,418) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $86,111. This change was primarily related to settling the ZapGo rent obligation in 2021 for $121,718.
Income Tax Credits
Income tax credits for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $437,994 as compared to $146,408 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $291,586. These credits are R&D tax credits allowed in the UK for certain payroll and related costs incurred by Oxion. The credit for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 is significantly less than the credit for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 because payroll in the UK did not start until September 1, 2020.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $2,576,542 as compared with $364,756 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of $2,211,786. The increase in net operating loss is primarily due to the increase in operating expenses recorded in the current period due to the commencement of operations in 2021 compared to the comparable prior year period.
Current Liquidity and Capital Resources for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities
Cash used in operations of $1,806,494 during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of our $2,576,542 net loss reconciled with our net non-cash expenses relating to prepaid expenses, COVID-19 HM furlough support, security deposit, accounts payable and accrued expenses, payroll taxes payable and accrued interest on convertible notes. Cash used in operations of $281,034 during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of our $364,756 net loss reconciled with our net non-cash expenses relating to the reserve for leasehold improvements, loss on impairment of investment, prepaid expenses, other receivables, COVID-19 furlough support, accounts payable and accrued expenses, and payroll taxes payable. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company acquired inventory in the amount of $116,127.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $278,854 versus $596,611 for year ended December 31, 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company purchased fixed assets in the amount of $12,893 and $215,249, respectively. Additionally in 2021 and 2020, the Company acquired intellectual property in the amount of $265,961 and $381,362, respectivley.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,054,375 for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus net cash provided by financing activities of $916,761 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included repayments in the amount of $191,268 for loan obligations, $1,144 in advances from stockholders, $99,265 in payments on convertible notes, $585,000 in proceeds from notes payable, related parties, $43,355 in contributed capital and $1,754,160 in proceeds from sale of preferred stock. The net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included proceeds in the amount of $191,268 from loan obligations, $165,913 in advances from stockholders, $99,265 in proceeds on convertible notes, $71,042 in proceeds from notes payable, and $389,273 in contributed capital.
Future Capital Requirements
Our capital requirements for 2022 will depend on numerous factors, including management’s evaluation of the timing of projects to pursue. Subject to our ability to generate revenues and cash flow from operations and our ability to raise additional capital (including through possible joint ventures, acquisitions, and/or partnerships), we expect to incur substantial expenditures to carry out our business plan, as well as costs associated with our capital raising efforts and being a public company.
The sale of additional equity or debt securities may result in additional dilution to our shareholders Any such required additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we were unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to reduce the scope of, delay or eliminate some or all of our planned activities and limit our operations which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Inflation
The amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements do not provide for the effect of inflation on our operations or financial position. The net operating losses shown would be greater than reported if the effects of inflation were reflected either by charging operations with amounts that represent replacement costs or by using other inflation adjustments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Going Concern
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to pursue any extensive activities. For these reasons, our auditors stated in their report on our audited financial statements that they have substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern without further financing.