Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “COVA Acquisition Corp.,” “COVA,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to COVA Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the annual financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Annual Report”) includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”).
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on December 11, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination, we intend to focus our search for a target in the high growth technology and tech-enabled businesses in Southeast Asia in the consumer internet, ecommerce, and software industries. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our entire activity since inception has been to prepare for our initial public offering, which was consummated on February 9, 2021 and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants. Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding; and
our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 9, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 units (“Units”), which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,900,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating aggregate gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, $0.0001 par value per share and one-half of one redeemable warrant for a total of 15,000,000 warrants (the “Public Warrants”). Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated a private placement of 8,872,000 warrants (the “Private Warrants”) to COVA Acquisition Sponsor LLC (the “Sponsor”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total proceeds of $8,872,000.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $300,000,000 was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”). We incurred $17,210,247 in offering costs, consisting of $6,000,000 of underwriting discount, $10,500,000 of deferred underwriting discount, and $710,247 of other offering costs.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $300,053,996. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (excluding deferred underwriting commissions and less taxes payable) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay our taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $7,181 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate, and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial Business Combination, our Sponsor, officers, directors, or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that the initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into private placement warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Warrants. To date, there have been no such loans.
Prior to the completion of the initial Business Combination, the Company does not expect to seek loans from parties other than the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor as the Company does not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in the Trust Account. Management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of a Business Combination or for the next 12 months. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described above, and, subsequent to the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting, and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $11,682,453, which consisted of a gain from change in fair value on warrant liability of $14,374,150 and interest income on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $53,995, offset by offering costs allocated to warrant liability of $989,589, and operating costs of $1,756,103.
For the period from December 11, 2020 (Inception) to December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $8,927, which consisted of operating costs of $8,927.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
We complied with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to our initial public offering. We allocate the offering costs between its ordinary shares and Public Warrants using relative fair value method, with the offering costs allocated to the Public Warrants expensed immediately. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares have been charged to shareholders’ deficit.
Net Income (loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted loss per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) initial public offering, (ii) exercise of the overallotment option and (iii) the private placement to our Sponsor since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. The Public Warrants and the Private Warrants are exercisable to purchase a total of 23,872,000 Class A ordinary shares.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company evaluated the Public Warrants and Private Warrants (collectively, “Warrants”, which are discussed in Note 2 and Note 5 in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the initial public offering) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities as of December 31, 2021.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $10,500,000, in aggregate. The underwriters’ deferred commissions will be paid to the underwriters from the funds held in the Trust Account upon and concurrently with the completion of our initial business combination. The deferred underwriting fees will be waived by the underwriters solely in the event that we do not complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of the independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.