Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report, including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the Commission.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on January 7, 2021 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of warrants that occurred simultaneously with the consummation of the initial public offering, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of shares of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, the Company had $1,547,800 in cash. The Company considers all short-term investments with an original maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash equivalents. The Company did not have any cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
For the period from January 7, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $2.5 million. Our entire activity from January 7, 2021 through December 31, 2021, consisted of formation and preparation for our initial public offering and since our initial public offering, the search for a target business with which to consummate an initial business combination, and as such, we had no operations and no significant operating expenses. Subsequent to the closing of our initial public offering on August 12, 2021, our normal operating costs included costs associated with our search for the business combination, costs associated with our governance and public reporting, state franchise taxes and charges of $10,000 per month from our sponsor for administrative services. Our interest income earned on cash equivalents and marketable securities held in the trust account were approximately $7,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $1.5 million in its operating bank account and working capital of approximately $1.9 million.
The Company’s liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of the initial public offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from the sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares to the sponsor and the advancement of funds by the sponsor under the promissory note to cover the Company’s expenses in connection with the initial public offering. As of December 31, 2021, no amounts remained outstanding under the promissory note. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering and private placement, the Company’s liquidity needs have been satisfied from the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, and the results of its operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these unaudited condensed financial statements. The unaudited condensed financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the initial public offering to purchase up to 5,250,000 over-allotment Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On August 24, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option for 700,000 over-allotment units.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of 2% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $7,140,000 in the aggregate, which was paid upon the closing of the initial public offering and the partial exercise of the over-allotment option. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $12,495,000 in the aggregate in connection with the closing of the initial public offering and the partial exercise of the over-allotment option.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the effective date of the initial public offering, we agreed to pay our sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. The Company incurred $50,000 in expenses in connection with such services during the period from January 7, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Marketable Securities Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in trust account are comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 180 days or less, classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in gain on marketable securities (net), dividends and interest, held in trust account in our statements of operations. The fair value for trading securities is determined using quoted market prices in active markets.
Warrant Liability
The Company accounts for the private placement warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40. Such guidance provides that because the private placement warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, each private placement warrant must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company will classify each private placement warrant as a liability at its fair value. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date. With each such re-measurement, the private placement warrant liability will be adjusted to fair value, with the change in fair value recognized in the Company’s statement of operations.
The private placement warrants are identical to the public warrants underlying the Units sold in the initial public offering, except that the private placement warrants and the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the private placement warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of a business combination, subject to certain limited exceptions. Additionally, the private placement warrants will be exercisable on a cashless basis and non-redeemable so long as they are held by the sponsor or such its permitted transferees. If the private placement warrants are held by someone other than the sponsor or its permitted transferees, the private placement warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the public warrants.
Class A common stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of common stock
Net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the periods. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 18,660,000 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The Company’s statements of operations include a presentation of income (loss) per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the public Class A common stock subject to redemption and Class B common stock, the Company first calculated the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares. Subsequent to calculating the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares, the Company split the amount to be allocated using a ratio of 62% for the Class A common stock and 38% for the Class B common stock for the period from January 7, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, reflective of the respective participation rights.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities which qualify as financial instruments under the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements,” equal or approximate the carrying amounts represented in the condensed balance sheet primarily due to their short-term nature, except for the warrant liability.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. U.S. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value.
The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
● Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
● Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
In some circumstances, the inputs used to measure fair value might be categorized within different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In those instances, the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the fair value hierarchy based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt -debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging -Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. For smaller reporting companies, this update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. The Company’s management is currently evaluating the new guidance, but does not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public company that is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.