ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis describes the principal factors affecting our results of operations, liquidity, capital resources and contractual cash obligations. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements, information about our business practices, significant accounting policies, risk factors, and the transactions that underlie our financial results, which are included in various parts of this filing.
A discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
General
We are an independent oil and natural gas company focused on the acquisition, exploration and development of high-quality assets in the leading oil plays of South and West Texas. Our activities are primarily focused on horizontal development in the Midland and Delaware Basins, both of which are part of the larger Permian Basin in West Texas, as well as the Eagle Ford in South Texas. Our operating culture is centered on responsible development of hydrocarbon resources, safety and the environment, which we believe strengthens our operational performance. Our drilling activity is predominantly focused on the horizontal development of several prospective intervals in the Permian, including multiple levels of the Wolfcamp formation and the Lower Spraberry shales, and the Eagle Ford. We have assembled a multi-year inventory of potential horizontal well locations and intend to add to this inventory through delineation drilling of emerging zones on our existing acreage and through acquisition of additional locations through working interest acquisitions, leasing programs, acreage purchases, joint ventures and asset swaps.
Financial and Operational Highlights
For discussion of our significant financial and operational highlights for the year ended December 31, 2021, please see “Part 1. Items 1 and 2. Business and Properties - Overview - Major Developments in 2021”.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain operating information with respect to the Company’s oil and natural gas operations for the periods indicated:
(1) Reflects calendar average daily spot market prices.
Revenues
The following table reconciles the changes in oil, natural gas, NGLs, and total revenue for the period presented by reflecting the effect of changes in volume and in the underlying commodity prices.
(1) Excludes sales of oil and gas purchased from third parties and sold to our customers.
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, of $1.9 billion increased $867.8 million, or 88%, compared to revenues of $983.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a 101% increase in the average realized sales price which rose to $53.06 per Boe from $26.45 per Boe as well as revenue attributable to wells that were acquired in the Primexx Acquisition. The increase in the average realized sales price was partially offset by a 6% decrease in production, which was primarily due to the divestitures that occurred during 2021 as well as normal production decline, partially offset by production resulting from our developmental activities during the year as well as production from the properties acquired in the Primexx Acquisition.
Operating Expenses
Lease Operating Expenses. Lease operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 5% to $203.1 million compared to $194.1 million for the same period of 2020, primarily due to operating expenses attributable to wells that were acquired in the Primexx Acquisition, partially offset by a reduction in certain operating expenses such as repairs and maintenance and equipment rentals. Lease operating expense per Boe for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $5.82 compared to $5.22 for the same period of 2020 primarily due to the wells that were acquired in the Primexx Acquisition, as discussed above, higher costs driven by the recent increase in inflation, as well as the distribution of fixed costs spread over lower production volumes.
Production and Ad Valorem Taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, production and ad valorem taxes increased 60% to $100.2 million compared to $62.6 million for the same period of 2020, which is primarily related to an 88% increase in total revenues which increased production taxes. The impact of the increase in production taxes described above was partially offset by a decrease in ad valorem taxes due to lower property tax valuations for 2021 as a result of lower commodity prices during 2020. Production and ad valorem taxes as a percentage of total revenues decreased to 5.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 6.4% of total revenues for the same period of 2020, primarily due to lower property tax valuations for 2021 as discussed above.
Gathering, Transportation and Processing Expenses. Gathering, transportation and processing costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 5% to $81.0 million compared to $77.3 million for the same period of 2020, which was primarily related to new oil transportation agreements that were in place for the full year of 2021 as compared to a partial year in 2020, partially offset by a 6% decrease in production volumes between the two periods as discussed above.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization (“DD&A”). The following table sets forth the components of our depreciation, depletion and amortization for the periods indicated:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, DD&A decreased to $356.6 million from $480.6 million for the same period of 2020. The decrease in DD&A was primarily the result of the impairments of evaluated oil and gas properties that were recognized during 2020 as well as a production decrease of 6% as discussed above.
General and Administrative, Net of Amounts Capitalized (“G&A”). G&A for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $50.5 million compared to $37.2 million for the same period of 2020, primarily due to an increase in the fair value of Cash-Settled RSU Awards and Cash SARs as a result of the significant increase in our stock price between the two periods as well as higher compensation costs.
Impairment of Evaluated Oil and Gas Properties. We did not recognize an impairment of evaluated oil and gas properties for the year ended December 31, 2021. Impairments of evaluated oil and gas properties of $2.5 billion were recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to declines in the 12-Month Average Realized Price of crude oil. See “Note 5 - Property and Equipment, Net” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Merger, Integration and Transaction Expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred merger, integration and transaction expenses of $14.3 million, which were associated with the Primexx Acquisition, as compared to $28.5 million for 2020, which were related to the Carrizo Acquisition. See “Note 4 - Acquisitions and Divestitures” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Primexx Acquisition and the Carrizo Acquisition.
Other Income and Expenses
Interest Expense, Net of Capitalized Amounts. The following table sets forth the components of our interest expense, net of capitalized amounts for the periods indicated:
Interest expense, net of capitalized amounts, incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $7.7 million to $102.0 million compared to $94.3 million for the same period of 2020. The increase is primarily due to the issuance of the Second Lien Notes at the end of the third quarter of 2020 as well as amortization of the discount associated with those Second Lien Notes. These increases were partially offset by the reduction in Senior Unsecured Notes outstanding as a result of the exchange of Senior Unsecured Notes for Second Lien Notes which occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020, lower borrowings on the Credit Facility, and an increase in capitalized interest.
(Gain) Loss on Derivative Contracts. The net (gain) loss on derivative contracts for the periods indicated includes the following:
See “Note 8 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” and “Note 9 - Fair Value Measurements” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(Gain) Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. During November 2021, in connection with the exchange of $197.0 million of our Second Lien Notes for 5.5 million shares of our common stock, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $43.4 million, which consisted of the notional amount of common stock issued less the aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes exchanged, net of a pro-rata write-off of associated unamortized discount of $16.9 million and fees incurred. Additionally, during July 2021, we redeemed all of our 6.25% Senior Notes and recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $2.4 million, which was primarily related to writing off the remaining unamortized premium associated with the 6.25% Senior Notes.
During November 2020, in connection with the exchange of $389.0 million of our Senior Unsecured Notes for the Second Lien Notes, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $170.4 million, which consisted of the carrying values of the Senior Unsecured Notes exchanged less the aggregate principal amount of the Second Lien Notes issued, net of the associated debt discount of $9.1 million, which was based on the Second Lien Notes’ allocated fair value on the exchange date.
See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Income Tax Expense. We recorded income tax expense of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $122.1 million for the same period of 2020. Since the second quarter of 2020, we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets will not be realized and have recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets, which still remained as of December 31, 2021. See “Note 12 - Income Taxes” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
2022 Capital Budget and Funding Strategy. Our 2022 Capital Budget has been established at $725.0 million, with over 85% allocated towards development in the Permian with the balance towards development in the Eagle Ford. Because we are the operator of a high percentage of our properties, we can control the amount and timing of our capital expenditures. We plan to execute a moderated capital expenditure program through reduced reinvestment rates and balanced capital deployment for a more consistent cash flow generation and will be focused to further enhance our multi-zone, scaled development program to drive capital efficiency. See “Items 1 and 2. Business and Properties - Capital Budget” for additional details.
The following table is a summary of our 2021 capital expenditures (1):
(1) Capital expenditures, presented on an accrual basis, includes drilling, completions, facilities, and equipment, and excludes land, seismic, and asset retirement costs.
We believe that existing cash and cash equivalents, any positive cash flows from operations and available borrowings under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to support working capital, capital expenditures and other cash requirements for at least the next 12 months and, based on our current expectations, for the foreseeable future thereafter. Our future capital requirements, both near-term and long-term, will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, commodity prices, market conditions, our available liquidity and financing, acquisitions and divestitures of oil and gas properties, the availability of drilling rigs and completion crews, the cost of completion services, success of drilling programs, land and industry partner issues, weather delays, the acquisition
of leases with drilling commitments, and other factors. We regularly consider which resources, including debt and equity financings, are available to meet our future financial obligations, planned capital expenditures and liquidity requirements.
In addition, depending upon our actual and anticipated sources and uses of liquidity, prevailing market conditions and other factors, we may, from time to time, seek to retire or repurchase our outstanding debt or equity securities through cash purchases in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in aggregate, may be material. During 2021, to help manage our future financing cash outflows and liquidity position, we completed the exchange of $197.0 million of aggregate principal amount of our 9.00% Second Lien Senior Secured Notes for 5.5 million shares of our common stock, which reduced the long-term debt balance in our consolidated balance sheets and also reduced future interest payments.
We may consider divesting certain properties or assets that are not part of our core business or are no longer deemed essential to our future growth or enter into joint venture agreements, provided we are able to divest such assets or enter into joint venture agreements on terms that are acceptable to us. During 2021, we sold certain non-core assets in the Delaware Basin, Eagle Ford Shale and Midland Basin for combined net proceeds of $181.8 million, which were used to repay borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility.
Overview of Cash Flow Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents decreased $10.3 million to $9.9 million compared to $20.2 million at December 31, 2020.
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $974.1 million and $559.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in operating activities was primarily attributable to the following:
•An increase in revenue due to an increase in realized pricing; and
•Changes related to timing of working capital payments and receipts; offset by
•Increase in cash paid for commodity derivative settlements.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $876.4 million and $529.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in investing activities was primarily attributable to the following:
•A $480.8 million increase in acquisitions due to the Primexx acquisition; offset by
•A decrease in capital expenditures.
Financing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $108.1 million compared to $23.0 million during 2020. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to the following:
•Redemption of the 6.25% Senior Notes in July 2021; and
•Repayments on the Credit Facility; offset by
•The issuance of $650.0 million of 8.00% Senior Notes in July 2021
Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, our Credit Facility had a maximum credit amount of $5.0 billion, a borrowing base and elected commitment amount of $1.6 billion, with borrowings outstanding of $785.0 million at a weighted-average interest rate of 2.65%, and letters of credit outstanding of $24.0 million. The borrowing base under the credit agreement is subject to regular redeterminations in the spring and fall of each year, as well as special redeterminations described in the credit agreement, which in each case may reduce the amount of the borrowing base. On November 1, 2021, we entered into the fifth amendment to our credit agreement governing the Credit Facility which, among other things, reaffirmed the borrowing base and elected commitment amount of $1.6 billion as a result of the fall 2021 scheduled redetermination.
Our Credit Facility contains certain covenants including restrictions on additional indebtedness, payment of cash dividends and maintenance of certain financial ratios. Under the Credit Facility, we currently must maintain the following financial covenants determined as of the last day of the quarter: (1) commencing on March 31, 2020 and for each quarter ending on or prior to December 31, 2021, a Secured Leverage Ratio of no more than 3.00 to 1.00; (2) commencing March 31, 2022 and for each quarter ending thereafter, a Leverage Ratio of no more than 4.00 to 1.00; and (3) a Current Ratio of not less than 1.00 to 1.00. We were in compliance with these covenants at December 31, 2021.
Second Lien Note Exchange. On November 5, 2021, we closed on the agreement with Chambers Investments, LLC (“Kimmeridge”), a private investment vehicle managed by Kimmeridge Energy Management, LLC, to exchange $197.0 million of our outstanding Second Lien Notes, for a notional amount of approximately $223.1 million of our common stock, which equated to 5.5 million shares.
8.00% Senior Notes and Redemption of 6.25% Senior Notes. On July 6, 2021, we issued $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.00% Senior Notes due 2028 in a private placement for proceeds of approximately $638.1 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs. The 8.00% Senior Notes mature on August 1, 2028 and interest is payable semi-annually each February 1 and August 1, commencing on February 1, 2022. On June 21, 2021, we delivered a redemption notice with respect to all $542.7 million of our outstanding 6.25% Senior Notes due 2023, which became redeemable on July 21, 2021. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the 8.00% Senior Notes to redeem all of our outstanding 6.25% Senior Notes and the remaining proceeds to partially repay amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility.
See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our long-term debt.
Material Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we have financial obligations associated with our outstanding long-term debt, including interest payments and principal repayments. See “Note 7 - Borrowings” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the contractual commitments under our debt agreements, including the timing of principal repayments. Additionally, we have operational obligations associated with long-term, non-cancelable leases, drilling rig contracts, frac service contracts, gathering, processing and transportation service agreements, and estimates of future asset retirement obligations. See “Note 14 - Asset Retirement Obligations” and “Note 17 - Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
We estimate that the combination of our sources of capital, as discussed above, will continue to be adequate to fund our short- and long-term contractual obligations.
Other Commitments
The following table includes our current oil sales contracts and firm transportation agreements as of December 31, 2021:
(1)For each of the commitments shown in the table above, the committed barrels may include volumes produced by us and other third-party working, royalty, and overriding royalty interest owners whose volumes we market on their behalf. We expect to fulfill these delivery commitments with our existing production or through the purchases of third-party commodities.
(2)Each of the firm transportation agreements shown in the table above grant us access to delivery points in several locations along the Gulf Coast.
(3)The committed volumes shown in the table above for this particular firm transportation agreement are average volumes. For the terms of August 2020-July 2023, August 2023-July 2027 and August 2027-July 2030, the committed volumes are 7,500 Bbls/d, 10,000 Bbls/d and 12,500 Bbls/d, respectively.
Critical Accounting Estimates
For discussion regarding our significant accounting policies, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make judgments affecting estimates and assumptions for reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Estimates of proved oil and gas reserves are used in calculating DD&A of evaluated oil and natural gas property costs, the present value of estimated future net revenues included in the full cost ceiling test, estimates of future taxable income used in assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, and the estimated timing of cash outflows underlying asset retirement obligations. There are numerous uncertainties inherent in the estimation of proved oil and gas reserves and in the projection of future rates of production and the timing of development expenditures. Other
significant estimates are involved in determining asset retirement obligations, acquisition date fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, impairments of unevaluated leasehold costs, fair values of commodity derivative assets and liabilities, fair values of contingent consideration arrangements, grant date fair value of stock-based awards, and contingency, litigation, and environmental liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Oil and Natural Gas Properties
Oil and natural gas properties are accounted for using the full cost method of accounting under which all productive and nonproductive costs directly associated with property acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized as oil and gas properties.
Capitalized oil and gas property costs are amortized on an equivalent unit-of-production method whereby the depletion rate is computed on a quarterly basis by dividing current quarter production by estimated proved oil and gas reserves at the beginning of the quarter then applying such depletion rate to evaluated oil and gas property costs, which includes estimated asset retirement costs, less accumulated amortization, plus estimated future expenditures to be incurred in developing proved reserves, net of estimated salvage values. Each quarter, a full cost ceiling test is performed to determine whether an impairment to our evaluated oil and gas properties should be recorded.
The estimated future net revenues used in the cost center ceiling are calculated using the 12-Month Average Realized Price of oil, NGLs, and natural gas, held flat for the life of the production, except where different prices are fixed and determinable from applicable contracts for the remaining term of those contracts. Prices do not include the impact of commodity derivative instruments as we elected not to meet the criteria to qualify for hedge accounting treatment. Details of the 12-Month Average Realized Price of crude oil for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 as well as impairments of evaluated oil and natural gas properties are summarized in the table below:
The process of estimating proved oil and gas reserves requires that our independent and internal reserve engineers exercise judgment based on available geological, geophysical and technical information. Additionally, operating costs, production and ad valorem taxes, and future development costs are estimated based on current costs. A significant change to our estimated volumes of oil and gas reserves as well as changes to the estimates of prices and costs could have an impact on the depletion rate calculation as well as the estimated future net revenues used in the cost center ceiling. We have described the risks associated with reserve estimation and the volatility of oil and natural gas prices under Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The table below presents various pricing scenarios to demonstrate the sensitivity of our December 31, 2021 cost center ceiling to changes in 12-month average benchmark crude oil and natural gas prices underlying the 12-Month Average Realized Prices. The sensitivity analysis is as of December 31, 2021 and, accordingly, does not consider drilling and completion activity, acquisitions or dispositions of oil and gas properties, production, changes in crude oil and natural gas prices, and changes in development and operating costs occurring subsequent to December 31, 2021 that may require revisions to estimates of proved reserves. See also Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors-If oil and natural gas prices remain depressed for extended periods of time, we may be required to make significant downward adjustments to the carrying value of our oil and natural gas properties.”
Derivative Instruments
We use commodity derivative instruments to mitigate the effects of commodity price volatility for a portion of our forecasted sales of production and achieve a more predictable level of cash flow. We do not use these instruments for speculative or trading purposes. Settlements of derivative contracts are generally based on the difference between the contract price and prices specified in the derivative instrument and a NYMEX price or other futures index price. The estimated fair value of our derivative contracts is based upon current forward market prices on NYMEX and in the case of collars and floors, the time value of options. For additional information regarding our derivatives instruments and their fair values, see “Note 8 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” and “Note 9 - Fair Value Measurements” of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our financial condition and results of operations can be significantly impacted by changes in the market value of our derivative instruments as a result of the volatility of oil and gas prices. See “Part II,