ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, references to the “Company,” the “combined company,” “Mosaic,” “we,” “our,” or “us” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Annual Report”) refer to Mosaic ImmunoEngineering, Inc. and its subsidiaries (formerly known as Patriot Scientific Corporation). References to “PTSC” refer to Patriot Scientific Corporation prior to the completion of the Reverse Merger (as discussed below) and references to “Private Mosaic” refer to privately held Mosaic ImmunoEngineering, Inc. prior to the completion of the Reverse Merger.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report, including all documents incorporated by reference herein, includes certain statements constituting “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, Section 21E of the Exchange Act and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including statements concerning our beliefs, plans, objectives, goals, expectations, anticipations, estimates, intentions, operations, future results and prospects, and we rely on the “safe harbor” provisions in those laws. We are including this statement for the express purpose of availing ourselves of the protections of such safe harbors with respect to all such forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements in this Annual Report reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. In this report, the words “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “intends,” “future,” “estimates,” “may,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “will,” “shall,” “propose,” “continue,” “predict,” “plan” and similar expressions are generally intended to identify certain of the forward-looking statements. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made. Any forward-looking statement is not a guarantee of future performance. Please see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of certain risk factors applicable to our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur for any future period. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update or revise these forward-looking statements for any reason, even if new information becomes available in the future.
Overview
We are a development-stage biotechnology company focused on advancing and eventually commercializing our proprietary immunomodulator platform technology. Our lead immunomodulator product candidate, MIE-101, is based on a naturally occurring plant virus known as Cowpea mosaic virus (or CPMV) which is believed to be non-infectious in animals including mice, dogs and humans. However, because of its virus structure and genetic composition, CPMV elicits a strong immune response when delivered directly into tumors as shown in our preclinical studies. Data from numerous mouse cancer models and in companion dogs with naturally occurring tumors show the ability of intratumoral administration of CPMV to result in anti-tumor effects in treated tumors and systemically at other sites of disease through immune activation.
Our lead immuno-oncology candidate, MIE-101, resulted from years of research by our scientific co-founders that was supported by numerous grants from federal and private funding agencies. Published preclinical data from our co-founders’ studies and ongoing research support the potential anti-cancer activity of MIE-101 as a monotherapy. In addition, preclinical data generated further support the potential of MIE-101 to improve anti-tumor effects of standard cancer treatments including chemotherapy, radiation therapy and checkpoint inhibitors. These studies include data from multiple preclinical tumor models, veterinary studies in companion animals with naturally occurring cancer, as well as showing the potential to activate human immune effector cells in vitro. MIE-101 is currently in late-stage preclinical development and our goal is to advance MIE-101 into veterinary studies in 2022 and into Phase I clinical trials in 2023, provided we are able to raise sufficient funding.
The Company’s immunomodulator platform technology has also been used to produce modular vaccines under our Modular Vaccine Platform (“MVP”) that may help prevent or treat diseases in studies that were supported by funding agencies. This vaccine system uses the immunomodulator technology platform as an adjuvant by linking non-infectious virus particles directly to epitopes that correspond to disease targets of interest. In preclinical studies, vaccination with MVP candidates have been able to protect animals from both cancer and infectious diseases including published results demonstrating significant promise against SARS-CoV-2. We believe our MVP platform represents a way to efficiently develop vaccine candidates in response to emerging infectious diseases. The adjuvant and linker chemistry can be stockpiled and ready for the rapid identification of targets of interest which can be evaluated via preclinical testing in a relatively short period time. These vaccines may also have a superior cold-chain profile that would potentially allow distribution to vaccination centers without refrigeration or freezing. The MVP platform combined with our proprietary trans-dermal delivery system could potentially allow for self-administration and shipment of materials at room temperature, which makes the platform ideal for rapid response situations.
Summary of Significant Events
Private Mosaic, a Delaware corporation, was formed on March 30, 2020. On July 1, 2020, we signed a License Option Agreement with CWRU, granting us the exclusive right to license technology for a novel platform technology using an immunomodulator platform technology to treat and prevent cancer and infectious diseases in humans and for veterinary use. On August 21, 2020, we closed a Reverse Merger transaction (as discussed below) by and between Patriot Scientific Corporation (now known as Mosaic ImmunoEngineering, Inc.) and Private Mosaic. On November 30, 2020, we filed amended and restated articles of incorporation with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware (“Amended and Restated Certificate”) to change the name of the Company to Mosaic ImmunoEngineering, Inc. (“Name Change”), to implement a 1-for-500 reverse stock split (“Reverse Stock Split”), and to reduce the number of authorized shares of common stock from 600 million to 100 million. The Reverse Stock Split was effective on December 2, 2020. All share numbers and preferred stock conversion numbers included herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the 1-for-500 Reverse Stock Split. On December 30, 2020, we changed our fiscal year end from May 31 to December 31. On May 7, 2021, we issued unsecured convertible promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $575,000.
In addition, we plan to file an application with The Nasdaq Stock Market requesting that our common stock and potentially warrants (if applicable), be listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market in 2022. On June 10, 2021 and June 14, 2021, our Board of Directors and majority shareholders, respectively, approved a discretionary reverse stock split whereby our Board of Directors have broad authority to implement a future reverse stock split through June 25, 2022 at a ratio ranging from 1-for-2 to 1-for-4 or any number in between in order to potentially achieve compliance with the initial listing requirements of the Nasdaq Stock Market.
The following discussion represents additional information pertaining to these corporate events:
Reverse Merger
On August 19, 2020, Patriot Scientific Corporation (now known as Mosaic ImmunoEngineering, Inc.) and Private Mosaic entered into a stock purchase agreement (“Stock Purchase Agreement”), whereby one of the wholly owned subsidiaries of Patriot Scientific Corporation merged with and into Private Mosaic, with Private Mosaic surviving as wholly owned subsidiary of Patriot Scientific Corporation (the “Reverse Merger”). The transaction closed on August 21, 2020 (“Closing Date”) in accordance with the terms of the Stock Purchase Agreement.
On the Closing Date, Patriot Scientific Corporation acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding common stock of Private Mosaic, representing 630,000 shares of its Class A common stock (“Class A Stock”) and 70,000 shares of its Class B common stock (“Class B Stock”) (collectively referred to as “Target Common Stock”). In exchange for the Target Common Stock, the holders of the Class A Stock received 630,000 shares of the Company’s Series A Convertible Voting Preferred Stock (“Series A Preferred”) and holders of the Class B Stock received 70,000 shares of the Company’s Series B Convertible Voting Preferred Stock (“Series B Preferred”). Each share of Series A Preferred converted into 10.194106 shares of common stock as defined in the Series A Certificate of Designation. Each share of Series B Preferred converts into 11.46837 shares of common stock of the Company, possesses full voting rights, on an as-converted basis, as the common stock of the Company and contains certain anti-dilution rights, as defined in the Series B Certificate of Designation. On a fully diluted, as converted basis, the holders of Series A Preferred and Series B Preferred, in aggregate, owned 90% of the issued and outstanding common stock of the Company as of the Closing Date.
The Reverse Merger was treated by the Company as a reverse merger in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). For accounting purposes, Private Mosaic is considered to have acquired PTSC as the accounting acquirer because: (i) Private Mosaic stockholders owned 90% of the combined company, on an as-converted basis, immediately following the Closing Date, (ii) Private Mosaic directors held a majority of board seats in the combined company and (iii) Private Mosaic management held all key positions in the management of the combined company. Accordingly, Private Mosaic’s historical results of operations replaced PTSC’s historical results of operations for all periods prior to the Closing Date of the Reverse Merger and, for all periods following the Closing Date of the Reverse Merger, the results of operations of the combined company are included in the Company’s financial statements.
Name Change
On November 30, 2020, Patriot Scientific Corporation changed its name to Mosaic ImmunoEngineering, Inc. to align the Company’s corporate name with its new strategic direction, upon filing its Amended and Restated Certificate.
Reverse Stock Split
On October 21, 2020 and October 22, 2020, our Board of Directors and majority shareholders, respectively, approved the Reverse Stock Split of one (1) share of our common stock for every 500 shares of our common stock (“1-for-500”). On November 30, 2020, we filed the Amended and Restated Certificate to effect a Reverse Stock Split on December 2, 2020, whereby every 500 shares of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock were combined into one share of its common stock, except to the extent that the Reverse Stock Split resulted in any of the Company’s stockholders owning a fractional share, which was rounded up to the next highest whole share. In connection with the Reverse Stock Split, there was no change in the par value per share of $0.00001.
Change in Fiscal Year
On December 30, 2020, the Board approved a change to our fiscal year end from May 31 to December 31. The change in fiscal year was effective for the Company’s 2020 fiscal year.
License Option Agreement
On July 1, 2020, we signed a License Option Agreement with CWRU, granting us the exclusive right to license technology for a novel platform technology using an immunomodulator platform technology to treat and prevent cancer and infectious diseases in humans and for veterinary use. Under the License Option Agreement, CWRU granted us an exclusive option for a period of two (2) years to negotiate and enter into a license agreement with CWRU, provided that we meet certain diligence milestones, including but not limited to, (i) delivering a development plan within 18 months, (ii) raising $3 million in either equity, debt, or grant funding, or a combination thereof within 18 months, (iii), generating sufficient preclinical data to support the identification of the initial field of use to support the initial planned clinical indication for the technology, (iv) determining manufacturing processes and cGMP requirements to manufacture the initial product for use in toxicology studies, and (v) identifying required toxicology studies required to support Phase I clinical trials in the initial field of use. We are currently in negotiations on the final license agreement with CWRU and since July 2020, we have incurred in excess of $4 million towards advancing the Company and the underlying technology and we currently believe we have met the aforementioned development milestones.
Under the License Option Agreement, we issued CWRU 70,000 shares of Series B Preferred under the Reverse Merger, which included certain anti-dilution rights. Pursuant to the Certificate of Designation, the Series B Preferred holder will continue to maintain ownership equal to 10% of the fully diluted shares of common stock outstanding of the Company, including for such purposes all other convertible securities outstanding and reserved for issuance except stock options issued and outstanding and reserved for issuance under a Board approved employee stock option plans reserving for issuance no more than ten percent (10%) of the outstanding common stock of the Company then outstanding, until we initially raise at least $1 million from the sale of either preferred or common stock, or a combination thereof (“Capital Threshold”). In addition, pursuant to the License Option Agreement, net working capital acquired under the Reverse Merger of approximately $374,000 was applied against the Capital Threshold. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining Capital Threshold was approximately $626,000.
Convertible Notes
On May 7, 2021 (“Effective Date”), we issued unsecured convertible promissory notes (“Convertible Notes”) in the aggregate principal amount of $575,000 to five (5) accredited investors, including three members of our Board of Directors that participated on the same terms as other accredited investors (collectively, the “Investors”) in exchange for $525,003 in gross proceeds in addition to $49,997 in accrued payable to founder that was invested in Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes have no stated maturity date; bear interest at a simple rate equal to eight percent (8.0%) per annum until converted; and automatically convert into the same equity securities issued for cash in the Qualified Financing (as described below), or at the option of the Investors, into the same equity securities issued for cash in a Smaller Financing (as described below). Interest on the Convertible Notes will be accreted and added to the unpaid principal balance prior to conversion.
The Convertible Notes will convert into the same equity securities offered in the Qualified Financing or Smaller Financing (“Conversion Shares”), as described below, at a conversion price equal to the lower of (i) the product equal to 80% times the lowest per unit purchase price of the equity securities issued for cash in the Qualified Financing or Smaller Financing, or (ii) $2.377 (“Conversion Price”). The Conversion Price may be reduced or increased proportionately as a result of stock splits, stock dividends, recapitalizations, reorganizations, and similar transactions. Upon any conversion of the Convertible Notes in connection with a Qualified Financing or a Smaller Financing, as applicable, the Convertible Notes shall convert immediately prior to the closing thereof, such that the investors paying cash in such Qualified Financing or Smaller Financing, as applicable, are not diluted by the conversion of the Convertible Notes.
Pursuant to the Note Agreement, a Qualified Financing represents a single transaction or series or transactions whereby the Company receives aggregate gross proceeds of at least $5 million from the sale of equity securities following the Effective Date (excluding proceeds from the issuance of any future Convertible Notes). A Smaller Financing represents any sale of equity securities whereby the aggregate gross proceeds are less than $5 million (excluding proceeds from the issuance of any future Convertible Notes).
In addition, in the event of a corporate transaction covering the sale of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets, or merger or consolidation with or into another entity, or change in ownership of at least 50% in voting securities of the Company, the holder of the Convertible Note may elect that either: (a) the Company pay the holder of such Convertible Note an amount equal to the sum of (i) all accrued and unpaid interest due on such Convertible Note and (ii) one and one-half (1.5) times the outstanding principal balance of such Convertible Note; or (b) such Convertible Note will convert into that number of conversion shares equal to the quotient obtained by dividing (i) the outstanding principal balance and unpaid accrued interest of such Convertible Note on the date of conversion by (ii) $2.377.
Discretionary Authority to Implement a Reverse Stock Split at a Ratio of 1:2 to 1:4 (“Discretionary Reverse Stock Split”)
We plan to file an application with The Nasdaq Stock Market requesting that our common stock and potentially warrants (if applicable), be listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market in 2022. On June 10, 2021 and June 14, 2021, our Board of Directors and majority shareholders, respectively, approved a Discretionary Reverse Stock Split whereby our Board of Directors have broad authority to implement a future reverse stock split through June 25, 2022 at a ratio ranging from 1-for-2 to 1-for-4 in order to meet the Nasdaq Stock Market initial listing requirements. The Board maintains the right to elect not to proceed with the Discretionary Reverse Stock Split if it determines, in its sole discretion, that the Company will be able to satisfy the initial listing requirements of the Nasdaq Stock Market without implementing the Discretionary Reverse Stock Split or if it is otherwise no longer in the best interests of the Company. However, the effect of a Discretionary Reverse Stock Split on the market price of the common stock cannot be predicted with any certainty, and the history of similar stock split combinations for companies in like circumstances is varied. It is possible that the per share price of the common stock after the Discretionary Reverse Stock Split will not rise in proportion to the reduction in the number of shares of the common stock outstanding resulting from the Discretionary Reverse Stock Split, effectively reducing our market capitalization, and there can be no assurance that the market price per post-reverse split share will either exceed or remain in excess of the prescribed initial listing minimum bid price for a sustained period of time. The market price of our common stock may vary based on other factors that are unrelated to the number of shares outstanding, including the Company’s future performance.
PLEASE NOTE THAT UNLESS SPECIFICALLY INDICATED TO THE CONTRARY, THE DATA CONTAINED IN THIS ANNUAL REPORT ON FORM 10-K, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO SHARE NUMBERS AND CONVERSION PRICES, DOES NOT REFLECT THE IMPACT OF THE DISCRETIONARY REVERSE STOCK SPLIT THAT MAY BE EFFECTUATED.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which require us to make estimates and judgments that significantly affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences could affect the results of operations reported in future periods. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
1. Investment in Affiliated Company
We currently own 2,100,000 shares of preferred stock, representing approximately a 46% ownership interest, on an as-converted basis, in Holocom, Inc. (“Holocom”), a California corporation that manufactures products that protect information transmitted over secure networks. The shares are convertible at our option into shares of Holocom’s common stock on a one-to-one basis. The preferred stock entitles us to receive non-cumulative dividends at the per annum rate of $0.04 per share, when and if declared by the Board of Directors of Holocom, as well as a liquidation preference of $0.40 per share, plus an amount equal to all declared but unpaid dividends. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our investment in Holocom was valued at $0 based on various indicators of impairment, including Holocom’s inability to meet its business plan and raise sufficient capital, in addition to the general economic environment.
2. Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Anti-Dilution Issuance Rights Derivative Liability
Pursuant to the Series B Preferred Certificate of Designation, the Series B Preferred includes certain anti-dilution issuance rights, whereby the holder will continue to maintain equity ownership equal to 10% of the fully diluted shares of common stock outstanding, calculated on an as converted basis, including all other convertible securities outstanding and reserved for issuance (and excluding stock options issued and outstanding and reserved for issuance under a Board approved employee stock option plan reserving for issuance no more than ten percent (10%) of the outstanding common stock of the Company) until we raise approximately $626,000 from the sale of common or preferred stock, or a combination thereof.
To determine the estimated fair value of the anti-dilution issuance rights liability, the Company used a Monte Carlo simulation methodology, which models the future movement of stock prices based on several key variables. At December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020, and August 21, 2020 (at inception), the estimated fair value of the anti-dilution issuance rights was $104,300, $83,500, and $83,500, respectively. We initially recorded the fair value as a derivative liability with a corresponding charge to research and development expense and we will mark-to-market at each reporting period, with changes in fair value recognized in other income (expense) in the consolidated statement of operations at each period-end while this derivative instrument is outstanding.
The primary inputs used in valuing the anti-dilution issuance rights liability at December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020, and at August 21, 2020 (at inception), were as follows:
The fair value of the common stock was determined by management with the assistance of an independent third-party specialist. The computation of expected volatility was estimated using available information about the historical volatility of stocks of similar publicly traded companies for a period matching the expected term assumption. In addition, the Company incorporated the estimated number of shares, timing, and probability of future equity financings in the calculation of the anti-dilution issuance rights liability.
3. Convertible Notes
The Company follows ASC 480-10, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” in its evaluation of the accounting for share-settled debt (Convertible Notes). ASC 480-10-25-14 requires liability accounting for certain financial instruments, including shares that embody an unconditional obligation to transfer a variable number of shares, provided that the monetary value of the obligation is based solely or predominantly on one of the following three characteristics:
a) A fixed monetary amount known at inception;
b) Variations in something other than the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares; or
c) Variations in the fair value of the issuer’s equity shares, but the monetary value to the counterparty moves in the opposite direction as the value of the issuer’s shares.
Moreover, equity classification was not an appropriate classification for the convertible notes because the underlying terms of the convertible notes do not expose the investors to risks and rewards similar to those of an owner and, therefore, do not create a shareholder relationship. Pursuant to ASC 835-30, the convertible notes were initially recorded at their amortized cost and are being accreted to their redemption value over the estimated conversion period using the effective interest method.
4. Income Taxes
We follow authoritative guidance in accounting for uncertainties in income taxes. This authoritative guidance prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement requirement for the financial statement recognition of a tax position that has been taken or is expected to be taken on a tax return and also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. Under this guidance, we may only recognize tax positions that meet a “more likely than not” threshold.
We follow authoritative guidance to evaluate whether a valuation allowance should be established against our deferred tax assets based on the consideration of all available evidence using a “more likely than not” standard. In making such judgments, significant weight is given to evidence that can be objectively verified. We assess our deferred tax assets annually under more likely than not scenarios in which they may be realized through future income.
In addition, utilization of our net operating loss carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation due to ownership change limitations that may have occurred as a result of the Reverse Merger, or that could occur in the future, as required by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). These ownership changes may limit the amount of the net operating loss carry forwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively. In general, an “ownership change” as defined by Section 382 of the Code results from a transaction or series of transactions over a three-year period resulting in an ownership change of more than 50 percentage points of the outstanding stock of a Company by certain stockholders. Moreover, since we will need to raise substantial additional funding to finance our operations, we may undergo further ownership changes in the future, which could further limit our ability to use net operating loss carryforwards. As a result, if we generate taxable income, our ability to use some of our net operating loss carryforwards to offset U.S. federal taxable income may be subject to limitations, which could result in increased future tax liability to us.
With the exception of refundable income taxes, we have determined that it was more likely than not that all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized in the future due to our continuing pre-tax and taxable losses in addition to the potential loss of deferred tax assets as a result of the change in control (see Note 1 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements). As a result of this determination, and with the exception for the aforementioned refundable income taxes, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Private Mosaic, the accounting acquirer in the Reverse Merger, was incorporated on March 30, 2020 (date of inception). Therefore, Private Mosaic’s historical results of operations replaced PTSC’s historical results of operations for all periods prior to the Closing Date of the Reverse Merger and, for all periods following the Closing Date of the Reverse Merger, the results of operations of the combined company are included in the Company’s financial statements.
In addition, on December 30, 2020, we changed our fiscal year end from May 31st to December 31st effective for the period ended December 31, 2020. Therefore, the prior year financial information covers the periods from June 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and from March 30, 2020 (date of inception) to May 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 and Prior Year Periods from June 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and from March 30, 2020 (date of inception) to May 31, 2020:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses of approximately $1,456,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 are primarily related to salaries and related costs for personnel in research and development functions and related consulting fees associated with advancing the platform technologies, including approximately $499,000 in share-based compensation expense. We believe our research and development expenses will increase significantly over time as we raise sufficient capital to advance our programs.
Research and development expenses of approximately $343,000 for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 are related to (i) salaries and related costs for personnel in research and development functions and related consulting fees associated with advancing the platform technologies of approximately $259,000 and (ii) the recognition of the fair market value of the Class B common stock issued under the License Option Agreement and the fair market value of the anti-dilution issuance rights issued to the holder of the Series B Preferred in the amount of approximately $84,000. The estimated fair value of the anti-dilution issuance rights liability was based on a Monte Carlo simulation methodology, which models the future movement of stock prices based on several key variables. Pursuant to the License Option Agreement, we receive rights to materials and research information to evaluate the technology for a period of two years with an option to license the technology, provided we achieve certain research and development milestones and financial milestones, as defined in the agreement (see Note 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
There were no research and development expenses for the period from March 30, 2020 (date of inception) to May 31, 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses of approximately $2,045,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel and consultants in executive and administrative functions of approximately $1,740,000, including approximately $809,000 in share-based compensation expense, fees for outside legal counsel of approximately $23,000, fees related to intellectual property rights of approximately $70,000, audit, tax, accounting and filing fees of approximately $88,000, director and officer insurance of approximately $52,000, investor and public relation fees of approximately $54,000, and other fees and expenses of approximately $18,000. We believe our general and administrative expenses will increase over time as we hire new employees to support key administrative functions and the planned expansion of research and development personnel.
General and administrative expenses of approximately $493,000 for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 consist principally of salaries and related costs for personnel and consultants in executive and administrative functions of approximately $347,000, fees for outside legal counsel of approximately $52,000, fees related to intellectual property rights of approximately $17,000, audit and accounting related fees of approximately $42,000, director and officer insurance of approximately $21,000, and other fees and expenses of approximately $14,000.
General and administrative expenses of $511 for the period from March 30, 2020 (date of inception) to May 31, 2020 are primarily related to corporate formation costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in Valuation of Derivative Liability
The change in valuation of the derivative liability of approximately $21,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 pertains to an increase in the estimated fair value of the anti-dilution issuance rights provided under the Series B Preferred (see Notes 3 and 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Interest Expense and Accretion to Redemption Value on Convertible Notes
Non-cash interest expense of approximately $30,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 represents interest expense on convertible notes (see Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Accretion to redemption value on convertible notes of approximately $130,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 pertains to the accretion of the convertible notes to their redemption value of $718,750 based on the underlying terms of the convertible notes (see Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Equity in Loss of Affiliated Company
Equity in loss of affiliated company of approximately $5,000 for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 primarily represents expenses associated with winding up and dissolving Phoenix Digital Solutions LLC. The Company has determined that the underlying patents were no longer enforceable and therefore, deemed it to be in the best interest of shareholders to dissolve Phoenix Digital Solutions LLC and distribute the remaining assets. On September 29, 2020, the managing members of PDS agreed to wind up and dissolve PDS (see Note 4 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 21, 2020, we completed our Reverse Merger with PTSC, which provided us $605,215 in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. During May 2021, we raised $575,000 from the issuance of convertible notes, which included $49,997 of accrued payable to founder that was invested in convertible notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $226,142. Our ability to continue our operations is highly dependent on our ability to raise capital to fund future operations. We anticipate, based on currently proposed plans and assumptions that our cash on hand will not satisfy our operational and capital requirements through twelve months from the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our primary uses of capital to date are primarily related to payroll, consulting and related costs, corporate formation and ongoing public company expenses, fees associated with license agreements, including patent related expenses, and costs of the Reverse Merger. On a go forward basis, we will need significant additional capital to support our research and development efforts, compensation and related expenses, and hiring additional staff (including clinical, scientific, operational, financial, and management personnel). We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future for the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates, provided we are able to raise sufficient capital to advance our technologies.
We plan to continue to fund losses from operations and future funding needs through our cash on hand and future equity and/or debt offerings, as well as potential collaborations or strategic partnerships with other companies.
There are a number of uncertainties associated with our ability to raise additional capital and we have no current arrangements with respect to any additional financing. In addition, the continuation of disruptions caused by COVID-19 may cause investors to slow down or delay their decision to deploy capital based on volatile market conditions which will adversely impact our ability to fund future operations. Consequently, there can be no assurance that any additional financing on commercially reasonable terms, or at all, will be available when needed. The inability to obtain additional capital will delay our ability to conduct our business operations. Any additional equity financing may involve substantial dilution to our then existing stockholders. The above matters raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table provides a summary of our net cash flow activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the prior year periods from June 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and from March 30, 2020 (date of inception) to May 31, 2020:
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of our net loss of $3,684,478 offset by (i) share-based compensation expense of $1,308,008, (ii) non-cash interest on convertible notes of $30,121, (iii) accretion to redemption value on convertible notes of $130,027, (iv) an increase in the fair value of the derivative liability of $20,800, (v) and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1,516,286 primarily due to an increase in accrued compensation of $997,866 and an increase in accrued expenses and other of $456,846.
Net cash used in operating activities for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 consisted of our net loss of $842,243, offset by non-cash items consisting of (i) share-based compensation expense of $45,708, (ii) equity in loss of affiliated company of $5,102, (iii) the fair value of common stock issued under the License Option Agreement of $7, and (iv) the fair value of derivative liability associated with anti-dilution issuance rights of $83,500. Additionally, cash used in operating activities for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 was supplemented with a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $454,886 primarily due to an increase in accrued compensation of $393,431 and an increase in accrued expenses and other of $88,128.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the period March 30, 2020 (date of inception) to May 31, 2020 consisted of our net loss of $511 offset by an increase in amounts payable to founders of $1,011.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of net proceeds received of $27,637 from the dissolution of Phoenix Digital Solutions LLC (“PDS”), representing our 50% interest in PDS.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 consisted of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash acquired in the Reverse Merger of $605,215.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of net proceeds received from the issuance of convertible notes of $525,003, which amount excludes $49,997 that was payable to one of our co-founders as of December 31, 2020 and invested in the convertible notes in May 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the seven months ended December 31, 2020 represents the proceeds received from the founders of Private Mosaic from the issuance of Class A Common Stock.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a detailed description of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report and begin on page with the index to consolidated financial statements.