ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis presents management’s view of our business, financial condition and overall performance and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. This information is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our past performance, current financial condition and outlook for the future. Discussion of 2019 items and variance drivers between the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 are not included herein, and can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Our discussion and analysis includes the following subjects:
•Overview
•Overview of Significant Events
•Market Environment
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
•Recent Accounting Standards
Overview
We are a limited partnership formed by Cheniere to provide clean, secure and affordable LNG to integrated energy companies, utilities and energy trading companies around the world. We operate a natural gas liquefaction and export facility at Sabine Pass, Louisiana (the “Sabine Pass LNG terminal”) with six operational natural gas liquefaction Trains, regasification facilities and a pipeline that interconnects the Sabine Pass LNG terminal with a number of large interstate natural gas pipelines (collectively, the “Liquefaction Project”). For further discussion of our business, see Items 1. and 2. Business and Properties.
Our long-term customer arrangements form the foundation of our business and provide us with significant, stable, long-term cash flows. We have contracted approximately 75% of the total production capacity from the Liquefaction Project with approximately 16 years of weighted average remaining life as of December 31, 2021. Our contracts are fixed-priced, long-term SPAs consisting of a fixed fee per MMBtu of LNG plus a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG, with the variable fees generally structured to cover the cost of natural gas purchases and transportation and liquefaction fuel to produce LNG, thus limiting our exposure to fluctuations in U.S. natural gas prices. We believe that continued global demand for natural gas and LNG, as further described in Items 1. and 2. Business and Properties-Market Factors and Competition, will provide a foundation for additional growth in our business in the future.
Overview of Significant Events
Our significant events since January 1, 2021 and through the filing date of this Form 10-K include the following:
Strategic
•In February 2022, Cheniere Marketing entered into agreements to novate to SPL SPAs entered into with ENN LNG (Singapore) Pte Ltd. and a subsidiary of Glencore plc, aggregating approximately 21 million tonnes of LNG to be delivered between 2023 and 2035, in connection with a prior commitment by Cheniere to collateralize financing for Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project.
Operational
•As of February 18, 2022, over 1,550 cumulative LNG cargoes totaling approximately 110 million tonnes of LNG have been produced, loaded and exported from the Liquefaction Project.
•On February 4, 2022, substantial completion of Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project was achieved.
Financial
•In February 2022, we announced the initiation of quarterly distributions to be comprised of a base amount plus a variable amount, which are expected to begin with the distribution related to the first quarter of 2022. It is anticipated that the quarterly distribution with respect to the first quarter of 2022 will be comprised of a base amount equal to $0.775 ($3.10 annualized), and a variable amount equal to the remaining available cash per unit, which will take into consideration, among other things, amounts reserved for annual debt repayment and capital allocation goals, anticipated capital expenditures to be funded with cash, and cash reserves to provide for the proper conduct of the business.
•We completed the following debt transactions:
◦In December 2021, SPL issued Senior Secured Notes due 2037 on a private placement basis for an aggregate principal amount of approximately $482 million (the “2037 SPL Private Placement Senior Secured Notes”). The 2037 SPL Private Placement Senior Secured Notes are fully amortizing, with a weighted average life of over 10 years and a weighted average interest rate of 3.07%.
◦In September 2021, we issued an aggregate principal amount of $1.2 billion of 3.25% Senior Notes due 2032 (the “2032 CQP Senior Notes”).
◦The proceeds, net of related fees, costs and expenses (“net proceeds”) of the 2032 CQP Senior Notes were used to redeem a portion of the outstanding $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of the 5.625% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2026 CQP Senior Notes”). The remaining net proceeds of the 2032 CQP Senior Notes, along with the net proceeds of the 2037 SPL Private Placement Senior Secured Notes and cash on hand, were used to redeem the outstanding $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the 6.25% Senior Secured Notes due 2022 (the “2022 SPL Senior Notes”).
◦In March 2021, we issued an aggregate principal amount of approximately $1.5 billion of 4.000% Senior Notes due 2031 (the “2031 CQP Senior Notes”). The net proceeds of the 2031 CQP Senior Notes, along with cash on hand, were used to redeem the 5.250% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 CQP Senior Notes”).
•In April 2021, S&P Global Ratings changed the outlook on our ratings to positive from negative, and in February 2022, upgraded our issuer credit rating from BB to BB+.
•In February 2021, Fitch Ratings (“Fitch”) changed the outlook of SPL’s senior secured notes rating to positive from stable and the outlook of our long-term issuer default rating and senior unsecured notes rating to positive from stable.
Market Environment
The LNG market in 2021 saw unprecedented price increases across all natural gas and LNG benchmarks. Colder than normal temperatures early in the year, concerns over low natural gas and LNG inventories, low additional LNG supply availability and forecasts of a cold 2021/2022 winter in Europe and Asia increased price volatility and supported a run-up in natural gas and LNG prices. These conditions were exacerbated by rising coal and carbon prices in Europe, persistent under-performance from some non-US LNG supply projects and reduced Russian pipe exports to Europe, precipitating the early stages of a price-based energy crisis in Europe.
High demand for LNG during the recovery from the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in intense competition for supplies between the Atlantic and Pacific basins. Global LNG demand grew by about approximately 5% from the comparable 2020 period, adding an additional 18 mtpa to the overall market. A robust economic recovery in China powered an 8% increase in Asia’s LNG demand of approximately 19.5 million tonnes from the comparable 2020 period. This led to competition for supplies between Asia, Europe and Latin America, exposing the supply constraints that the industry has had while emerging from the pandemic. In turn, this drove international natural gas and LNG prices higher and widened the price spreads between the U.S. and other parts of the world. As an example, the Dutch Title Transfer Facility (“TTF”) monthly
settlement prices averaged $14.4/MMBtu in 2021, approximately 375% higher than the $3.0/MMBtu average in 2020, and the TTF monthly settlement prices averaged $28.9/MMBtu in the fourth quarter of 2021, approximately 512% higher than the $4.72/MMBtu average in the fourth quarter of 2020. Similarly, the 2021 average settlement price for the Japan Korea Marker (“JKM”) increased 292% year-over-year to an average of $15.0/MMBtu in 2021, and the fourth quarter of 2021 average settlement price for the JKM increased over 412% year-over-year to an average of $27.9/MMBtu. This extreme price increase triggered a strong supply response from the U.S., which played a significant role in balancing the global LNG market. The U.S. exported 70 million tonnes of LNG, a gain of approximately 49% from the comparable 2020 period, as the market continued to pull on supplies from our facilities and those of our competitors. Exports from our Liquefaction Project reached 25 million tonnes, representing over 35% of the gain in the U.S. total over the same period.
Results of Operations
The following charts summarize the total revenues and total LNG volumes loaded from our Liquefaction Project (including both operational and commissioning volumes) during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) The years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 excludes eight TBtu and 17 TBtu, respectively, that were loaded at our affiliate’s facility.
Net income
Net income increased by $447 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the comparable period in 2020, primarily as a result of increased margin on LNG delivered as a result of increases in both volume delivered and gross margin on LNG delivered per MMBtu, partially offset by non-recurrence of revenues recognized on LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery.
We enter into derivative instruments to manage our exposure to commodity-related marketing and price risk. Derivative instruments are reported at fair value on our Consolidated Financial Statements. In some cases, the underlying transactions being economically hedged are accounted for under the accrual method of accounting, whereby revenues and expenses are recognized only upon delivery, receipt or realization of the underlying transaction. Because the recognition of derivative instruments at fair value has the effect of recognizing gains or losses relating to future period exposure, and given the significant volumes, long-term duration and volatility in price basis for certain of our derivative contracts, use of derivative
instruments may result in continued volatility of our results of operations based on changes in market pricing, counterparty credit risk and other relevant factors, notwithstanding the operational intent to mitigate risk exposure over time.
Revenues
(1)Excludes volume associated with cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery. The years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include eight TBtu and 17 TBtu, respectively, that were loaded at our affiliate’s facility.
Total revenues increased by approximately $3.3 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, from the comparable period in 2020, primarily due to increased revenues per MMBtu as a result of variable fees that are received in addition to fixed fees when customers take delivery of scheduled cargoes as opposed to exercising their contractual right to not take delivery, as well as from increases in Henry Hub prices and higher volumes of LNG delivered between the periods due to the delivery of all available volume of LNG in 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $553 million in LNG revenues associated with LNG cargoes for which customers notified us that they would not take delivery.
Prior to substantial completion of a Train, amounts received from the sale of commissioning cargoes from that Train are offset against LNG terminal construction-in-process, because these amounts are earned or loaded during the testing phase for the construction of that Train. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we realized offsets to LNG terminal costs of $105 million, corresponding to 12 TBtu that were related to the sale of commissioning cargoes from the Liquefaction Project. We did not realize any offsets to LNG terminal costs during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Also included in LNG revenues are sales of certain unutilized natural gas procured for the liquefaction process and gains and losses from derivative instruments, which include the realized value associated with a portion of derivative instruments that settle through physical delivery. We recognized revenues of $173 million and $255 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to these transactions.
We expect the volume of LNG produced and available for sale to increase in the future as Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project achieved substantial completion on February 4, 2022.
Operating costs and expenses
Total operating costs and expenses increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of increased cost of sales. Cost of sales includes costs incurred directly for the production and delivery of LNG from the Liquefaction Project, to the extent those costs are not utilized for the commissioning process. Cost of sales increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the comparable period in 2020 primarily due to the increase in pricing of natural gas feedstock as a result of higher US natural gas prices and increased volume of LNG delivered, partially offset by a decrease in net costs associated with the sale of certain unutilized natural gas procured for the liquefaction process and the increased fair value of commodity derivatives to secure natural gas feedstock for the Liquefaction Project due to favorable shifts in long-term forward prices relative to our hedged position. Cost of sales also includes variable transportation and storage costs and other costs to convert natural gas into LNG.
Other expense
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the comparable period in 2020 primarily due to lower interest costs as a result of refinancing higher cost debt and reduction of outstanding debt during the year, as well as an increase in the portion of total interest costs that is eligible for capitalization due to the continued construction of the remaining assets of the Liquefaction Project. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $963 million and $1,005 million of total interest cost, respectively, of which we capitalized $132 million and $96 million, respectively.
Loss on modification or extinguishment of debt increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 from the comparable period in 2020. The loss on modification of debt recognized in each of the years included the incurrence of fees paid to lenders, third party fees and write off of unamortized debt issuance costs recognized upon the early redemption of our senior notes, as further discussed in Liquidity and Capital Resources-Sources and Uses of Cash-Financing Cash Flows.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following information describes our ability to generate and obtain adequate amounts of cash to meet our requirements in the short term and the long term. In the short term, we expect to meet our cash requirements using operating cash flows and available liquidity, consisting of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and cash equivalents and available commitments under our credit facilities. In the long term, we expect to meet our cash requirements using operating cash flows and other future potential sources of liquidity, which may include debt offerings by us or our subsidiaries and equity offerings by us. The table below provides a summary of our available liquidity as of December 31, 2021 (in millions). Future material sources of liquidity are discussed below.
(1)Available commitments represent total commitments less loans outstanding and letters of credit issued under each of our credit facilities as of December 31, 2021. See Note 11-Debt of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our credit facilities and other debt instruments.
Our liquidity position subsequent to December 31, 2021 is driven by future sources of liquidity and future cash requirements. Future sources of liquidity are expected to be composed of (1) cash receipts from executed contracts, under which we are contractually entitled to future consideration, and (2) additional sources of liquidity, from which we expect to receive cash although the cash is not underpinned by executed contracts. Future cash requirements are expected to be composed of (1) cash payments under executed contracts, under which we are contractually obligated to make payments, and (2) additional cash requirements, under which we expect to make payments although we are not contractually obligated to make the payments under executed contracts. Future sources of liquidity and future cash requirements are estimates based on management’s assumptions and currently known market conditions and other factors as of December 31, 2021.
Although material sources of liquidity and material cash requirements are presented below from a consolidated standpoint, we and our subsidiary SPL operate with independent capital structures. Certain restrictions under debt instruments executed by our subsidiaries limit its ability to distribute cash, including the following:
•SPL is required to deposit all cash received into restricted cash and cash equivalents accounts under certain of their debt agreements. The usage or withdrawal of such cash is restricted to the payment of liabilities related to the Liquefaction Project and other restricted payments. The majority of the cash held by SPL that is restricted to CQP relates to advance funding for operation and construction of the Liquefaction Project; and
•SPL is restricted by affirmative and negative covenants included in certain of its debt agreements in its ability to make certain payments, including distributions, unless specific requirements are satisfied.
Notwithstanding the restrictions noted above, we believe that sufficient flexibility exists to enable each independent capital structure to meet its currently anticipated cash requirements. The sources of liquidity at SPL primarily fund the cash requirements of SPL, and any remaining liquidity not subject to restriction, as supplemented by liquidity provided by SPLNG, is available to enable CQP to meet its cash requirements.
Supplemental Guarantor Information
The $1.5 billion of 4.500% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “2029 CQP Senior Notes”), the 2031 CQP Senior Notes and the 2032 CQP Senior Notes (collectively, the “CQP Senior Notes”), are jointly and severally guaranteed by each of our subsidiaries other than SPL and, subject to certain conditions governing its guarantee, Sabine Pass LP (each a “Guarantor” and collectively, the “CQP Guarantors”).
The CQP Guarantors’ guarantees are full and unconditional, subject to certain release provisions including (1) the sale, disposition or transfer (by merger, consolidation or otherwise) of the capital stock or all or substantially all of the assets of the CQP Guarantors, (2) upon the liquidation or dissolution of a Guarantor, (3) following the release of a Guarantor from its guarantee obligations and (4) upon the legal defeasance or satisfaction and discharge of obligations under the indenture governing the CQP Senior Notes. In the event of a default in payment of the principal or interest by us, whether at maturity of the CQP Senior Notes or by declaration of acceleration, call for redemption or otherwise, legal proceedings may be instituted against the CQP Guarantors to enforce the guarantee.
The rights of holders of the CQP Senior Notes against the CQP Guarantors may be limited under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or state fraudulent transfer or conveyance law. Each guarantee contains a provision intended to limit the Guarantor’s liability to the maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent conveyance or transfer under U.S. federal or state law. However, there can be no assurance as to what standard a court will apply in making a determination of the maximum liability of the CQP Guarantors. Moreover, this provision may not be effective to protect the guarantee from being voided under fraudulent conveyance laws. There is a possibility that the entire guarantee may be set aside, in which case the entire liability may be extinguished.
The following tables include summarized financial information of CQP (“Parent Issuer”), and the CQP Guarantors (together with the Parent Issuer, the “Obligor Group”) on a combined basis. Investments in and equity in the earnings of SPL and, subject to certain conditions governing its guarantee, Sabine Pass LP (collectively with SPL, the “Non-Guarantors”), which are not currently members of the Obligor Group, have been excluded. Intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Obligor Group have been eliminated. Although the creditors of the Obligor Group have no claim against the Non-Guarantors, the Obligor Group may gain access to the assets of the Non-Guarantors upon bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of the Non-Guarantors due to its investment in these entities. However, such claims to the assets of the Non-Guarantors would be subordinated to the any claims by the Non-Guarantors’ creditors, including trade creditors.
Future Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Future Sources of Liquidity under Executed Contracts
Because many of our sales contracts have long-term durations, we are contractually entitled to significant future consideration under our SPAs and TUAs which has not yet been recognized as revenue. This future consideration is in most cases not yet legally due to us and was not reflected on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021. In addition, a significant portion of this future consideration is subject to variability as discussed more specifically below. We anticipate that this consideration will be available to meet liquidity needs in the future. The following table summarizes our estimate of future material sources of liquidity to be received from executed contracts as of December 31, 2021 (in billions):
(1)Excludes contracts for which conditions precedent have not been met. Agreements in force as of December 31, 2021 that have terms dependent on project milestone dates are based on the estimated dates as of December 31, 2021. The timing of revenue recognition under GAAP may not align with cash receipts, although we do not consider the timing difference to be material. The estimates above reflect management’s assumptions and currently known market conditions and other factors as of December 31, 2021. Estimates are not guarantees of future performance and actual results may differ materially as a result of a variety of factors described in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(2)LNG revenues (including $2.1 billion and $4.0 billion of fixed fees and variable fees, respectively, from affiliates) exclude revenues from contracts with original expected durations of one year or less. Fixed fees are fees that are due to us regardless of whether a customer exercises their contractual right to not take delivery of an LNG cargo under the contract. Variable fees are receivable only in connection with LNG cargoes that are delivered.
(3)LNG revenues (variable fees, including affiliate) reflect the assumption that customers elect to take delivery of all cargoes made available under the contract. LNG revenues (variable fees, including affiliate) are based on estimated forward prices and basis spreads as of December 31, 2021. The pricing structure of our SPA arrangements with our customers incorporates a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG generally equal to 115% of Henry Hub, which is paid upon delivery, thus limiting our net exposure to future increases in natural gas prices. Certain of our contracts contain additional variable consideration based on the outcome of contingent events and the movement of various indexes. We have not included such variable consideration to the extent the consideration is considered constrained due to the uncertainty of ultimate pricing and receipt.
LNG Revenues
We have contracted approximately 75% of the total production capacity from the Liquefaction Project through long-term SPAs, with approximately 16 years of weighted average remaining life as of December 31, 2021. The majority of this contracted capacity is comprised of fixed-price, long-term SPAs that SPL has executed with third parties to sell LNG from
Trains 1 through 6 of the Liquefaction Project. Under the SPAs, the customers purchase LNG on a free on board (“FOB”) basis for a price consisting of a fixed fee per MMBtu of LNG (a portion of which is subject to annual adjustment for inflation) plus a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG generally equal to 115% of Henry Hub. Certain customers may elect to cancel or suspend deliveries of LNG cargoes, with advance notice as governed by each respective SPA, in which case the customers would still be required to pay the fixed fee with respect to the contracted volumes that are not delivered as a result of such cancellation or suspension. The variable fees under our SPAs were generally sized with the intention to cover the costs of gas purchases and variable transportation and liquefaction fuel to produce the LNG to be sold under each such SPA. In aggregate, the annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers is approximately $2.9 billion for Trains 1 through 5 of the Liquefaction Project. After giving effect to an SPA that Cheniere has committed to provide to SPL and upon the date of first commercial delivery of Train 6, the annual fixed fee portion to be paid by the third-party SPA customers is expected to increase to at least $3.3 billion. Our long-term SPA customers consist of creditworthy counterparties, with an average credit rating of A, A2 and A- by S&P Global Ratings, Moody’s Corporation and Fitch Ratings, respectively. A discussion of revenues under our SPAs can be found in Note 13-Revenues from Contracts with Customers of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
In addition to the third party SPAs discussed above, SPL has also executed agreements with Cheniere Marketing to sell: (1) at Cheniere Marketing’s option, any LNG produced by SPL in excess of that required for other customers at a price of 115% of Henry Hub plus $3.00 per MMBtu of LNG and (2) up to 306 cargoes to be delivered between 2022 and 2027 at a weighted average price of $1.95 plus 115% of Henry Hub (included in the table above).
In August 2020, we entered into an arrangement with subsidiaries of Cheniere to provide the ability, in limited circumstances, to potentially fulfill commitments to LNG buyers in the event certain conditions impact operations at either the Sabine Pass or Corpus Christi liquefaction facilities. The purchase price for such cargoes would be (i) 115% of the applicable natural gas feedstock purchase price or (ii) a free-on-board U.S. Gulf Coast LNG market price, whichever is greater.
Regasification Revenues
SPLNG has entered into two long-term, third party TUAs, under which SPLNG’s customers are required to pay fixed monthly fees, whether or not they use the approximately 2 Bcf/d of the regasification capacity they have reserved at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal. TotalEnergies Gas & Power North America, Inc. (“Total”) and Chevron U.S.A. Inc. (“Chevron”) are each obligated to make monthly capacity payments to SPLNG aggregating approximately $125 million annually, prior to inflation adjustments, for 20 years that commenced in 2009. Total S.A. has guaranteed Total’s obligations under its TUA up to $2.5 billion, subject to certain exceptions, and Chevron Corporation has guaranteed Chevron’s obligations under its TUA up to 80% of the fees payable by Chevron.
SPLNG has also entered into a TUA with SPL to reserve the remaining capacity at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal. SPL is obligated to make monthly capacity payments to SPLNG aggregating approximately $250 million annually, prior to inflation adjustments, continuing until at least May 2036. SPL entered into a partial TUA assignment agreement with Total, whereby SPL gained access to substantially all of Total’s capacity and other services provided under Total’s TUA with SPLNG that started in 2019. Notwithstanding any arrangements between Total and SPL, payments required to be made by Total to SPLNG will continue to be made by Total to SPLNG in accordance with its TUA. Payments made by SPL to Total under this partial TUA assignment agreement are included in other purchase obligations in the Future Cash Requirements for Operations and Capital Expenditures under Executed Contracts table below. Full discussion of SPLNG’s revenues under the TUA agreements and the partial TUA assignment can be found in Note 13-Revenues from Contracts with Customers of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Additional Future Sources of Liquidity
Available Commitments under Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.6 billion in available commitments under our credit facilities, subject to compliance with the applicable covenants, to potentially meet liquidity needs. Our credit facilities mature between 2024 and 2025.
Future Cash Requirements for Operations and Capital Expenditures under Executed Contracts
We are committed to make future cash payments for operations and capital expenditures pursuant to certain of our contracts. The following table summarizes our estimate of material cash requirements for operations and capital expenditures under executed contracts as of December 31, 2021 (in billions):
(1)Excludes contracts for which conditions precedent have not been met. Agreements in force as of December 31, 2021 that have terms dependent on project milestone dates are based on the estimated dates as of December 31, 2021. The estimates above reflect management’s assumptions and currently known market conditions and other factors as of December 31, 2021. Estimates are not guarantees of future performance and actual results may differ materially as a result of a variety of factors described in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(2)Purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding that specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased. As project milestones and other conditions precedent are achieved, our obligations are expected to increase accordingly. We include contracts for which we have an early termination option if the option is not currently expected to be exercised.
(3)Pricing of natural gas supply agreements is based on estimated forward prices and basis spreads as of December 31, 2021.
(4)Includes $0.3 billion of purchase obligations to related parties under the natural gas transportation and storage service agreements.
(5)Capital expenditures primarily consist of costs incurred through our EPC contract with Bechtel Oil, Gas and Chemicals, Inc. (“Bechtel”) for the engineering, procurement and construction of Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project, which achieved substantial completion on February 4, 2022, and the third marine berth that is currently under construction.
(6)Other purchase obligations primarily include payments under SPL’s partial TUA assignment agreement with Total, as discussed in Note 13-Revenues from Contracts with Customers of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Includes $0.9 million of purchase obligations to affiliates under service agreements.
(7)Leases include payments under operating leases and forward-starting leases. Certain of our leases also contain variable payments, such as inflation, which are not included above unless the contract terms require the payment of a fixed amount that is unavoidable. Payments during renewal options that are exercisable at our sole discretion are included only to the extent that the option is currently believed to be reasonably certain to be exercised.
Natural Gas Supply, Transportation and Storage Service Agreements
We have secured natural gas feedstock for the Sabine Pass LNG terminal through long-term natural gas supply agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we have secured 86% of the natural gas supply required to support the total forecasted production capacity of the Liquefaction Project during 2022. Natural gas supply secured decreases as a percentage of forecasted production capacity beyond 2022. Natural gas supply is generally secured on an indexed pricing basis, with title transfer occurring upon receipt of the commodity. As further described in the LNG Revenues section above, the pricing structure of our SPA arrangements with our customers incorporates a variable fee per MMBtu of LNG generally equal to 115% of Henry Hub, thus limiting our net exposure to future increases in natural gas prices. Inclusive of amounts under contracts with unsatisfied conditions precedent as of December 31, 2021, we have secured up to 5,102 TBtu of natural gas feedstock through agreements with remaining terms that range up to 10 years. A discussion of our natural gas supply agreements can be found in Note 8-Derivative Instruments of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
To ensure that we are able to transport natural gas feedstock to the Sabine Pass LNG terminal, we have entered into transportation precedent and other agreements to secure firm pipeline transportation capacity from third party pipeline companies. We have also entered into firm storage services agreements with third parties to assist in managing variability in natural gas needs for the Liquefaction Project.
Capital Expenditures
We enter into lump sum turnkey contracts with third party contractors for the EPC of our Liquefaction Project. The historical contracts have been executed with Bechtel, who has charged a lump sum for all work performed and generally bore project cost, schedule and performance risks unless certain specified events occurred, in which case Bechtel caused us to enter into a change order, or we agreed with Bechtel to a change order. The future capital expenditures included in the table above primarily consist of costs incurred under the Bechtel EPC contract for Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project. The total contract price of the EPC contract for Train 6, which achieved substantial completion on February 4, 2022, and the third marine berth that is currently under construction is approximately $2.5 billion.
Leases
We have entered into leases for the use of tug vessels and land sites. A discussion of our lease obligations can be found in Note 12-Leases of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Additional Future Cash Requirements for Operations and Capital Expenditures
Corporate Activities
We rely on our general partner to manage all aspects of the development, construction, operation and maintenance of the Sabine Pass LNG terminal and the Liquefaction Project and to conduct our business. Because our general partner has no employees, it relies on subsidiaries of Cheniere to provide the personnel necessary to allow it to meet its management obligations to us, SPLNG, SPL and CTPL. As of January 31, 2022, Cheniere and its subsidiaries had 1,550 full-time employees, including 513 employees who directly supported the Sabine Pass LNG terminal operations. See Note 14-Related Party Transactions of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the services agreements pursuant to which general and administrative services are provided to us, SPLNG, SPL and CTPL.
Financially Disciplined Growth
Our significant land position at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal provide potential development and investment opportunities for further liquefaction capacity expansion at strategically advantaged locations with proximity to pipeline infrastructure and resources. We expect that any potential future expansion at the Sabine Pass LNG terminal would increase cash requirements to support expanded operations, although expansion could be designed to leverage shared infrastructure to reduce the incremental costs of any potential expansion.
Future Cash Requirements for Financing under Executed Contracts
We are committed to make future cash payments for financing pursuant to certain of our contracts. The following table summarizes our estimate of material cash requirements for financing under executed contracts as of December 31, 2021 (in billions):
(1)The estimates above reflect management’s assumptions and currently known market conditions and other factors as of December 31, 2021. Estimates are not guarantees of future performance and actual results may differ materially as a result of a variety of factors described in this annual report on Form 10-K.
(2)Debt and interest payments are based on the total debt balance, scheduled contractual maturities and fixed or estimated forward interest rates in effect at December 31, 2021. Debt and interest payments do not contemplate repurchases, repayments and retirements that we expect to make prior to contractual maturity. See further discussion in Note 11-Debt of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, our debt complex was comprised of senior notes with an aggregate outstanding principal balance of $17.3 billion and credit facilities with an aggregate outstanding balance of zero. As of December 31, 2021, we and SPL were in compliance with all covenants related to their respective debt agreements. Further discussion of our debt obligations, including the restrictions imposed by these arrangements, can be found in Note 11-Debt of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest
As of December 31, 2021, our senior notes had a weighted average interest rate of 4.86%. Borrowings under our credit facilities are indexed to LIBOR, which is expected to be phased out by 2023. It is currently unclear whether LIBOR will be utilized beyond that date or whether it will be replaced by a particular rate. We intend to continue working with our lenders and counterparties to pursue amendments to our debt agreements that are currently indexed to LIBOR. Undrawn commitments under our credit facilities are subject to commitment fees ranging from 0.20% to 0.49%. Issued letters of credit under our credit facilities are subject to letter of credit fees ranging from 1.50% to 1.625%. We had $395 million of issued letters of credit under our credit facilities as of December 31, 2021.
Additional Future Cash Requirements for Financing
CQP Distribution
Our partnership agreement requires that, within 45 days after the end of each quarter, we distribute all of our available cash (as defined in our partnership agreement). Our available cash is our cash on hand at the end of a quarter less the amount of any reserves established by our general partner. All distributions paid to date have been made from accumulated operating surplus.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table summarizes the sources and uses of our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions). The table presents capital expenditures on a cash basis; therefore, these amounts differ from the amounts of capital expenditures, including accruals, which are referred to elsewhere in this report. Additional discussion of these items follows the table.
Operating Cash Flows
Our operating cash net inflows during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $2,291 million and $1,751 million, respectively. The $540 million increase in operating cash inflows in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily related to cash provided by working capital primarily from payment timing differences and timing of cash receipts from the sale of LNG cargoes.
Investing Cash Flows
Cash outflows for property, plant and equipment were primarily for the construction costs for Train 6 of the Liquefaction Project, which was nearing substantial completion in the fourth quarter of 2021. These costs are capitalized as construction-in-process until achievement of substantial completion.
Financing Cash Flows
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had total debt issuances of $3,182 million, which were comprised of $2,700 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes and aggregate borrowings of $482 million under our credit facilities. The proceeds from these issuances and borrowings, together with cash on hand, were used to redeem $3,600 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into the 2020 SPL Working Capital Facility to replace the previous working capital facility, as well as issued an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion of the 4.500% Senior Secured Notes due 2030 (the “2030 SPL Senior Notes”) that was used to redeem all of SPL’s 5.625% Senior Secured Notes due 2021 (the “2021 SPL Senior Notes”).
Debt Issuances and Related Financing Costs
The following table shows the issuances of debt during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including intra-quarter borrowings (in millions):
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred debt issuance costs and other financing costs of $39 million and $35 million, respectively, related to the debt issuances above and closing of credit facilities during the respective periods.
Debt Redemptions and Repayments and Related Extinguishment Costs
The following table shows the redemptions and repayments of debt during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including intra-quarter repayments (in millions):
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred debt extinguishment costs of $76 million and $39 million, respectively, related to these redemptions and repayments, primarily for the payment of early redemption fees and write off of unamortized issuance costs.
Cash Distributions to Unitholders
Our partnership agreement requires that, within 45 days after the end of each quarter, we distribute all of our available cash (as defined in our partnership agreement). Our available cash is our cash on hand at the end of a quarter less the amount of any reserves established by our general partner. All distributions paid to date have been made from accumulated operating surplus. The following provides a summary of distributions paid by us during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
On January 28, 2022, we declared a $0.700 distribution per common unit and the related distribution to our general partner and incentive distribution right holders that was paid on February 14, 2022 to unitholders of record as of February 7, 2022 for the period from October 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021.
Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. Management evaluates its estimates and related assumptions regularly, including those related to the valuation of derivative instruments. Changes in facts and circumstances or additional information may result in revised estimates, and actual results may differ from these estimates. Management considers the following to be its most critical accounting estimates that involve significant judgment.
Fair Value of Derivative Instruments
All derivative instruments, other than those that satisfy specific exceptions, are recorded at fair value. We record changes in the fair value of our derivative positions through earnings based on the value for which the derivative instrument could be exchanged between willing parties. If market quotes are not available to estimate fair value, management’s best estimate of fair value is based on the quoted market price of derivatives with similar characteristics or determined through industry-standard valuation approaches. Such evaluations may involve significant judgment and the results are based on expected future events or conditions, particularly for those valuations using inputs unobservable in the market as discussed below.
Our derivative instruments consist of financial commodity derivative contracts transacted in an over-the-counter market and physical commodity contracts. Valuation of our financial commodity derivative contracts is determined using observable commodity price curves and other relevant data.
Valuation of our physical commodity derivative contracts, consisting primarily of natural gas supply contracts for the operation of our liquified natural gas facilities is often developed through the use of internal models which incorporate significant unobservable inputs. In instances where observable data is unavailable, consideration is given to the assumptions that market participants would use in valuing the asset or liability. This includes assumptions about market risks, such as future prices of energy units for unobservable periods, liquidity and volatility.
The valuation of certain physical commodity derivatives requires the use of significant unobservable inputs and judgment in estimating underlying forward commodity curves due to periods of unobservability or limited liquidity. Such valuations are more susceptible to variability particularly when markets are volatile. Provided below is the change in unrealized valuation gain (loss) of instruments valued through the use of internal models which incorporate significant unobservable inputs, inclusive of certain LNG term deals, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions). The changes shown are limited to instruments held at the end of each respective period.
The ultimate fair value of our derivative instruments is uncertain, and we believe that it is reasonably possible that a material change in the estimated fair value could occur in the near future, particularly as it relates to commodity prices given the level of volatility in the current year. See