Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly those under “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Corbus Pharmaceuticals Holdings, Inc. (the “Company” or “Corbus”) is focused on the development of immune modulators that will have application in disease states spanning from immuno-oncology to fibrosis. Corbus’ current pipeline includes anti-integrin monoclonal antibodies that block activation of TGFβ and small molecules that activate or inhibit the endocannabinoid system. The company plans to expand its pipeline in immuno-oncology through internal efforts and business development.
The pipeline includes the following programs:
1.Anti-integrin monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that inhibit the activation of TGFβ for the treatment of cancer and fibrosis. CRB-601 is an anti-αvβ8 mAb being developed as a potential treatment for solid tumors in combination with existing therapies, including checkpoint inhibitors. The solid tumor program is scheduled for an IND submission to the FDA in the first half of 2023. CRB-602 is a discovery stage anti-αvβ6/αvβ8 mAb currently being explored in disease indications including oncology and fibrosis.
2.Second generation cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1) inverse agonists designed to treat obesity and related metabolic diseases. In animal models of diet-induced obesity, our compounds induce weight loss both as a monotherapy and in combination with a GLP-1 agonist. The program is progressing through preclinical studies and regulatory pathway evaluation.
3.Lenabasum, a novel, synthetic, oral molecule that selectively activates cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2). We completed a Phase 3 study in dermatomyositis in June 2021 which did not meet its primary endpoint. We expect topline data from the National Institutes of Health-sponsored Phase 2 study of lenabasum in systemic lupus erythematosus by the end of March 2022. The Company does not plan to conduct additional clinical studies for Lenabasum and will seek licensing partners to fund future development.
Financial Operations Overview
We are an immunology company and have not generated any revenues from the sale of products. We have never been profitable and at December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $349.7 million. Our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were approximately $45,640,000 and $111,269,000, respectively.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses to decline in 2022 as compared to 2021 due to the completion of our lenabasum clinical studies and a reduction in personnel. We do not plan to conduct additional clinical studies for lenabasum. While we expect expenses to decline in 2022, we will still incur significant operating losses and accordingly we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include government grants and collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
We expect to continue to incur operating losses for at least the next several years in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•conduct preclinical and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•continue our research and development efforts; and
•manufacture drugs for clinical studies.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments for all assets and liabilities, including those related to stock-based compensation expense. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current economic and industry conditions and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. This forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that full consideration has been given to all relevant circumstances that we may be subject to, and the consolidated financial statements accurately reflect our best estimate of the results of operations, financial position and cash flows for the periods presented.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from awards for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $882,000 and $3,937,000, respectively, and pertains only to the 2018 CFF Award. No revenue from licenses was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We will assess any new agreements we enter into under GAAP, including whether such agreements fall under the scope of such standard. This standard applies to all contracts with customers, except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. Under GAAP, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for contracts with customers, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The five-step model is applied to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue associated with the performance obligation is being recognized as revenue as the research and development services are provided using an input method, according to the costs incurred as related to the research and development activities and the costs expected to be incurred in the future to satisfy the performance obligation. The transfer of control occurs over this time period and, in management’s judgment, is the best measure of progress towards satisfying the performance obligation. The research and development services related to this performance obligation were performed over an approximately three-year period and were completed as of December 31, 2021. Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion. Amounts recognized as revenue, but not yet received or invoiced are generally recognized as contract assets.
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sales of products. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for the marketing of lenabasum or other of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty.
We recognized approximately $882,000 and $3,937,000 of revenue from awards in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Amounts recognized in revenue from awards for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were in connection with our entry on January 26, 2018 into the Cystic Fibrosis Program Related Investment Agreement (“Investment Agreement) with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (“CFF”), a non-profit drug discovery and development corporation, pursuant to which we received a development award for up to $25 million in funding (the “2018 CFF Award”) to support a Phase 2b Clinical Trial (the “Phase 2b Clinical Trial”) of lenabasum in patients with cystic fibrosis of which we received $6.25 million in the first quarter of 2018, $6.25 million in the second quarter of 2018, $5.0 million in the second quarter of 2019, $5.0 million in the third quarter of 2020, and $2.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 upon our achievement of a milestone related to the progress of the Phase 2b Clinical Trial, as set forth in the Investment Agreement. We received the entire $25 million from the CFF and have recorded a total of $25 million in revenue to date. We will not be recognizing revenue in the future from the 2018 CFF award.
Additionally, no revenue from licenses was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses are incurred for the development of our drug candidates and consist primarily of payroll and payments to contract research and development companies. To date, these costs are related to generating pre-clinical data and the cost of manufacturing drug product for clinical trials and conducting clinical trials. These costs are expected to decrease in 2022 as our RESOLVE-1 Study and our Phase 2b Study of lenabasum for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, dermatomyositis, and systemic sclerosis have completed and we have reduced the size of our staff and will not be conducting additional clinical trials for lenabasum.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll, rent and professional services such as accounting and legal services.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily refundable research and development tax credits that were earned on certain research and development expenses we incurred primarily outside of the United States. Other income, net also consists of interest income we earn on interest-bearing accounts, interest expense incurred on our outstanding debt, changes in derivative liabilities, and realized and unrealized foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments for all assets and liabilities, including those related to stock-based compensation expense, accrued research and development expense, and operating lease right of use assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current economic and industry conditions and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. This forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that full consideration has been given to all relevant circumstances that we may be subject to, and the consolidated financial statements accurately reflect our best estimate of the results of operations, financial position and cash flows for the periods presented.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate and accrue expenses, the largest of which are research and development expenses. This process involves: communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost; estimating and accruing expenses in our financial statements as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time; and periodically confirming the accuracy of our estimates with selected service providers and making adjustments, if necessary.
Examples of estimated research and development expenses that we accrue include:
•fees paid to CROs in connection with nonclinical studies;
•fees paid to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of lenabasum for clinical trials;
•fees paid to CRO and research institutions in connection with conducting of clinical studies; and
•professional service fees for consulting and related services.
We base our expense accruals related to clinical studies on our estimates of the services performed pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and clinical research organizations that conduct and manage clinical studies on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors, such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical study milestones. Our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of accrued research and development expenses following each applicable reporting period. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information regarding the status or conduct of our clinical studies and other research activities.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock options are granted with an exercise price at no less than fair market value at the date of the grant. The stock options normally expire ten years from the date of grant. Stock option awards vest upon terms determined by our board of directors.
We recognize compensation costs resulting from the issuance of stock-based awards to employees, members of our Board of directors and consultants. The fair value of each option grant was estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value is amortized as compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. We estimate volatility by analyzing the volatility of the trading price of our common stock. We use historical data, as well as subsequent events occurring prior to the issuance of the consolidated financial statements, to estimate option exercise and employee forfeitures within the valuation model. The expected term of options granted to employees under our stock plans is based on the average of the contractual term (generally 10 years) and the vesting period (generally 48 months). The expected term of options granted under the 2014 Plan, all of which qualify as “plain vanilla” per SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin 107, is based on the average of the 6.25 years. For non-employee options, the expected term is the contractual term. The risk-free rate is based on the yield of a U.S. Treasury security with a term consistent with the option. We estimate the forfeiture rate at the time of grant and revise it, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Forfeitures were estimated based on management’s expectation through industry knowledge and historical data. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and do not anticipate paying dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, we have assumed no dividend yield for purposes of estimating the fair value of our share-based compensation.
The following assumptions were used to estimate the fair value of employee stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
Results of Operations
Comparison of Year Ended 2021 to 2020
Revenue from Awards. We have recognized approximately $882,000 and $3,937,000 of revenue from awards in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue from awards for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $882,000 and $3,937,000, respectively, recognized in accordance with GAAP and pertains only to the 2018 CFF Award. We received an aggregate of $12,500,000 during the year ended December 31, 2018, an additional $5,000,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019, $5,000,000 in the third quarter of 2020, and $2,500,000 in the fourth quarter of 2021 upon our achievement of a milestone related to the progress of the Phase 2b Clinical Trial, as set forth in the Investment Agreement.
We assessed the 2018 CFF Award for accounting under ASC 606. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $36,445,000, a decrease of $61,822,000 over the $98,267,000 recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to lower clinical expenses of approximately $31,860,000, associated with the end of lenabasum clinical studies. There was also a decrease of $12,731,000 in compensation costs, $11,138,000 in manufacturing costs, $2,743,000 in consulting costs, $2,780,000 in toxicology costs, $1,418,000 in analytical testing, and $1,067,000 in data analysis costs. These decreases were offset by an increase of $2,230,000 in license expense from licensing agreements entered into during the second quarter of 2021 and a $380,000 increase to impairment loss due to entering into a sublease agreement in the third quarter of 2021.
During 2018, the Company formed a subsidiary in each of the United Kingdom and Australia and approximately 25% and 44% of research and development expenses recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 respectively was recorded in these entities.
General and Administrative. General and Administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $20,425,000, a decrease of $8,055,000 over the $28,480,000 recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to decreases of approximately $4,226,000 of compensation costs, $1,593,000 of commercial marketing costs, $1,171,000 of consulting costs, and $528,000 of recruiting costs. These decreases are partially offset by an increase in legal costs of $487,000.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net for 2021 was approximately $10,349,000 as compared to approximately $11,541,000 recorded for 2020. The decrease of $1,192,000 in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to a decrease in refundable research and development credits from a foreign tax authority of approximately $910,000 as compared to the prior year. There was also an increase in interest expense of $1,582,000 related to the K2HV security and loan agreement, offset by an increase in net amortization on marketable debt securities of $785,000, and an increase of $914,000 related to the change in fair value of the derivative liability valuation associated with the K2HV loan and security agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have experienced negative cash flows from operations. We have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity-related securities. In addition, the majority of the costs of the SLE clinical trial has been or is expected to be funded by NIH grants, and our phase 2b cystic fibrosis trial was supported by the 2018 CFF Award. At December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit since inception was approximately $349,734,000.
At December 31, 2021, we had total current assets of approximately $100,205,000 and current liabilities of approximately $17,008,000 resulting in working capital of approximately $83,197,000. Of our total cash, cash equivalents, investments, and restricted cash of $98.3 million at December 31, 2021, $75.8 million was held within the United States.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $48,184,000 which includes a net loss of approximately $45,640,000, adjusted for non-cash expenses of approximately $13,153,000, principally related to stock-based compensation expense of $9,480,000, depreciation and amortization expense of $1,000,000, amortization of debt discount of $701,000, and net amortization on premium of investments of $698,000, and approximately $15,696,000 of cash used by net working capital items, principally related to the decreases in accounts payable of $5,956,000 and accrued expenses of $11,912,000. These decreases in working capital were offset by an increase in the contract asset of $1,618,000.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $73,417,000, which was largely to the purchase, net of sale, and maturities of investments.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $60,823,000. On August 7, 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement (the “August 2020 Sale Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may issue and sell, from time to time, through Jefferies, shares of our common stock. As of August 7, 2020, we were authorized to offer and sell up to $150 million of our common stock pursuant to the August 2020 Sale Agreement. We received gross proceeds of $60,681,000, less issuance costs of approximately $1,820,000 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 for sales of our common stock under the August 2020 Sale Agreement. As of December 31, 2021 we have sold 40,937,861 shares of our common stock under the August 2020 Sale Agreement for approximate gross proceeds totaling $82,086,000, less issuance costs incurred of approximately $2,463,000.
Under current SEC regulations, if at any time our public float is less than $75.0 million, and for so long as our public float remains less than $75.0 million, the amount we can raise through primary public offerings of securities in any twelve-month period using shelf registration statements is limited to an aggregate of one-third of our public float, which is referred to as the baby shelf rules. As of December 31, 2021, our calculated public float is below $75.0 million and we will be subject to baby shelf rules for any offerings conducted on our shelf registration statement. As of March 8, 2022, the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates, or the public float, was $71.6 million, which was calculated based on 124,708,567 shares of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates at a price of $0.57 per share, the closing price of our common stock on January 11, 2022. As such, we will be restricted from selling more than $23.9 million of securities pursuant to a shelf registration statement in any twelve-month period, so long as the aggregate market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $75.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we also received proceeds of approximately $945,000 from the issuance of 838,600 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of stock options to purchase common stock. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included proceeds from issuances of notes payable of approximately $984,000, offset by principal payments on notes payable of approximately $927,000 in connection with our loan agreements with financing companies to fund D&O insurance premiums. The terms of the loan that we entered into in November 2020 stipulated equal monthly payments of principal and interest payments of $103,112 over a nine-month period. Interest accrued on this loan at an annual rate of 4.89% and the loan was paid in full in July 2021. In November 2021, the Company entered into a loan agreement with a financing company for $984,375 to finance one of the Company’s insurance policies. The terms of the loan stipulate equal monthly payments of principal and interest payments of $111,041 over a nine-month period. Interest accrues on this loan at an annual rate of 3.64%.
We expect our cash, cash equivalents, and investments of approximately $97.6 million at December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our operating and capital requirements into the first quarter of 2024 based on current planned expenditures.
We will need to raise significant additional capital to continue to fund operations and the discovery and pre-clinical costs for our product candidates. If we are unable to raise sufficient capital in the future, we may be required to undertake cost-cutting measures, including delaying or discontinuing certain clinical activities. We may seek to sell common stock, preferred stock or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding or seek other debt financing. In addition, we may seek to raise cash through collaborative agreements or from government grants. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and certain of those securities may have rights senior to those of our common shares. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights.
The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions, and, more specifically, on the progress of our clinical development programs.
Funding may not be available when needed, at all, or on terms acceptable to us. Lack of necessary funds may require us, among other things, to delay, scale back or eliminate expenses including some or all of our planned clinical trials.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table presents information about our known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021. It does not reflect contractual obligations that may have arisen or may arise after that date. Except for historical facts, the information in this section is forward-looking information.
On February 26, 2019, we amended our lease (“February 2019 Lease Agreement”) pursuant to which an additional 30,023 square feet of office space (“New Premises”) will be leased by us in the same building for an aggregate total of 62,756 square feet of leased office space (“Total Premises”). The February 2019 Lease Agreement constitutes a modification as it extends the original lease term and increases the scope of the lease (additional space provided under the amendment), which requires evaluation of the remeasurement of the lease liability and corresponding right-of-use (“ROU”) asset. Accordingly, we reassessed the classification of the Leased Premises and remeasured the lease liability on the basis of the extended lease term using the 20 additional monthly rent payments and the incremental borrowing rate at the effective date of the modification of 9%. The remeasurement for the modification resulted in an increase to the lease liability and the ROU asset of approximately $855,000. We determined that the New Premises will be treated as a new standalone operating lease under GAAP and recorded a lease liability and a right-of-use asset of approximately $2.7 million for this lease.
Per the terms of the February 2019 Lease Agreement, the landlord agreed to reimburse us for $990,759 of leasehold improvements. The reimbursements are being recognized as a reduction of rent expense over the term of the lease. Additionally, the February 2019 Lease Agreement required a standby irrevocable letter of credit of $369,900, which may be reduced, if we are not in default under the February 2019 Lease Agreement, to $277,425 and $184,950 on the third and fourth anniversary of the commencement date, respectively.
Pursuant to the terms of our non-cancelable lease agreements in effect at December 31, 2021, the following table summarizes our maturities of operating lease liabilities as of December 31, 2021:
On August 26, 2021, we entered into a sublease agreement with a third party to sublease 12,112 square feet of the 30,023 square feet leased under one of our two existing lease agreements. The sublease commenced on October 1, 2021 and ends October 31, 2026. Pursuant to the terms of the sublease agreement, the following table summarizes undiscounted sublease cash inflows:
We may enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for pre-clinical research studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore, we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. As of December 31, 2021, other than our leases in the table above, we had no material Contractual Obligations or Commitments that will affect our future liquidity.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors, other than future royalty payments under development award agreements discussed as follows:
License Agreement with Jenrin
Pursuant to the terms of the Jenrin Agreement, we are obligated to pay potential milestone payments to Jenrin totaling up to $18.4 million for each compound we elect to develop based upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones. In addition, we are obligated to pay Jenrin royalties in the mid, single digits based on net sales of any Licensed Products, as defined in the Jenrin Agreement, subject to specified reductions.
The Jenrin Agreement terminates on a country-by-country basis and product-by-product basis upon the expiration of the royalty term for such product in such country. Each royalty term begins on the date of the first commercial sale of the licensed product in the applicable country and ends on the later of seven years from such first commercial sale or the expiration of the last to expire of the applicable patents in that country. The Jenrin Agreement may be terminated earlier in specified situations, including termination for uncured material breach of the Jenrin Agreement by either party, termination by Jenrin in specified circumstances, termination by Corbus with advance notice and termination upon a party’s insolvency or bankruptcy.
License Agreement with Milky Way
Pursuant to the terms of the Milky Way Agreement, we are obligated to pay potential milestone payments to Milky Way totaling up to $53.0 million based upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones. In addition, we are obligated to pay Milky Way royalties in the lower, single digits based on net sales of any Licensed Products, as defined in the Milky Way Agreement.
The Milky Way Agreement will remain in effect on a Licensed Product-by-License Product and country-by-country basis, until the expiration of the Royalty Term of the Licensed Product in the country. The "Royalty Term" means the period beginning from the First Commercial Sale of the Licensed Product in the country until the expiration of the last-to-expire Valid Claim in any Licensor Patent in the country that Covers the composition of matter of the Licensed product, the manufacture of the Licensed Product in the country, or a method of use of the Licensed Product for an indication for which Regulatory Approval has been obtained in the country. The Milky Way Agreement may be terminated earlier in specified situations, including termination for material breach or termination by Corbus with advance notice.
License Agreement with UCSF
Pursuant to the terms of the UCSF Agreement, we are obligated to pay potential milestone payments to UCSF totaling up to $153.0 million based upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones. In addition, we are obligated to pay UCSF royalties in the lower, single digits based on net sales of any Licensed Products, as defined in the UCSF Agreement.
The UCSF Agreement will remain in effect until the expiration or abandonment of the last of the Patent Rights licensed. The Royalty Term is the duration of Patent Rights in that country covering the applicable Licensed Product or Licensed Services Sold in the country. The UCSF Agreement may be terminated earlier in specified situations, including termination for material breach, termination by Corbus with advance notice and termination upon a party's bankruptcy.