ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
THE FOLLOWING DISCUSSION CONTAINS FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS THAT REFLECT OUR PLANS, ESTIMATES AND BELIEFS. OUR ACTUAL RESULTS COULD DIFFER MATERIALLY FROM THOSE DISCUSSED IN THE FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS. FACTORS THAT COULD CAUSE OR CONTRIBUTE TO SUCH DIFFERENCES INCLUDE THOSE DISCUSSED BELOW AND ELSEWHERE IN THIS ANNUAL REPORT.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This annual report on Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and other Federal securities laws and is subject to the safe-harbor created by such Act and laws. Forward-looking statements may include statements regarding our goals, beliefs, strategies, objectives, plans, including product and technology developments, future financial conditions, results or projections or current expectations These forward-looking statements involve known or unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance, or achievements of the Company to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “potential,” “continue,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions. These statements are based on our current beliefs, expectations, and assumptions and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Although we believe that the expectations reflected-in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this report, and we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise, other than as required by law. In light of these assumptions, risks, and uncertainties, the forward-looking events discussed in this report might not occur and actual results and events may vary significantly from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.
Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company
We are an Emerging Growth Company as defined in Section 2(a)(19) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act. We will continue to be an emerging growth company until: (i) the last day of our fiscal year during which we had total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion; (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the first sale of our common stock pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities Act; (iii) the date on which we have, during the previous 3-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, as defined in Section 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the prior June 30.
As an emerging growth company, we are exempt from:
· Sections 14A(a) and (b) of the Exchange Act, which require companies to hold stockholder advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute compensation.
· The requirement to provide, in any registration statement, periodic report or other reports to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the “Commission” or “SEC”, certain modified executive compensation disclosure under Item 402 of Regulation S-K or selected financial data under Item 301 of Regulation S-K for any period before the earliest audited period presented in our initial registration statement.
· Compliance with new or revised accounting standards until those standards are applicable to private companies;
· The requirement under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, to provide auditor attestation of our internal controls and procedures; and
· Any Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, or “PCAOB”, rules regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or an expanded auditor report, and any other PCAOB rules subsequently adopted unless the Commission determines the new rules are necessary for protecting the public.
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b)(1) of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act.
We are also a smaller reporting company as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. As a smaller reporting company, we are not required to provide selected financial data pursuant to Item 301 of Regulation S-K, nor are we required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. We are also permitted to provide certain modified executive compensation disclosure under Item 402 of Regulation S-K.
Company Overview
Community Redevelopment, Inc. was formed on August 16, 2010, as Crosswind Renewable Energy Corp. an Oklahoma corporation and was formally renamed as Community Redevelopment Inc. on June 24, 2020. We are an emerging growth company as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”). We were established to build upon community assets through real estate, financial services and technology. Our experienced team has dedicated their careers to constructing high-quality mixed-use, multifamily residential, and commercial properties in top metropolitan regions as well as have deep roots in technology and finance industries. Our vision is to integrate our real estate development proprietary business model across multiple verticals in finance, technology, and real estate. This will provide long-term value to investors while staying true to our mission of enhancing communities.
Our focus is to invest primarily in real estate, technology and finance opportunities in the United States. Our board of directors will at all times have oversight and policy-making authority over us, including responsibility for governance, financial controls, compliance and disclosure.
On September 20, 2021, the Company executed a Merger Agreement with Red Hills Capital Advisors, LLC, by which the Company has now acquired a portfolio of membership interests in six commercial, retail, multifamily and mixed-use properties, in revitalized areas in the Washington, DC Metro area. All the properties are both partially occupied and under continued development. As of the year ending December 21, 2021, the Company has filed with the SEC a Registration offering of up to $25 million in shares of common stock.
Community Redevelopment can help impact economic mobility by focusing on partnerships between the public and private sector to generate both business interest and business activity in low-income neighborhoods that have gone unnoticed by the development community at large while repairing and mending relationships in these underserved communities. Our Company intends to work with other real estate developers, as well as local and state government agencies to implement the community’s vision for our projects. We are confident in our ability to deliver community-centric projects because we have built a team that understands the challenges facing underserved communities from living and working in them. Our diverse team is our strength. Towards this goal, on September 20th, 2021, the Company executed a Merger Agreement with Red Hills Capital Advisors, LLC, by which the Company has now acquired a portfolio of membership interests in six commercial, retail, multifamily and mixed-use properties, in revitalized areas in the Washington, DC Metro area. All the properties are both partially occupied and under continued development. Red Hills Capital Advisors LLC which was brought into the company by Garfield Antonio, our President, Director and Board Member as disclosed in our 8-K of July 12th, 2021.
Our Company is graciously endowed with an expert management team that has extensive experience in acquiring, developing, constructing, and managing high-quality multifamily, and retail properties in attractive markets throughout the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern United States. The Company is focused on all aspects of the real estate development cycle including land development, design-build, property operations, and site redevelopment. In addition to the ownership of our operating property portfolio, Community Redevelopment plans to develop and build desirable properties for its own account and through ventures with affiliated and unaffiliated partners.
Community Redevelopment, Inc. is focused on community development in urban and suburban markets and our mission is to integrate our proprietary business model by providing sustainable, long-term value to investors as we strive to provide opportunities to improve neighborhoods with residential, commercial, and industrial development projects while designing architecturally pleasing, clean, energy-efficient communities and commercial structures.
Properties Acquired by the Red Hills Capital Advisors LLC.
As of September 20, 2021, we acquired membership interests in advance in real estate. The Consideration for this transaction on the part of the Company was the issuance of 17,750,000 common shares and 1,000,000 Preferred shares with 1:1 conversion, and 30:1 voting ratio. The stock value of the investment is described below:
Community Redevelopment owns membership interests in multiple properties in the Washington DC metropolitan region, which are comprised of retail, multifamily, and mixed-use development projects. Our acquisition strategy is based on acquiring quality, well-positioned real estate in markets with robust growth and demographics, anchored by strong tenants. The Washington D.C. metropolitan area remains strong as a result of increased government spending. These properties are located in a market that is thriving and generating robust job growth with significant demand for housing.
We anticipate acquiring several properties and expanding into other markets. Community Redevelopment Inc. is currently seeking additional opportunities in the Mid Atlantic, Southeast, and Gulf Coast states markets. Community Redevelopment's acquisition strategy is based on acquiring quality, well-positioned real estate in markets with robust growth and demographics, anchored by strong tenants. Our aim is to approach acquisition and development thoughtfully by developing and constructing high-quality, well-located projects at cost, for its stabilized portfolio or to sell with full market value-added for a profit. The Company also plans to partner with other developers to build or acquire fractional or membership interests in economically viable projects. Community Redevelopment’s business model creates a tremendous advantage in the marketplace while providing long-term value. Our ability to acquire and develop single and multi-family rental properties that can either be held by us or sold to regional and national companies, further strengthens our market standing. We believe our strategy of working with federal, state, and local governments, as well as community leaders and other developers in our principal geographic areas and our targeted areas for expansion, will provide us with a diverse product portfolio and an opportunity to increase our overall market share and value
Community Redevelopment, Inc. is not an opportunity zone fund or a real estate investment trust. Community Redevelopment, Inc. is a real estate developer offering potential investors an opportunity to participate in the process of investing in real estate projects that could improve the quality of life for residents of low-income neighborhoods, via a publicly traded company. The Company intends to work with other real estate developers, as well as local and state government agencies to complete its projects in these communities.
Community Redevelopment, Inc. operates as a community-oriented real estate redeveloper targeting economic growth and opportunity zones in secondary and tertiary value-added markets. The Company is primarily focused on opportunity zones in an effort to bring commerce and affordable housing to underserved areas. Community Redevelopment plans to provide numerous opportunities to improve low-income neighborhoods for residential, commercial, and industrial opportunities through government incentives, long-term partnerships, and agreements. Our mission is to rebuild depressed, underserved communities, improve the quality of life in those markets, and provide our investors with an opportunity to profit. We intend to accomplish this by focusing on partnerships between the public and private sector to generate both business interest and business activity in low-income neighborhoods that have gone unnoticed by the development community at large while repairing and mending relationships in these underserved communities.
The Company is not a “shell company,” since its filing of its Form 10 with the SEC on January 19, 2021. merger with Red Hills Capital Advisors in September, as it has formal operations, emplaced Board, an Audit Committee and actively pursuing several current projects, despite having no significant cash on hand since the change in control of July 6th, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $1,084,486 in cash. The Company intends to comply with the periodic reporting requirements of the Exchange Act for so long as it is subject to those requirements.
The Company’s current management believes the advantages of being a publicly held corporation will enable it to project further and faster growth during this market downturn. The Company’s principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through community-private partnerships within different US jurisdictions.
During the remainder of the fiscal year and beyond such time, we anticipate incurring costs related to the filing of Exchange Act reports, and investigating, analyzing, and consummating further local partnerships. We believe we will be able to meet these costs through the use of funds to be loaned by or invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors. Our management and stockholders have indicated their intent to advance funds on behalf of the Company as needed in order to accomplish its business plan and comply with its Exchange Act reporting requirements; however, there are no agreements in effect between the Company and our management and stockholders specifically requiring that they provide any funds to the Company. As a result, there are no assurances that such funds will be advanced or that the Company will be able to secure any additional funding as needed.
While the Company has limited assets and no revenues to date, the Company has an exceptionally experienced management in finance, politics, and business and has unrestricted flexibility in seeking, analyzing and participating in potential urban renewal opportunities in the area of community redevelopment. In its efforts to analyze potential ventures, the Company will consider the following kinds of factors:
(a) potential for growth, indicated by local need and assigned local, state or federal funding and incentives towards urban renewal in that given locale.
(b) competitive position as compared to other firms of similar size and experience within the industry segment as well as within the industry as a whole.
(c) strength and diversity of current management.
(d) capital requirements and anticipated availability of required funds, to be provided by the Company or from operations, through ventures or similar arrangements, sales of securities, or from other sources.
(e) the extent to which the business opportunity can be advanced; and
In applying the foregoing criteria, not one of which will be definitive, management will attempt to analyze all factors and circumstances and make a determination based upon reasonable investigative measures and available data. Potentially available urban renewal opportunities may occur in many different locales, and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such urban renewal opportunities extremely difficult and complex. Due to the Registrant’s limited capital available for investigation, the Registrant may not discover or adequately evaluate adverse facts about the opportunity to be engaged. In addition, we will be competing against other entities that possess greater financial, technical, and managerial capabilities for identifying and completing new projects.
In evaluating a prospective new project, we will conduct as extensive a due diligence review of potential targets as possible given our dependence upon the ever-changing city, state, and federal funding initiatives for urban redevelopment and our limited financial resources. We expect that our due diligence will encompass, among other things, meetings with the local government officials and inspection of its neighborhoods and infrastructure, as necessary, as well as a review of financial, government statistical data and other information which is made available to us. This due diligence review will be conducted primarily by our management or by unaffiliated third parties we may engage, including but not limited to attorneys, accountants, consultants or other such professionals. The costs associated with hiring third parties as required to complete a new project may be significant and are difficult to determine as such costs may vary depending on a variety of factors, including the locale, amount of time it takes to complete a new project, the location of the project, and the size and complexity of the business of the project. As of the date of this filing, the Company has identified several potential business opportunities. The Company is currently in discussions with several but not limited to developers, real estate owners, property management companies in California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Ohio, and Texas to either acquire, design, and or redevelop properties.
Our limited funds will likely make it difficult to conduct a complete and exhaustive investigation and analysis of a target project at this early stage without bringing on strategic local partners, which is part of our business plan, see infra. As a general rule, it normally requires approximately 3-6 months to carry out due diligence and meeting with local and state officials, and approximately 9-12 months to follow through to completion. The estimated costs for this period and need are anywhere from approximately $750,000 to $1,500,000.
The time and costs required to select and evaluate a target project and to structure and complete a new project cannot presently be ascertained with any degree of certainty. The amount of time it takes to complete a new project, the location of the project, the size and complexity of the project neighborhood, the scope of city, state, and federal regulations, and whether funds may be raised contemporaneously with the transaction are all factors that determine the costs associated with completing a new project transaction. The time and costs required to complete a new project can be estimated once a new project target has been identified. Any costs incurred with respect to the evaluation of a prospective new project that is not ultimately completed will result in a loss to us.
Through information obtained from industry professionals including attorneys, architects, developers, appraisers, accountants, commercial and residential real estate brokers, builders, engineers as well as other consultants with experience in the urban redevelopment sphere, there are literally thousands of new potential projects, and the aim of the management is to filter through these for the most reasonably achievable urban renewal projects.
We are and will continue for the foreseeable future to be, an insignificant participant on the national level of public-private urban renewal.
Nearly all similar companies have significantly greater financial resources; consequently, we will be at a competitive disadvantage in identifying possible urban renewal opportunities and successfully completing a new project. These competitive factors may reduce the likelihood of our identifying and consummating a successful new project.
Some of our officers are engaged in outside business activities, and as such will be dividing their time amongst these entities and anticipate that they will devote less than full time to our business until the successful project has been identified. The specific amount of time that management will devote to the Company may vary from week to week or even day to day, and therefore the specific amount of time that management will devote to the Company on a weekly basis cannot be ascertained with any level of certainty. In all cases, management intends to spend as much time as is necessary to exercise their fiduciary duties as an officer and/or director of the Company and believes that they will be able to devote the time required to consummate a new project transaction as necessary. We expect no significant changes in the number of our employees other than such changes, if any, incident to a new project. We are, however, strengthening our corporate structure, and on May 14th, 2021, the Board appointed Stalin Cruz as the Company’s new Chief Financial Officer. On June 15th, 2021, the Board appointed Mr. Joe Gibbons as an Independent Board Member and to the Audit Committee, On June 17th, 2021, the Company appointed Mr. Randy Avon as an Independent Board Member and to the Audit Committee. And on June 18th, 2021, the Board appointed its current Director and Chair Mr. Ronald Silver to the Audit Committee, as seen on the 8K filed on that day. On July 12th, Garfield Antonio was named as Director and Board member, as seen in the 8K filed that day.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying audited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) for annual financial statement presentation and in accordance with Form 10-K. Accordingly, they include all of the information and footnotes required in annual financial statements. In the opinion of management, the audited financial statements contain all adjustments (consisting only of normal recurring accruals) necessary to present fairly the financial position and results of operations and cash flows. The results of operations presented are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for any other interim period or for the entire year.
These audited financial statements should be read in conjunction with our December 31st, 2020, Annual financial statements included in our Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on April 14th, 2021.
Going Concern
Due to the uncertainty of our ability to meet our current operating and capital expenses, our independent auditors included an explanatory paragraph in their report on the audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, regarding concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements contain additional note disclosures describing the circumstances that lead to this disclosure by our independent auditors.
Our audited condensed financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate profitable operations in the future and/or to obtain the necessary financing to meet our obligations and repay our liabilities arising from normal business operations when they become due. The outcome of these matters cannot be predicted with any certainty at this time and raise substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern. Our audited financial statements do not include any adjustments to the amount and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern. There is no assurance that our operations will be profitable. Our continued existence and plans for future growth depend on our ability to obtain the additional capital necessary to operate either through the generation of revenue or the issuance of additional debt or equity.
Our future growth is dependent upon achieving further development projects and execution of development projects, engaging other company related opportunities, management of operating expenses, and the ability of the Company to obtain the necessary financing to fund future obligations, and upon profitable operations.
Stockholders’ Equity
Since its inception on August 16, 2010, the Company had accumulated deficit of $49,276,680 as of twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
The aggregated loss is related to the capital invested in advances real estate membership interest, which has future positive cash flow after completion and stabilization. See note 5.
Authorized Shares
Common Stock
The Company is authorized to issue up to 500,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 par value. Each outstanding share of common stock entitles the holder to one vote per share on all matters submitted to a stockholder vote. All shares of common stock are non-assessable and non-cumulative, with no pre-emptive rights.
Preferred shares
The Company Authorizes and hereby creates 5,000,000 (Five Million) shares of preferred stock, with conversion rights of 1:1 (one to one), but with 30:1 voting rights. As of December 31, 2021, 1,000,000 shares of preferred stock were issued and outstanding.
Commitments and Contingencies
On April 8th, 2021, the Company executed a Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note, Securities Purchase Agreement, and ancillary agreements (collectively, the “Agreements”) with Leonite Capital, LLC Per the terms of the Agreements with Leonite Capital, LLC, the Company may borrow up to $500,000; of which $500,000 was tendered, which is open with right of redemption for one year. Prior to the maturity date of the Note, the Company at its option, has the right to redeem in cash in part or in whole, the amounts outstanding. Should the Fund wish to convert this debt into equity, the conversion price shall be sixty-five percent of the lowest Intraday price during the previous 21 days. Pursuant to the Agreements, the Company has earmarked the net proceeds for an immediate cash infusion for normative working capital purposes and capital expenditures. Leonite Capital. has agreed that neither it nor any of its affiliates shall engage in any short-selling or hedging of our Common Stock during any time. The foregoing is a summary description of certain terms of the Agreements. For a full description of all terms, please refer to the original Agreements which are Exhibits to this filing.
On November 30th, 2021, the Company executed a short-term loan of $1,000,000 Secured Note, by 1,500,000 million shares of CRDV stock (reserved in bank’s name, subject to loan and stock pledge agreement with NextBank International, Inc,) and secured by the president of the company, as a personal guarantor. Per the terms of the Agreements with NextBank International, Inc, the Company may borrow up to $1,000,000; which is open with the right of redemption for one year against the collateral of 1,500,000 shares of CRDV stock and the President of the company as guarantor.
The Private Note has a 7.5% fixed rate that matures on November 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the company has withdrawn the full amount net of the loan less the loan fees. For a full description of all terms, please refer to the original Agreements which are Exhibits to this filing.
We will require additional financing to implement our business plan, which may include joint venture projects and debt or equity financings. The nature of this enterprise and constraint of positive cash flow places debt financing beyond the creditworthiness required by most banks or typical investors of corporate debt until such time as economically viable profits and losses can be demonstrated. Therefore, any debt financing of our activities may be costly and result in substantial dilution to our stockholders.
Future financing through equity investments is likely to be dilutive to existing stockholders. Also, the terms of securities we may issue in future capital transactions may be more favorable for our new investors. Newly issued securities may include preferences, superior voting rights, and the issuance of warrants or other derivative securities, which may have additional dilutive effects. Further, we may incur substantial costs in pursuing future capital and financing, including investment banking fees, legal fees, accounting fees, and other costs. We may also be required to recognize non-cash expenses in connection with certain securities we may issue, such as convertible notes and warrants, which will adversely impact our financial condition.
Our ability to obtain needed financing may be impaired by such factors as the capital markets, which could impact the availability or cost of future financings. If the amount of capital we are able to raise from financing activities, together with our revenue from operations, is not sufficient to satisfy our capital needs, even to the extent that we reduce our operations accordingly, we may be required to cease operations.
There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain financing on terms satisfactory to us, or at all. We do not have any arrangements in place for any future financing. If we are unable to secure additional funding, we may cease or suspend operations. We have no plans, arrangements, or contingencies in place in the event that we cease operations.
Results of Operations
For the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021, and 2020
Revenues
The Company has not brought in revenues to date.
Operating Expenses
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, our total operating expenses were $9,899,332 compared to $46,154 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, resulting in an increase of $9,853,178. The increase is attributable to a total increase of $9,853,178 in general administration expenses.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we had $37,778,761 an unrealized loss on investments arising out of the acquisition transaction of Red Hills Capital LLC, which is the dollar value of the common stock issued for said acquisition.
Net Operating loss
Net Operating loss was $9,899,332 compared to net Operating loss of $46,154 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, for the reasons explained above.
Net loss
Net loss was $48,372,624 compared to a net loss of $46,154 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020. The increase is attributable to a total increase of $9,853,178 in general administration expenses, and an increase of $37,778,761 in unrealized loss on investments, which is the dollar value of the common shares issued for the acquisition of Red Hills Capital LLC.
Other Income
Other Income/(Expense) increased to ($694,531) for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was directly related to the swings in derivative fair values from $582,549. This was offset by an increase in interest expense of $1,277,080 when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
The Company’s cash and cash equivalents balance were $1,084,486 as of December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in the Company’s operating activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, was $385,991 as compared to net cash used in the operating activities of $41,849 during the corresponding period ended December 31, 2020. This represents a variance of $344,142 in net cash used in operating activities between the two periods. The underlying reasons for the variance were primarily due to an increase of $37,778,761 in shares issued for acquisition of membership interest, an increase of $9,557,117 for shares issued for services, an increase of $544,870 on change in the fair value of derivative liabilities, an increase in accrued expenses of $1,610 and an increase in accounts payable of $74,098 and an increase of $30,092 in the interest on convertible note payable between the two periods.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 was $0 and $0, respectively.
Cash provided by financing activities was $1,461,959 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash provided by financing activities of the amount of $50,367 for the same period ended December 31, 2020. This represents a variance of $1,411,592 in net cash used in financing activities between the two periods. The primary underlying reason is due to an increase on a short-term loan of $1,000,000, an increase in convertible loan of $500,000 and a decrease in shareholder’s loan of $38,041 between the two periods.
Since its inception on August 16, 2010, the Company had a cumulative deficit of $49,276,680 and we have a working capital deficit of $17,401,664 as of December 31, 2021. Our future growth is dependent upon achieving further purchase orders and execution, management of operating expenses and the ability of the Company to obtain the necessary financing to fund future obligations, and upon profitable operations.
Historically, we have financed our cash flow and operations from contributions of our majority shareholder and by raising equity and convertible loans.
As of December 30, 2021, our cash balance was $1,084,486 we believe we will require a minimum of $1,500,000 in working capital over the next 12 months to grow the company as currently planned, covering our operating costs and maintaining our regulatory reporting and filings. Should our revenues not materialize as expected, or if our costs and expenses prove to be greater than we currently anticipate, or should we change our current business plan in a manner that will increase or accelerate our anticipated costs and expenses; we may need funds in excess of that currently planned.
It is our current policy that all transactions between the Company and our officers, directors and their affiliates will be entered into only if such transactions are approved by a majority of the existing directors, are approved by vote of the stockholders, or are fair to us as a corporation as approved or ratified by our Board of Directors or authorized officer. We will conduct an appropriate review of all related party transactions on an ongoing basis, and, where appropriate, we review the potential of conflicts of interest.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates
In preparing the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), management makes estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities as of the dates of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates and assumptions made by management include, but are not limited to, revenue recognition, the allowance for bad debt, useful life of fixed assets, income taxes and unrecognized tax benefits, valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, and assumptions used in assessing impairment of long-lived assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Lease
On January 2, 2020, the Company adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases, or ASC 842, using the modified retrospective transition method with a cumulative effect adjustment to accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2019, and accordingly, modified its policy on accounting for leases as stated below. As described under “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements,” below, the primary impact of adopting ASC 842 for the Company was the recognition in the consolidated balance sheet of certain lease-related assets and liabilities for operating leases with terms longer than 12 months. The Company elected to use the short-term exception and does not records assets/liabilities for short term leases as of December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014 the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which supersedes all existing revenue recognition requirements, including most industry-specific guidance. This new standard requires a company to recognize revenues when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the company expects to receive for those goods or services. The FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASU No. 2014-09 that have the same effective date and transition date: ASU No. 2016-08, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Principal versus Agent Considerations; ASU No. 2016-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Identifying Performance Obligations and Licensing; ASU No. 2016-12, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606): Narrow-Scope Improvements and Practical Expedients; and ASU No. 2016-20, Technical Corrections and Improvements to Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The Company adopted these amendments with ASU 2014-09 (collectively, the new revenue standards).
Under the new revenue standards, the Company recognizes revenues when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which it expects to receive in exchange for those goods. The Company recognizes revenues following the five-step model prescribed under ASU No. 2014-09: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligation. The Company recognized revenue from providing temporary and permanent staffing solutions and the sale of consumer products. Service revenues are recognized as the services are performed in proportion to the transfer of control to the customer and real estate revenues are recognized at the time of sale when consideration has been exchanged and title has been conveyed to the buyer. At this time, we have not identified specific planned revenue streams. During the period from August 16, 2010 (Inception) to December 31, 2020, we did not recognize any revenue.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, the Company generally considers all expected future events other than enactments of changes in the tax law. For deferred tax assets, management evaluates the probability of realizing the future benefits of such assets. The Company establishes valuation allowances for its deferred tax assets when evidence suggests it is unlikely that the assets will be fully realized.
The Company recognizes the tax effects of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits as of the reporting date and then only in an amount more likely than not to be sustained upon review by the tax authorities. Income tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold is recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not threshold is derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. The Company classifies potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) as the income tax expense.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost to employees is measured at the date of grant, based on the calculated fair value of the stock-based award, and will be recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the award). Share-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services rendered are recorded at either the fair value of the services rendered or the fair value of the share-based payment, whichever is more readily determinable. The company has no stock-based compensation plan established as December 31, 2021.
Derivative instruments
The fair value of derivative instruments is recorded and shown separately under liabilities. Changes in the fair value of derivatives liability are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations under other (income) expenses.
Our Company evaluates all of its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. For stock-based derivative financial instruments, the Company uses the binomial option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and on subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Related Parties
The Company follows subtopic 850-10 of the FASB ASC for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions. Pursuant to Section 850-10-20 related parties include:
a. affiliates of the Company;
b. entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the FV option under the FV Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity;
c. trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management;
d. principal owners of the Company;
e. management of the Company;
f. other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and
g. other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
The financial statements shall include disclosures of material related party transactions, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of financial statements is not required in those statements.
The disclosures shall include: a. the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b. a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which income statements are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c. the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which income statements are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d. amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 requires companies to measure credit losses utilizing a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires a consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including those interim periods within those fiscal years. We did not expect the adoption of this guidance have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.