ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(All currency is rounded to the nearest thousands, except share and per share amounts.)
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains statements that are forward-looking. These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risk, uncertainties and other factors. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. Actual results could differ materially because of the factors discussed in “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and other factors that we have not identified.
Overview
Creative Realities, Inc. (“Creative Realities”, or the “Company”) transforms environments through digital solutions by providing innovative digital signage solutions for key market segments and use cases, including:
● Retail
● Entertainment and Sports Venues
● Restaurants, including quick-serve restaurants (“QSR”)
● Convenience Stores
● Financial Services
● Automotive
● Medical and Healthcare Facilities
● Mixed Use Developments
● Corporate Communications, Employee Experience
● Digital out of Home (DOOH) Advertising Networks
We serve market-leading companies, so there is a good chance that if you leave your home today to shop, work, eat or play, you will encounter one or more of our digital signage experiences. Our solutions are increasingly visible because we help our enterprise customers achieve a range of business objectives including:
● Increased brand awareness
● Improved customer support
● Enhanced employee productivity and satisfaction
● Increased revenue and profitability
● Improved guest experience
● Increased customer/guest engagement
● Improved patient outcomes
Through a combination of organically grown platforms and a series of strategic acquisitions, including our recent acquisition of Reflect Systems, Inc. in February 2022, the Company assist clients to design, deploy, manage, and monetize their digital signage networks. The Company sources leads and opportunities for its solutions through its digital and content marketing initiatives, close relationships with key industry partners, specifically equipment manufacturers, and the direct efforts of its in-house industry sales experts. Client engagements focus on consultative conversations that ensure the Company’s solutions are positioned to help clients achieve their business objectives in the most cost-effective manner possible.
When comparing Creative Realities to other digital signage providers, our customers value the following competitive advantages:
● Breadth of solutions - Creative Realities is one of only a few companies in the industry capable of providing the full portfolio of products and services required to implement and run an effective digital signage network. We leverage a ‘single vendor’ approach, providing clients with a one-stop-shop for sourcing digital signage solutions from design through day two services.
● Managed labor pool - Unlike most companies in our industry, we have a curated labor pool including thousands of qualified and vetted field technicians available to service clients quickly nationwide. We can meet tight schedules even in exceptionally large deployments and still ensure quality and consistency.
● In-house creative resources - We assist clients in repurposing existing content for digital signage experiences or creating new content, an activity for which the Company has won several design awards in recent years. In each instance, our services can be essential in helping clients develop an effective content program.
● Network scalability and reliability - Our software as a service (“SaaS”) content management platforms power some of the largest and most complex digital signage networks in North America evidencing our ability to manage enterprise scale projects. This also provides us purchasing power to source products and services for our customers, enabling us to deliver cost effective, reliable and powerful solutions to small and medium size business clients.
● Ad management platform - Our customers are increasingly interested in monetizing their digital signage networks through advertising content. However, efficiently scheduling advertising content into digital signage playlists to meet campaign objectives can be a challenging and labor-intensive process. AdLogic, our home-grown, content management-agnostic platform, automates this process, allowing network owners to capture more revenue with less expense.
● Media sales - Few, if any other digital signage solution providers, can offer their clients media sales as a service. We have in-house media sales expertise to elevate conversations with clients interested in better understanding network monetization. We believe this meaningful differentiation in the sales process provides an additional revenue stream to Creative Realities compared to our competitors.
● Market sector expertise - Creative Realities has in-house experts in key market segments such as automotive, retail, quick-serve restaurants (QSR), convenience stores, and Digital Out of Home (DOOH) advertising. Our expertise in these business segments enables our teams to provide meaningful business conversations and offer tailored solutions with prospects and customers to their unique business objectives. These experts build industry relationship and create thought leadership that drives lead flow and new opportunities for our business.
● Logistics - Implementing a large digital signage project can be a logistics nightmare that can stall an initiative even before deployment. Our expertise in logistics improves deployment efficiency, reduces delays and problems, and saves customers time and money.
● Technical support - Digital signage networks present unique challenges for corporate IT departments. Creative Realities helps simplify and improve end user support by leveraging our own Network Operations Center (“NOC”) in Louisville Kentucky. The NOC resolves many issues remotely and when field support is required, it can be dispatched from the NOC, leveraging our managed labor pool to resolve customer issues quickly and effectively.
● Integrations and Application Development - The future of digital signage is not still images and videos on a screen. Interactive applications and integrations with other data sources will dominate the future. From social media feeds to corporate data stores to Point of Sale (“POS”) systems, our proven ability to build scalable applications and integrations is a key advantage clients can leverage to deliver more compelling and engaging experiences for their customers.
● Hardware support - A number of digital signage providers sell a proprietary media player or align themselves with just one operating system. We utilize a range of media players including Windows, Android and BrightSign to provide clients the flexibility they need to select the appropriate hardware for any application knowing the entire network can still be served by a single digital signage platform, reducing complexity and improving the productivity of their teams.
The three primary sources of revenue for the company are:
● Hardware sales from reselling digital signage hardware from original equipment manufacturers such as Samsung and BrightSign.
● Services revenue from helping customers design, deploy and manage their digital signage network, including:
o Hardware system design/engineering
o Hardware installation
o Content development
o Content scheduling
o Post-deployment network and field support
o Media sales, as a result of our acquisition of Reflect
● Recurring subscription licensing and support revenue from our digital signage software platforms, which are generally sold via a SaaS model. These include:
o ReflectView, the Company’s core digital signage platform for most applications, scalable and cost effective from 10 to 100,000+ devices
o Reflect Xperience, a web-based interface that allows customers to give content scheduling access to local users via the web or mobile devices, while still maintaining centralized programming control
o Reflect AdLogic, the Company’s ad management platform for digital signage networks, which presently delivers approximately 50 million ads daily
o Reflect Clarity, the Company’s menu board solution, which has become a market leader for a range of restaurant and convenience store applications
o Reflect Zero Touch, which allows customers to turn any screen into an interactive experience by allowing guests to engage using their mobile device
o iShowroomProX, an omni-channel digital sales support platform targeted at original equipment manufacturers in the transportation sector, which integrates with dozens of key data services including dealer inventory at the VIN level
o OSx+, a digital VIN-level checklist used to assist in the tracking and delivery of new vehicles in the transportation sector, providing measurable lift in customer satisfaction scores and connected vehicle enrollments and subscription activations.
While hardware sales and support services revenues can fluctuate more significantly year over year based on new, large-scale network deployments, the Company expects to see continuous growth in recurring SaaS revenue for the foreseeable future as digital signage adoption/utilization continues to expand across the vertical markets we serve.
Recent Developments
Acquisition of Reflect
On November 12, 2021, the Company and Reflect Systems, Inc., or “Reflect,” entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as amended on February 8, 2022, the “Merger Agreement)” pursuant to which a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of Creative Realities, CRI Acquisition Corporation, or “Merger Sub,” would merge with and into Reflect, with Reflect surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of Creative Realities, , which transaction is referred to herein as the “Merger.” On February 17, 2022, the parties consummated the Merger.
Reflect provides digital signage solutions, including software, strategic and media services to a wide range of companies across the retail, financial, hospitality and entertainment, healthcare, and employee communications industries in North America. Reflect offers digital signage platforms, including ReflectView, a platform used by companies to power hundreds of thousands of active digital displays. Through its strategic services, Reflect assists its customers with designing, deploying and optimizing their digital signage networks, and through its media services, Reflect assists customers with monetizing their digital advertising networks.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, upon the closing of the Merger, Reflect stockholders as of the effective time of the Merger collectively received from the Company, in the aggregate, the following Merger consideration: (i) $16,166 payable in cash, (ii) 2,333,334 shares of common stock of Creative Realities (valued based on an issuance price of $2 per share) (the “CREX Shares”), (iii) the Secured Promissory Note (as described below), and (iv) supplemental cash payments (the “Guaranteed Consideration”), if any, payable on or after the three-year anniversary of the effective time of the Merger (subject to the Extension Option described below, the “Guarantee Date”), in an amount by which the value of the CREX Shares on such anniversary is less than $6.40 per share, or if certain customers of Reflect collectively achieve over 85,000 billable devices online at any time on or before December 31, 2022, is less than $7.20 per share (such applicable amount, the “Guaranteed Price”), multiplied by the amount of CREX Shares held by the Reflect stockholders on the Guarantee Date (subject to the Extension Option described below), subject to the terms of the Merger Agreement.
Creative Realities may exercise an extension option (the “Extension Option”) to extend the Guarantee Date from the three-year anniversary of the Closing Date to six (6) months thereafter if (i) the Extension Threshold Price is greater than or equal to 70% of the Guaranteed Price described above, and (ii) Creative Realities provides written notice of its election to exercise the Extension Option at least ten (10) days prior to the three-year anniversary of the Closing. The “Extension Threshold Price” means the average closing price per share of Creative Realities Shares as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market (or NYSE) in the fifteen (15) consecutive trading day period ending fifteen (15) days prior to the three-year anniversary of the Closing Date. If the Extension Threshold Price is less than 80% of the Guaranteed Price, then the Guaranteed Price will be increased by $1.00 per share.
In connection with the Merger, the Company adopted a Retention Bonus Plan and raised capital to, among other things, pay the cash portion of the Merger consideration, all of which is summarized below.
Retention Bonus Plan
On February 17, 2022, in connection with the closing of the Merger, the Company adopted a Retention Bonus Plan, pursuant to which the Company is required to pay to key members of Reflect’s management team an aggregate of $1,333 in cash, which was paid 50% at the closing of the Merger (the “Closing”), and subject to continuous employment with Reflect or Creative Realities, 25% on the one-year anniversary of Closing and 25% on the two-year anniversary of the Closing. The future cash payments due on the one-year and two-year anniversaries of the Closing have been deposited into an escrow agreement. The Retention Bonus Plan also requires the Company to issue Common Stock having an aggregate value of $667 to the plan participants as follows: 50% of the value of such shares were issued at the Closing, and subject to continuous employment with Reflect or Creative Realities, 25% of the value of such shares will be issued on the one-year anniversary of Closing and the remaining 25% of the value of such shares will be issued on the two-year anniversary of the Closing. The shares issued on the Closing were valued at $2.00 per share, and the shares to be issued after the Closing will be determined based on dividing the value of shares issuable on such date divided by the trailing 10-day volume weighed average price (VWAP) of the shares as of such date as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market.
Upon the resignation of a participant’s employment for “good reason,” or termination of the employment of a participant without “cause,” each as defined in the Retention Bonus Plan, the participant will be fully vested and will receive all cash and shares allocated to such participant under the Retention Bonus Plan. Any amounts unpaid by reason of a lapse in continuous employment or otherwise will be reallocated among the remaining Retention Bonus Plan participants.
Equity Financing
On February 3, 2022, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with a purchaser (the “Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell to the Purchaser, in a private placement priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules, (i) 1,315,000 shares (the “Shares”) of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”) and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of 1,315,000 shares of Common Stock, and (ii) pre-funded warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 5,851,505 shares of Common Stock (the “Pre-Funded Warrants”) and accompanying warrants to purchase an aggregate of 5,851,505 shares of Common Stock (collectively, the “Private Placement”). The accompanying warrants to purchase Common Stock are referred to herein collectively as the “Common Stock Warrants.” Under the Securities Purchase Agreement, each Share and accompanying warrants to purchase Common Stock were sold together at a combined price of $1.535, and each Pre-Funded Warrant and accompanying warrants to purchase Common Stock were sold together at a combined price of $1.5349, for gross proceeds of approximately $11,000 before deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. The net proceeds from the Private Placement were used to fund, in part, payment of the closing cash consideration in the Merger.
Each Pre-Funded Warrant has an exercise price of $0.0001 per share, is exercisable immediately until the Pre-Funded Warrant is exercised in full. The Common Stock Warrants expire five years from the date of issuance, have an exercise price of $1.41 per share and are exercisable immediately.
On February 17, 2022, in connection with obtaining a waiver of certain restrictions in the Securities Purchase Agreement in order to consummate the financing contemplated by the Credit Agreement (defined below), the Company paid consideration to such investor in the form of a warrant (the “Purchaser Warrant”) to purchase 1,400,000 shares of Company common stock. The number of shares of Company common stock subject to the Purchaser Warrant is equal to the waiver fee ($175) divided by $0.125 per share. The exercise price of the Purchaser Warrant is $1.41 per share, and the Purchaser Warrant is not exercisable until August 17, 2022. The Purchaser Warrant expires five years from the date of issuance.
Debt Financing
On February 17, 2022, the Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Borrowers”) refinanced their current debt facilities with Slipstream, pursuant to a Second Amended and Restated Credit and Security Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”). The Borrowers include Reflect, which became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company as a result of the closing of the Merger. The debt facilities continue to be fully secured by all assets of the Borrowers.
The Company raised $10,000 in gross proceeds, or $9,950 in net proceeds, from entry into a new, 36-month senior secured term loan (the “Acquisition Loan”) with Slipstream as part of the Credit Agreement, which matures on February 17, 2025 (the “Maturity Date”). The Acquisition Loan has an interest rate of 8.0%, with 50.0% warrant coverage (or 2,500,000 warrants). On the first day of each month, commencing March 1, 2022 through February 1, 2025, the Borrowers will make interest-only payments on the Acquisition Loan (estimated to be $67 per monthly payment). No principal payments on the Acquisition Loan are payable until the Maturity Date.
The Credit Agreement also provides that the Company’s outstanding loans from Slipstream, consisting of its pre-existing $4,767 senior secured term loan and $2,418 secured convertible loan, with an aggregate of $7,185 in outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest under such loans, were consolidated into a term loan (the “Consolidation Term Loan”). The Consolidation Term Loan has an interest rate of 10.0%, with 75.0% warrant coverage (or 2,694,495 warrants). On the first day of each month, commencing March 1, 2022 through February 1, 2025, the Borrowers will make interest-only payments on the Consolidation Term Loan (estimated to be $60 per monthly payment). Commencing on September 1, 2023, and on the first day of each month thereafter until the Maturity Date, the Borrowers will make a payment on the Consolidation Term Loan, in an equal monthly installment of principal sufficient to fully amortize the Consolidation Term Loan in eighteen equal installments (estimated to be $399 per monthly installment).
In connection with the Acquisition Loan and Consolidation Term Loan warrant coverage, the Company issued to Slipstream a warrant to purchase an aggregate of 5,194,495 shares of Company common stock (the “Lender Warrant”). The Lender Warrant has a five-year term, an initial exercise price of $2.00 per share, subject to adjustments in the Lender Warrant, and is not exercisable until August 17, 2022.
Secured Promissory Note
On February 17, 2022, pursuant to the terms of the Merger, the Company issued to RSI Exit Corporation (“Stockholders’ Representative”), the representative of Reflect stockholders, a $2,500 Note and Security Agreement (the “Secured Promissory Note”).
The Secured Promissory Note accrues interest at 0.59% (the applicable federal rate) and requires the Company and Reflect to pay equal monthly principal installments of $104 on the fifteenth (15th) day of each month, commencing on March 17, 2022. Any remaining or unpaid principal shall be due and payable on February 15, 2023. All payments under the Secured Promissory Note will be paid to the escrow agent in the Merger Agreement to be placed into the escrow account to secure the Reflect stockholders’ indemnification obligations until released on the one-year anniversary of the closing of the Merger, at which time any remaining proceeds not subject to a pending indemnification claim will be paid to the exchange agent for payment to the Reflect Stockholders. The obligations of the Company and Reflect set forth in the Secured Promissory Note are secured by a first-lien security interest in various contracts of Reflect, together with all accounts arising under such contracts, supporting obligations related to the accounts arising under such contracts, all related books and records, and products and proceeds of the foregoing. Slipstream subordinated its security interest in such collateral, and the recourse for any breach of the Secured Promissory Note by the Company or Reflect will be against such collateral.
Our Sources of Revenue
We generate revenue through digital signage solution sales, which include system hardware, professional and implementation services, software design and development, software licensing, deployment, and maintenance and support services.
We currently market and sell our technology and solutions primarily through our sales and business development personnel, but we also utilize agents, strategic partners, and lead generators who provide us with access to additional sales, business development and licensing opportunities.
Our Expenses
Our expenses are primarily comprised of three categories: sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative. Sales and marketing expenses include salaries and benefits for our sales, business development solution management and marketing personnel, and commissions paid on sales. This category also includes amounts spent on marketing networking events, promotional materials, hardware and software to prospective new customers, including those expenses incurred in trade shows and product demonstrations, and other related expenses. Our research and development expenses represent the salaries and benefits of those individuals who develop and maintain our proprietary software platforms and other software applications we design and sell to our customers. Our general and administrative expenses consist of corporate overhead, including administrative salaries, real property lease payments, salaries and benefits for our corporate officers and other expenses such as legal and accounting fees.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management is responsible for our financial statements and has evaluated the accounting policies to be used in their preparation. Our management believes these policies are reasonable and appropriate. The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II, ITEM 8 of this Annual Report. The following discussion identifies those accounting policies that we believe are critical in the preparation of our financial statements, the judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies and the possibility that materially different amounts will be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of commitments and contingencies at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We recognized revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we account for revenue using the following steps:
● Identify the contract, or contracts, with a customer
● Identify the performance obligations in the contract
● Determine the transaction price
● Allocate the transaction price to the identified performance obligations
● Recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy our performance obligations
See Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4 Revenue Recognition in our Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, ITEM 8 of this Annual Report, for a complete discussion of our revenue recognition policies.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to measure the estimated liability for doubtful accounts during the past two fiscal years. The Company’s methodology for calculating the allowance for doubtful accounts consists of (1) reserving for specific receivables which (a) are known to be facing serious financial problems, (b) have a trade dispute with the Company, or (c) are significantly aged and/or unresponsive, and (2) a general reserve for unaged accounts receivable based on a percentage of revenue each period. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to establish the liability for doubtful accounts. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material.
Goodwill
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually as of September 30 and whenever events or circumstances make it more likely than not that impairment may have occurred. We have no other indefinite-lived intangible assets. We test goodwill for impairment by comparing the book value to the fair value at the reporting unit level. We have only one reporting unit, and therefore the entire goodwill is allocated to that reporting unit. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by using a discounted cash flow analyses consisting of various assumptions, including expectations of future cash flows based on projections or forecasts derived from analysis of business prospects and economic or market trends that may occur. We use these same expectations in other valuation models throughout the business. In addition to the discounted cash flow analysis, we utilize a leveraged buy-out model, trading comps and market capitalization to ultimately determine an estimated fair value of our reporting unit based on weighted average calculations from these models. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, further analysis is performed to measure the impairment loss.
In addition, our market capitalization could fluctuate from time to time. Such fluctuation may be an indicator of possible impairment of goodwill if our market capitalization falls below its book value. If this situation occurs, we perform the required detailed analysis to determine if there is impairment.
During the first quarter of 2020, we determined that the reduced cash flow projections and the significant decline in our market capitalization as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic during the three months ended March 31, 2020 indicated that an impairment loss may have been incurred during the period. We qualitatively assessed and concluded that it was more likely than not that goodwill was impaired as of March 31, 2020. We reviewed our previous forecasts and assumptions based on our updated projections that were subject to various risks and uncertainties, including: (1) forecasted revenues, expenses and cash flows, including the duration and extent of impact to our business and our alliance partners from the COVID-19 pandemic, (2) current discount rates, (3) the reduction in our market capitalization, (4) changes to the regulatory environment and (5) the nature and amount of government support that will be provided. As a result of this qualitative assessment, we concluded that indicators of impairment were present. The subsequent quantitative interim impairment assessment of our goodwill as of March 31, 2020 resulted in recording an impairment of $10,646 as of March 31, 2020.
No additional impairment was recorded during the remainder of 2020, nor as a result of our annual assessment completed as of September 30, 2021, and no indicators of impairment were identified as of December 31, 2021.
We have not made any material changes in our reporting units or the accounting methodology we used to assess impairment of goodwill since September 30, 2021. The valuation of goodwill is subject to a high degree of judgment, uncertainty and complexity. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the future estimates or assumptions we use to test for impairment losses on goodwill. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.
Income Taxes
Accounting for income taxes requires recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities. These deferred taxes are measured by applying the provisions of tax laws in effect at the balance sheet date, including the impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”) enacted on December 22, 2017.
We recognize in income the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period that includes the enactment date.
As of December 31, 2021, a full valuation allowance is recorded against our deferred tax. The valuation allowance is based, in part, on our estimate of future taxable income, the expected utilization of federal and state tax loss carryforwards, and credits and the expiration dates of such tax loss carryforwards. Significant assumptions are used in developing the analysis of future taxable income for purposes of determining the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets which, in our opinion, are reasonable under the circumstances.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements in our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, ITEM 8 of this Annual Report, for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on results of operations and financial condition, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
Note: All dollar amounts reported in Results of Operations are in thousands, except per-share information.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The tables presented below compare our results of operations from one period to another, and present the results for each period and the change in those results from one period to another in both dollars and percentage change.
Sales
Sales increased by $980, or 6%, in 2021 as compared to 2020 driven by an increase of $459 in hardware sales as compared to the same period in 2020, despite a decrease of $2,135 in the sale of our Safe Space Solutions products year-over-year, which launched in April 2020. Core digital signage sales (inclusive of hardware, installation, and services) expanded by $3,115 in 2021 despite constraints and headwinds due to limited supply chain availability of semiconductor chips delaying the delivery of digital displays and media players to the Company. The supply disruption for digital displays prevented the Company from delivery of hardware and execution of installation activities during the year. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had customer purchase orders for equipment and installation activities in excess of $1,000 which were delayed as a result of product availability. The Company expects to experience continued disruptions and delays related to fulfillment of inventory purchases from vendors during 2022, but we expect a full recovery in the timely availability of equipment no later than the end of the second quarter of 2022.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $236 in absolute dollars to $8,357 in 2021 from $8,121 in 2020, or 3% through a combination of a 6% increase in revenue and a 1.2% reduction in gross margin percentage, driven by an increase in revenue from hardware revenue, which typically is a lower margin revenue stream than our services, as a percentage of total revenue in 2021 as compared to the prior year.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses generally include the salaries, taxes, and benefits of our sales and marketing personnel, as well as trade show activities, travel, and other related sales and marketing costs. Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $523, or 31%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 driven by (1) a current year Employee Retention Credit of $232 related to the retention and payment of salaries to sales personnel throughout 2020 and 2021, which was all recorded when filed in 2021, (2) reduction of $105 in sales lead generation tools, and (3) the result of reduced personnel costs, partially offset by an increase of $47 on trade show activity and related travel costs following a return to participation in industry trade shows and events after the elimination of such costs in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $533, or 49%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 as the result of (1) a current year Employee Retention Credit of $196 related to the retention and payment of salaries to development personnel throughout 2020 and 2021, which was all recorded when filed in 2021, (2) a reduction in personnel costs during the period following reduced headcount and salary reductions in March 2020 through salary reinstatements in October 2021, and (3) an increase in capitalization of development activities for new features/functionality.
General and Administrative Expenses
Total general and administrative expenses decreased by $867, or 10%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was driven by $694 of Employee Retention Credits related to the retention and payment of salaries to sales personnel throughout 2020 and 2021, each of which were recorded in 2021 when the tax credits were filed. Excluding the consideration of those Employee Retention Credits recorded in the period, total general and administrative expenses decreased $173, or 2%, during 2021 as compared to 2020. The comparable year-over-year expenses included reductions of (a) $262 in non-ERC-related personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, and travel-related expenses, (b) $334 in rent expense following closure, downsizing, or restructuring of four leases during 2020, and (c) reductions in legal expenses of $366 following settlement of the Amended and Restated Seller Note, partially offset by an increase in stock compensation amortization expense of $1,213 related to incremental employee and directors’ awards granted during 2020, which are being amortized over a nineteen (19) month remaining vesting period, and 2021, which are being amortized over twelve (12) and (24) month vesting periods, based on the grant date fair value calculated using the Black Scholes method. Personnel costs were reduced following completion of a reduction-in-force and salary reductions for remaining personnel in March 2020.
Bad Debt
Expenses related to the Company’s allowance for bad debts decreased by $1,105, or 133%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by a cash recovery of $555 in 2021 related to a customer bankruptcy for which the Company previously recorded a reserve beginning in second quarter 2020. The remaining reduction was the result of reduced credits and cancellations in 2021 as compared to the prior year in which the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in material customer closures.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $110, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This decrease was the result of a trade name asset becoming fully amortized during 2020, while no amortization was recorded during the 2021. Depreciation was consistent in both periods.
Lease Termination Expense
On December 31, 2020, we exited our office facilities located in Dallas, TX. In ceasing use of these facilities, we recorded a one-time non-cash charge of $18. There were no such lease terminations during 2021.
Goodwill impairment
See Note 7 Intangible Assets, Including Goodwill to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the Company’s interim impairment test and the non-cash impairment charge recorded in 2020.
Interest Expense
See Note 8 Loans Payable to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of the Company’s debt and related interest expense obligations.
Gain on Settlement of Obligations
During 2021, (i) the full principal amount of the PPP Loan and the accrued interest of $1,552 were forgiven and recorded as a gain on settlement, (ii) the Company settled the Amended and Restated Seller Note and related accrued interest for $100, recording a gain on settlement of $1,624, representing $1,538 related to the Amended and Restated Seller Note and $86 of related interest thereon, and (iii) the statute of limitations passed related to the remaining liability on a lease abandoned by the Company in 2015, resulting in a gain of $256.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company settled and/or wrote off obligations of $348 for aggregate cash payments of $139 and recognized a gain of $209 related to legacy accounts payable deemed to no longer be legal obligations to vendors.
Supplemental Operating Results on a Non-GAAP Basis
The following non-GAAP data, which adjusts for the categories of expenses described below, is a non-GAAP financial measure. Our management believes that this non-GAAP financial measure is useful information for investors, shareholders and other stakeholders of our Company in gauging our results of operations on an ongoing basis. We believe that EBITDA is a performance measure and not a liquidity measure, and therefore a reconciliation between net loss/income and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA has been provided. EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net loss/income as an indicator of performance or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as an indicator of cash flows, in each case as determined in accordance with GAAP, or as a measure of liquidity. In addition, EBITDA does not take into account changes in certain assets and liabilities as well as interest and income taxes that can affect cash flows. We do not intend the presentation of these non-GAAP measures to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for results prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP measures should be read only in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with GAAP that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We produced net income and positive cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 but incurred a net loss and had negative cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2,883 and a working capital surplus of $2,913.
Equity Financing
As described more fully in the Recent Developments section above, on February 3, 2022, the Company entered into the Securities Purchase Agreement pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell 1,315,000 shares of the Company’s common stock and Common Stock Warrants to a Purchaser in a Private Placement transaction for gross proceeds of $11,000 before deducting placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. The net proceeds from the Private Placement were used to fund, in part, payment of the closing cash consideration in the Merger.
Debt Financing
On February 17, 2022, the Company and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Borrowers”) refinanced their current debt facilities with Slipstream, pursuant to the Credit Agreement, and raised $10,000 in gross proceeds with a maturity date of February 1, 2025.
The Credit Agreement also provides that the Company’s outstanding loans from Slipstream, consisting of its pre-existing $4,767 senior secured term loan and $2,418 secured convertible loan, with an aggregate of $7,185 in outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest under such loans, were consolidated into a Consolidation Term Loan with a maturity date of February 1, 2025. On February 17, 2022, in connection with the closing of the acquisition of Reflect, the Company issued to RSI Exit Corporation (“Stockholders’ Representative”), the representative of Reflect stockholders, a $2,500 Note and Security Agreement (the “Secured Promissory Note”).
The Secured Promissory Note accrues interest at 0.59% (the applicable federal rate) and requires the Company and Reflect to pay equal monthly principal installments of $104 on the fifteenth (15th) day of each month, commencing on March 17, 2022, for twelve months with any remaining or unpaid principal due and payable on February 15, 2023.
Management believes that, based on (i) the execution of the Equity Financing, (ii) the refinancing of our debt as part of the Debt Financing, including extension of the maturity date on our term loans, and (iii) our operational forecast through 2022 following completion of the Reflect Acquisition, that we can continue as a going concern through at least March 31, 2023. However, given our historical net losses and cash used in operating activities, we obtained a continued support letter from Slipstream through March 31, 2023. We can provide no assurance that our ongoing operational efforts will be successful which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and cash flows.
See Note 8 Loans Payable to the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Recent Developments section earlier in Item 7 for an additional discussion of the Company’s debt obligations and further discussion of the Company’s refinancing activities subsequent to December 31, 2021.
Operating Activities
The cash flows provided by / (used in) operating activities were $471 and $(3,530) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Removing the effect of non-cash items, cash provided by operations in 2021 was $1,723, driven by an (1) increase in net customer/vendor deposits of $901 related to upfront cash collections/payments for large-scale projects, (2) increase in net accounts receivable and payables of $196 related to the timing of collections and payments for ongoing hardware and installation sales and purchases, and (3) a decrease in inventory of $471 as Safe Space Solutions inventory purchased in the prior year was sold in 2021, partially offset by a $338 decrease in deferred revenue.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,159 as compared to $657 for the same period in 2020. Uses of cash in the current and prior period relate primarily to internal and external costs associated with software development. We currently do not have any material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2021; however, we anticipate an increase in our capital expenditures of approximately $430 in excess of our historical trends through the first half of 2022 to maintain and enhance the software platform for our customers and to enhance revenue generating activities through the platform.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $1,745 and $3,479, respectively. The current year results were driven by completion of the Company’s registered direct offering, while the prior year results were driven by our receipt of a PPP Loan of $1,552 and proceeds from our at-the-market offering of $1,831, partially offset by no debt proceeds during the year.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet arrangements set forth in Item 303(a) (4) of Regulation S-K.