ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Charge Enterprises, Inc. (the “Company” or “Charge”) consists of a portfolio of global businesses with a vision to build the electrification and telecommunications infrastructure that will address and service requirements for EVC and WNI which includes 5G, tower, distributed antennae systems (“DAS”), small cell, and electrical infrastructure. We operate in two segments: Telecommunications which provides connection of voice calls and data to global carriers and Infrastructure which builds physical wireless network elements, provides electrical construction services and designs and installs EV charging stations and infrastructure.
Telecommunications has provided connection of both voice and data to Carriers and MNO’s globally for over two decades and we will selectively add profitable products and services, such as SMS text, to this long-established business.
Infrastructure focuses on building physical elements of wireless networks, installation of EV charging ecosystems and electrical installation.
Comparability to Past Periods
Due to acquisitions made over the course of 2020 and 2021, we are presenting both reported and proforma results for consolidated operations and our segments. Results of acquisitions are included in reported results from the date of acquisition closure. Within Telecommunications, we acquired PTGi on October 31, 2020. Within Infrastructure, we acquired GetCharged on October 12, 2020, ANS on May 21, 2021 and BW on December 27, 2021.
Our proforma presentation assumes a full twelve month period for all our operations, including acquisitions, for both 2020 and 2021. Management believes that presenting pro forma results is important to understand our financial performance, providing better analysis of trends in our underlying businesses as it allows for comparability to prior period results. The unaudited pro forma results of operations are not intended to represent or be indicative of the consolidated results of operations or financial condition of our company that would have been reported had the acquisitions been completed as of their respective dates and should not be construed as representative of the future consolidated results of operations or financial condition of the combined entity.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Comparison of the Pro Forma results for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Net revenue decreased $90.6 million to $516.3 million. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to changes in our customer mix and fluctuations in wholesale traffic volumes within Telecommunications.
Cost of goods sold
Costs of goods sold decreased $89.1 million to $495.3 million. The decrease in cost of goods sold is directly related to the decrease in customer revenue within Telecommunications. Overall margins are flat in each segment, however, Infrastructure, which has a higher gross margin, is growing while Telecommunications is declining, which has a lower gross margin.
Stock based compensation
Stock based compensation increased $28.3 million to $30.6 million due to options granted in 2021 to newly hired employees as we build our management team and operations as well as to employees that joined our company as part of acquisitions.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $3.4 million to $10.1 million driven by $0.7 million of acquisition related costs in 2021 and higher consulting, investor relations, marketing and software expense related to growing our business and preparing to be a public company.
Professional services
Professional services fees increased $0.5 million to $2.0 million driven by higher legal and accounting fees related to acquisitions and public company preparation.
Salaries and benefits
Salaries and benefits increased $0.8 million to $14.8 million driven by investments in personnel associated with our company’s growth.
Other operating (income) expense
Other operating expenses decreased $11.8 million to $17.3 million driven by stock issuance costs of $13.4 million in 2020 and investment income of $3.3 million in 2021, offset by higher impairments in 2021 of $4.4 million. Investment income was earned in 2021 as part of our liquidity management program.
Income tax benefit
We generated a larger income tax benefit in 2021 due to higher losses specifically within the Non-operating corporate segment related to salaries and benefits, stock compensation and interest expenses.
Segment Results of Operations
Telecommunications
Comparison of the Pro Forma results for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net revenue
Net revenue decreased $92.7 million to $452.8 million driven by changes in our customer mix and overall declines in wholesale traffic volumes. The rapid development of new technologies, services and products has eliminated many of the traditional distinctions among wireless, cable, internet, local and long distance communication services. We have and will experience downward pressure on revenues due to the pace of technology development, emergence of new products, and intense competition.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue decreased $90.9 million to $447.2 million driven by the change in customer revenue. Gross margin percentage in this business remains relatively flat year over year.
General and administrative
General and administrative increased $0.9 million to $1.9 million primarily due to changes in classification of certain resources between general and administrative and salaries and benefits.
Salaries and benefits
Salaries and benefits decreased $3.0 million to $1.8 million due to certain changes in classification between salaries and benefits and general and administrative and allocations to Non-operating Corporate in 2021.
Infrastructure
Comparison of the Pro Forma results for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net revenue
Net revenue increased $2.1 million to $63.5 million primarily driven by higher volume in small cell, tower and outside building wireless business along with growth in the monitor and maintenance sector.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue increased $1.8 million to $48.2 million directly correlated with the change in revenues with slight variances due to mix and nature of jobs during the period.
General and administrative
General and administrative increased $0.3 million to $4.8 million which is in line with the level to support the business.
Salary and benefits
Salary and benefits decreased $0.8 million to $8.3 million driven by slightly higher costs in 2020 related to employee bonuses, collection and recruiting as well as lower costs in 2021 due to favorable resolution of certain employee related liabilities.
Other operating (income) expense
Other operating (income) expense increased $5.1 million to $16.5 million due to the write downs of goodwill and fixed assets within the GetCharged business.
Non-operating Corporate Segment
Comparison of the Pro Forma results for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Stock based compensation
Stock based compensation increased $28.3 million to $30.6 million due to options granted in 2021 to newly hired employees as we build our management team and operations as well as to employees that joined our company as part of acquisitions.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $2.2 million to $3.4 million driven by $0.7 million of acquisition related costs in 2021 and higher consulting, investor relations, marketing and software expense related to growing our business and preparing to be a public company.
Professional services
Professional services fees increased $1.0 million to $1.8 million driven by higher legal and accounting fees related to acquisitions and public company preparation.
Salaries and benefits
Salaries and benefits increased $4.6 million to $4.7 million driven by investments in personnel associated with the Company’s growth and certain allocations from Telecommunications beginning in 2021.
Other operating (income) expense
Other operating expenses decreased $18.8 million to $1.3 million driven by stock issuance costs of $13.4 million in 2020 and investment income of $3.3 million in 2021. Investment income was earned in 2021 as part of our liquidity management program.
Consolidated Capital Resources and Liquidity
Our current operations have been focused primarily on business planning and raising capital. Our primary sources of liquidity are operating cash flows and private placement investment and debt. In order to finance acquisitions, we have issued and outstanding approximately $40.4 million aggregate principal amount of convertible and non-convertible promissory notes throughout 2020 and 2021. We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our short- and long-term cash requirements. We believe that our operating cash flows access to funding is sufficient to fund our cash requirements for the next 12 months. In the event that our plans change or our cash requirements are greater than we anticipate, we may need to access the capital markets to finance future cash requirements. However, there can be no assurance that such financing will be available to us should we need it or, if available, that the terms will be satisfactory to us and not dilutive to existing shareholders.
Funding
On February 25, 2022 the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with Island Capital Group Charge Me LLC (the “February 2022 Investors”) pursuant to which it issued Series C preferred shares in an aggregate face value of $12,050,000 for an aggregate purchase price of $10,845,000.
On December 17, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with funds affiliated with Arena Investors LP (the “December 2021 Investors”) pursuant to which we issued a note payable in an aggregate face value of $15.9 million for an aggregate purchase price of $13.3 million. The notes have a coupon of 7.5% and a 23-month term and matures on November 19, 2023. On December 17, 2021, we issued 2,370,370 shares of Series C Preferred to Arena Investors LP as part of the securities purchase agreement at an aggregate purchase price of $6.7 million.
On May 19, 2021, we entered a securities purchase agreement with funds affiliated with Arena Investors LP (the “May 2021 Investors”) pursuant to which we issued (1) convertible notes in an aggregate principal amount of $5.6 million for an aggregate purchase price of $5 million that are convertible at any time, at the holder’s option, into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $3.00 per share and mature on May 19, 2024, and (2) non-convertible notes payable in an aggregate face value (includes 7.5% premium and 10% original issue discount) of $11.9 million for an aggregate purchase price of $10 million, with a coupon of 8% and an 18-month term and mature on November 19, 2022. The non-convertible notes maturity date was extended to November 19, 2023. Both issuances are referred to as the “May 2021 Notes”. In connection with the issuance of the May 2021 Notes, we issued to the May 2021 Investors warrants to acquire 1,870,000 shares of common stock.
On November 3, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with funds affiliated with Arena Investors LP (the “November 2020 Investors”) pursuant to which we issued convertible notes in an aggregate principal amount of $3.9 million for an aggregate purchase price of $3.5 million (collectively, the “November 2020 Notes” and together with the May 2020 Notes, the “Notes”). In connection with the issuance of the November 2020 Notes, we issued to the November 2020 Investors 903,226 shares of common stock. The November 2020 Notes are convertible at any time, at the holder’s option, into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $0.25 per share. The Notes maturity was extended from November 3, 2023, to November 3, 2024.
On May 8, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors (collectively, the “May 2020 Investors”) pursuant to which we issued convertible notes in an aggregate principal amount of $3 million for an aggregate purchase price of $2.7 million (the “May 2020 Notes”). In connection with the issuance of the Notes, we issued to the May 2020 Investors warrants to purchase an aggregate of 7,600,000 shares of Common Stock (collectively, the “Warrants”) and 7.5 shares of series G convertible preferred stock (the “Series G Preferred Stock”). The Notes maturity date of May 8, 2021 was extended to May 8, 2023, unless earlier converted. The Notes accrue interest at a rate of 8% per annum, subject to increase to 20% per annum upon and during the occurrence of an event of default. Interest is payable in cash on a quarterly basis beginning on December 31, 2020. The May 2020 Notes are convertible at any time, at the holder’s option.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activity, as reported within the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, followed by a discussion of the major drivers impacting operating, investing and financing cash flows for the years ended December 31:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities primarily include net income adjusted for (i) non-cash items included in net income, such as depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, amortization of debt discount, impairments, and (ii) changes in the balances of operating assets and liabilities, which can vary significantly in the normal course of business due to the amount and timing of payments.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The increase in net cash used by investing activities was primarily due to the acquisition of ANS and BW in 2021, both of which included a cash component of the total purchase price.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The increase in cash provided by financing activities is primarily due to the issuance of notes payable and Series C Preferred Stock in 2021 related to business acquisitions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, Charge did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Refer to Note 2 to the “Consolidated Financial Statements” for a summary of our significant accounting policies. Certain of our accounting policies requiring significant management assumptions and judgments are as follows:
Stock Based Compensation
We use the fair value method of accounting for our stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) granted to measure the cost of services received in exchange for the stock-based awards. The fair value of stock option awards with only service and/or performance conditions is estimated on the grant or offering date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires inputs such as the risk-free interest rate, expected term and expected volatility. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant judgment. The fair value of RSUs is measured on the grant date based on the closing fair market value of our common stock. The resulting cost is recognized over the period during which service is required to be provided in exchange for the awards, usually the vesting period, which is generally three to five years for stock options and RSUs. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized based on the graded vesting attribution method, where an award is divided into vesting increments or tranches, and the company recognizes compensation cost for each tranche separately, on a straight-line basis, net of actual forfeitures in the period.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue that is recorded reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We apply the following five-step model in order to determine this amount: (i) identification of the promised goods in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. Our main revenue stream is from services. We recognize as revenues the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied or as it is satisfied. Generally, our performance obligations are transferred to customers at a point in time, typically upon delivery. A good or service is considered to be transferred when the customer obtains control.
Within Infrastructure, due to the nature of our performance obligations, the estimation of total revenue and cost at completion is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. Management must make assumptions and estimates regarding labor productivity and availability, the complexity of the work to be performed, the cost and availability of materials, the performance of subcontracts, and the availability and timing of funding from the customer, among other variables. As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of contracts, we review and update contract-related estimates regularly through a review process in which management reviews the progress and execution of performance obligations and the estimated cost at completion. As part of this process, management reviews information including, but not limited to, any outstanding key contract matter, progress towards completion and the related program schedule and the related changes in estimates of revenues and costs. We recognize adjustments in estimated profit on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance is recognized using the adjusted estimate. If at any time the estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize a provision for the entire loss in the period it is identified.
The nature of our contracts gives rise to several types of variable consideration, including claims and unpriced change orders. We recognize revenue for variable consideration when it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. We estimate the amount of revenue to be recognized on variable consideration, using the expected value or the most likely amount method, whichever is expected to better predict the amount. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on assessments of legal enforceability, performance, and all information that is reasonably available to us.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost of an acquired business over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually or when events or circumstances arise, such as adverse changes in the business climate, that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying value. Our methodology for conducting this goodwill impairment testing contains both a qualitative and quantitative assessment. We have the option to initially perform an assessment of qualitative factors in order to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. The qualitative factors may include, but are not limited to, economic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance of the reporting unit and other company and reporting unit-specific events. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we then perform the impairment evaluation using a more detailed quantitative assessment. We could also directly perform this quantitative assessment for any reporting unit, bypassing the qualitative assessment. Our methodology for conducting the quantitative goodwill impairment testing is fundamentally based on the measurement of fair value for our reporting units, which inherently entails the use of significant management judgment. For valuation, we use a combination of the income approach (discounted cash flows) and market approach (market multiples) in estimating the fair value of our reporting units.
Income Taxes
We are subject to taxes in the U.S. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We make these estimates and judgments about our future taxable income and operating loss carryforwards that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our future plans. As of December 31, 2021, we had recorded a full valuation allowance on our net U.S. deferred tax assets because we expect that it is more likely than not that our U.S. deferred tax assets will not be realized. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Credit Losses - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 requires entities to use a forward-looking approach based on current expected credit losses (“CECL”) to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments, including trade receivables. This may result in the earlier recognition of allowances for losses. ASU 2016-13 is effective for our company beginning January 1, 2023, and early adoption is permitted. We do not believe the potential impact of the new guidance and related codification improvements will be material to our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“AUS 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 will simplify the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Limiting the accounting models will result in fewer embedded conversion features being separately recognized from the host contract as compared with current GAAP. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. ASU 2020-06 also amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. ASU 2020-06 will be effective January 1, 2024, for our company. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than January 1, 2021, including interim periods within that year. Management is currently evaluating the effect of the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on the consolidated financial statements, but currently does not believe ASU 2020-06 will have a significant impact on our company’s accounting for our convertible debt instruments. The effect will largely depend on the composition and terms of the financial instruments at the time of adoption.