ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, based on current expectations and related to future events and our future financial performance, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many important factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. As used throughout this report, the terms “the Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to the business of Curis, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, except where the context otherwise requires, and the term “Curis” refers to Curis, Inc.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company focused on the development of first-in-class and innovative therapeutics for the treatment of cancer.
We conduct our research and development programs both internally and through strategic collaborations. Our clinical stage drug candidates are emavusertib, previously CA-4948, and CI-8993:
•Emavusertib, previously CA-4948, an orally available small molecule inhibitor of Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4, or IRAK4, which is currently undergoing testing in a Phase 1/2 open-label dose escalating clinical trial in patients with non-Hodgkin lymphomas, or NHL, including those with Myeloid Differentiation Primary Response Protein 88, or MYD88, alterations, also known as the TakeAim Lymphoma study. We reported preliminary clinical
Table of Content
data from the study in December 2020. The trial was amended to include a combination study of emavusertib (CA-4948) and ibrutinib, a BTK inhibitor, in patients with NHL for which we enrolled the first patient in February 2021. We expect to provide initial data from the combination study in the first half of 2022. We are also conducting a separate Phase 1/2 open-label, single arm dose escalating and expansion trial in patients with relapsed or refractory, or R/R, acute myeloid leukemia, or AML, and high risk myelodysplastic syndromes, or MDS, also known as the TakeAim Leukemia study, and announced preliminary clinical data from this study in December 2020. The study was amended in April 2021 to include dose escalation cohorts of emavusertib (CA-4948) in combination with azacitidine or venetoclax. In April 2021, emavusertib (CA-4948) was granted Orphan Drug Designation for the treatment of R/R AML and high risk MDS by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA. In June 2021, we reported updated preliminary clinical data from the TakeAim Leukemia study and announced the recommended Phase 2 dose for monotherapy dose expansion. In January 2022, we provided updated preliminary clinical data for patients from the TakeAim Leukemia study.
•CI-8993, a monoclonal antibody designed to antagonize the V-domain Ig suppressor of T cell activation, or VISTA signaling pathway. In June 2020, we announced that the FDA had cleared our Investigational New Drug, or IND, application for CI-8993. In September 2020, we began enrollment in our Phase 1 trial of CI-8993 in patients with R/R solid tumors. We have an option to license CI-8993 from ImmuNext, Inc., or ImmuNext. In January 2022, we provided initial safety, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data from the Phase 1 study in patients with R/R solid tumors.
Our pipeline also includes the following:
•Fimepinostat, a small molecule that potently inhibits the activity of histone deacetylase, or HDAC, and phosphotidyl-inositol 3 kinase, or PI3 kinase enzymes, which has been granted Orphan Drug Designation and Fast Track Designation for the treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, or DLBCL, and Orphan Drug Designation for nuclear protein in testis (NUT) midline carcinoma by the FDA. In 2019, we began enrollment in a Phase 1 combination study with venetoclax in DLBCL patients, including patients with translocations in both MYC and the BCL2 gene, also referred to as double-hit lymphoma, or high-grade B-cell lymphoma, or HGBL. We reported preliminary clinical data from this combination study in December 2019. In March 2020, we announced that although we observed no significant drug-drug interaction in our Phase 1 study of fimepinostat in combination with venetoclax, we did not see an efficacy signal that would warrant continuation of the study. Accordingly, no further patients will be enrolled in this study. We are currently evaluating future studies for fimepinostat.
•CA-170, a small molecule antagonist of VISTA and PDL1, for which we announced initial data from a clinical study in patients with mesothelioma in conjunction with the Society of Immunotherapy of Cancer conference in November 2019. Based on this data, no further patients will be enrolled in the study. We are currently evaluating future studies for CA-170.
•CA-327, a small molecule antagonist of PDL1 and TIM3, is a pre-IND, stage oncology drug candidate.
We are party to a collaboration with Genentech Inc., or Genentech, a member of the Roche Group, under which F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, or Roche and Genentech are commercializing Erivedge® (vismodegib), a first-in-class orally administered small molecule Hedgehog signaling pathway antagonist. Erivedge is approved for the treatment of advanced basal cell carcinoma, or BCC.
In January 2015, we entered into an exclusive collaboration agreement with Aurigene Discovery Technologies Limited, or Aurigene, for the discovery, development and commercialization of small molecule compounds in the areas of immuno-oncology and precision oncology, which was amended in September 2016 and February 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we have licensed four programs under the Aurigene collaboration, including emavusertib (CA-4948).
In addition, we are party to an option and license agreement with ImmuNext. Pursuant to the terms of the option and license agreement, we have an option, exercisable for a specified period as set forth in the option and license agreement to obtain an exclusive license to develop and commercialize certain VISTA antagonizing compounds, including ImmuNext's lead compound, CI-8993, and products containing these compounds in the field of oncology.
Based on our clinical development plans for our pipeline, we intend to predominantly focus our available resources on the continued development of emavusertib (CA-4948), in collaboration with Aurigene, and CI-8993, in collaboration with ImmuNext, in the near term.
Liquidity
Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through private and public placements of our equity securities, license fees, contingent cash payments, research and development funding from our corporate collaborators, debt
Table of Content
financings and the monetization of certain royalty rights. We have never been profitable on an annual basis and have an accumulated deficit of $1.1 billion as of December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a loss of $45.4 million and used $37.6 million of cash in operations. We expect to continue to generate operating losses in the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our $139.8 million of existing cash, cash equivalents and investments at December 31, 2021 should enable us to maintain our planned operations for the next 12 months and into 2024. We have based this assessment on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and do not expect to achieve profitability in the foreseeable future, if at all. If sufficient funds are not available, we will have to delay, reduce the scope of, or eliminate some of our research and development programs, including related clinical trials and operating expenses, potentially delaying the time to market for or preventing the marketing of any of our product candidates, which could adversely affect our business prospects and our ability to continue our operations, and would have a negative impact on our financial condition and ability to pursue our business strategies. In addition, we may seek to engage in one or more strategic alternatives, such as a strategic partnership with one or more parties, the licensing, sale or divestiture of some of our assets or proprietary technologies or the sale of our company, but there can be no assurance that we would be able to enter into such a transaction or transactions on a timely basis or on terms favorable to us, or at all.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The continuing COVID-19 pandemic has caused many governments to implement measures to slow the spread of the pandemic through quarantines, strict travel restrictions, heightened border scrutiny, and other measures. The pandemic and government measures taken in response have had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce. While the COVID-19 pandemic has had adverse effects on our business and we expect the pandemic to have an adverse effect on our business, financial conditions and results of operations in the future, we are unable to predict the extent or nature of the future progression of the COVID-19 pandemic or its effects on our business and operations at this time.
We have enrolled, and will seek to enroll, cancer patients in clinical trials at sites located both in the United States and internationally. Many of our clinical trial sites have imposed restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which have had and may continue to have a negative impact on our ability to conduct our clinical trials. We have encountered and may continue to face difficulties recruiting and retaining patients in our ongoing and planned clinical trials to the extent patients are affected by the virus or are fearful of visiting or traveling to our clinical trial sites because of the pandemic. In addition, we do not currently know the duration or to what degree medical facilities, including our clinical trial sites, will continue to be impacted by the pandemic. For example, all of our clinical trial sites for our ongoing TakeAim Lymphoma study of emavusertib (CA-4948) are at large academic research hospitals that have imposed restrictions on entry which have in some instances prohibited, and in other instances may potentially prohibit in the future, clinical trial monitors and patients from entering the trial sites. We are actively working with our clinical trial sites to follow FDA guidelines for conducting clinical trials during the COVID-19 pandemic, including performing remote monitoring to the extent possible and arranging for the shipment of medicine directly from the clinical trial site to patients who are enrolled in our trials, if required; however, there is no assurance such arrangements will be successful. As a result, further enrollment in our ongoing TakeAim Lymphoma study of emavusertib (CA-4948) has been delayed and may continue to be delayed and patients currently enrolled in the trial may cease treatment due to the restrictions described above or fear of visiting or inability to visit our trial sites. As a result, enrollment in this trial has been slower than expected and the timeline of this trial has been delayed and may continue to be delayed. In addition, in July 2020, we commenced enrollment in our TakeAim Leukemia study of emavusertib (CA-4948). Clinical trial sites for this study have also imposed and may continue to impose restrictions similar to those described above. As a result, we may not be able to enroll this trial on our planned timeline, which would cause a delay in the overall timeline for this trial. Similarly, enrollment in and the overall timeline of our combination study of emavusertib (CA-4948) and ibrutinib, for which we commenced enrollment in February 2021, and our Phase 1 clinical trial for CI-8993, for which we commenced enrollment in September 2020, have been delayed and may continue to be delayed due to the factors discussed above. To the extent clinical trial sites are slowed down or closed to enrollment in our ongoing and planned clinical trials, this could also have a material adverse impact on our clinical trial plans and timelines. These restrictions may also impact our ability to collect patient data in a timely fashion. In addition, we do not know whether and to what extent potential exposure to COVID-19 of patients in our clinical trials could impact the efficacy of emavusertib (CA-4948) or CI-8993. The response to the COVID-19 pandemic may redirect resources of regulators in a way that would adversely impact our ability to progress regulatory approvals. In addition, we may face impediments to regulatory meetings and approvals relating to our clinical trials due to measures intended to limit in-person interactions.
We and our collaborators, third-party contract manufacturers, contract research organizations and clinical sites may experience delays or disruptions in supply and release of product candidates and/or procuring items that are essential for our research and development activities, including, for example, raw materials used in the manufacturing of our product candidates, basic medical and laboratory supplies used in our clinical trials or preclinical studies or animals that are used for preclinical testing, in each case, for which there may be shortages or supply chain disruptions as a result of the pandemic. While we
Table of Content
believe that we currently have sufficient supply of our product candidates to continue our ongoing clinical trials, shortages and global supply chain disruptions could make it difficult to obtain, or cause us to be delayed in obtaining, some of our product candidates, or materials contained therein, especially when such materials come from facilities located in areas particularly impacted by COVID-19. With shortages of supplies and continuing supply chain disruptions, we may be subject to inflationary costs and experience price increases for goods and services that we rely on. In addition, any disruptions could impact the supply, manufacturing or distribution of Erivedge, and sales of Erivedge may be negatively impacted by a decrease in new prescriptions as a result of a decline in patient medical visits due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had and could continue to have a negative impact on the amount and timing of any royalty revenue we may receive from Genentech related to Erivedge. There is no guarantee that the COVID-19 pandemic, or any potential future outbreak, would not impact our supply chain, which could have a material adverse impact on our clinical trial plans and business operations.
We also experienced delays in closing down our clinical trial sites related to our fimepinostat and CA-170 trials due to restrictions on non-essential workers imposed at those sites in response to COVID-19, which delayed the winding down of these trials.
Any negative impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has on the ability of our suppliers to provide materials for our product candidates or on recruiting or retaining patients in our clinical trials could cause costly delays to clinical trial activities, which could adversely affect our ability to obtain regulatory approval for and to commercialize our product candidates, increase our operating expenses, and have a material adverse effect on our financial results. Additionally, the pandemic has already caused significant disruptions in the financial markets, and may continue to cause such disruptions, which could impact our ability to raise additional funds and has also impacted, and may continue to impact, the volatility of our stock price and trading in our stock. Moreover, the pandemic has significantly impacted economies worldwide, which could result in adverse effects on our business and operations. We cannot be certain what the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will be on our business and it has had and may continue to have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and prospects.
Key Drivers
We believe that near term key drivers to our success will include:
•our ability to successfully plan, finance and complete current and planned clinical trials for emavusertib (CA-4948) and CI-8993, as well as for such clinical trials to generate favorable data; and
•our ability to raise additional financing, when required, to fund operations.
In the longer term, a key driver to our success will be our ability, and the ability of any current or future collaborator or licensee, to successfully develop and commercialize drug candidates.
Our Collaborations and License Agreements
Our current collaborations and license agreements are summarized below and detailed in the Business section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See "Business-Collaborations and License Agreements."
Aurigene
Our exclusive collaboration agreement, as amended, with Aurigene provides for the discovery, development and commercialization of small molecule compounds in the areas of immuno-oncology and selected precision oncology targets. As of December 31, 2021, we have four licensed programs, including emavusertib (CA-4948).
Under the collaboration agreement, as amended, Aurigene granted us an option to obtain exclusive, royalty-bearing licenses to relevant Aurigene technology to develop, manufacture and commercialize products containing certain of such compounds anywhere in the world, except for India and Russia, which are territories retained by Aurigene. Under the terms of the amended collaboration agreement, Aurigene also obtains rights to develop and commercialize CA-170 in Asia.
For each of the current four licensed programs, we have remaining unpaid or unwaived payment obligations of $42.5 million per program, related to regulatory approval and commercial sales milestones, plus specified additional payments for approvals for additional indications, if any.
We have agreed to pay Aurigene tiered royalties on our and our affiliates’ annual net sales of products at percentage rates ranging from the high single digits up to 10%, subject to specified reductions. In addition, we have agreed to make certain payments to Aurigene upon our entry into sublicense agreements on any program(s).
Table of Content
ImmuNext License Agreement
In January 2020, we entered into an option and license agreement with ImmuNext, or the ImmuNext Agreement. Under the terms of the ImmuNext Agreement, we agreed to engage in a collaborative effort with ImmuNext, and to conduct a Phase 1 clinical trial of an ImmuNext compound that antagonizes VISTA. We are conducting this Phase 1 clinical trial with respect to CI-8993. In exchange, ImmuNext granted us an exclusive option, exercisable until the earlier of (a) four years after January 6, 2020 and (b) 90 days after database lock for the first Phase 1 trial in which the endpoints are satisfied, or the Option Period, to obtain an exclusive, worldwide license to develop and commercialize certain VISTA antagonizing compounds and products containing these compounds in the field of oncology.
In January 2020, we paid $1.3 million as an upfront fee to ImmuNext. In addition, if we exercise the option, we will pay ImmuNext an option exercise fee of $20.0 million. ImmuNext will be eligible to receive up to $4.6 million in potential development milestones, up to $84.3 million in potential regulatory approval milestones, and up to $125.0 million in potential sales milestone payments from us. ImmuNext is also eligible to receive tiered royalties on annual net sales on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, at percentage rates ranging from high single digits to low double digits, subject to specified adjustments.
Genentech Hedgehog Signaling Pathway Collaboration Agreement
In 2003, we entered into a collaborative research, development and license agreement with Genentech, which we refer to as the collaboration agreement.
Under the terms of our collaboration agreement with Genentech, we granted Genentech an exclusive, global, royalty-bearing license, with the right to sublicense, to make, use, sell and import molecules capable of inhibiting the Hedgehog signaling pathway (including small molecules, proteins and antibodies) for human therapeutic applications, including cancer therapy. Genentech subsequently granted a sublicense to Roche for non-U.S. rights to Erivedge, other than in Japan where such rights are held by Chugai. Genentech and Roche are responsible for worldwide clinical development, regulatory affairs, manufacturing and supply, formulation, and sales and marketing.
We are eligible to receive up to an aggregate of $115.0 million in contingent cash milestone payments, exclusive of royalty payments, in connection with the development of Erivedge or another small molecule Hedgehog pathway inhibitor, assuming the successful achievement by Genentech and Roche of specified clinical development and regulatory objectives. Of this amount, we have received $59.0 million to date.
In addition to the contingent cash milestone payments, our wholly owned subsidiary, Curis Royalty, is entitled to a royalty on net sales of Erivedge that ranges from 5% to 7.5% based upon global Erivedge sales by Roche and Genentech. We recognized $10.7 million of royalty revenue from Genentech’s net sales of Erivedge during the year ended December 31, 2021, and have recognized an aggregate of $80.1 million in royalty revenues since Erivedge was approved.
As a result of our licensing agreements with various universities, we are obligated to make payments to university licensors on royalties that Curis Royalty earns in all territories. Cost of royalty revenues were $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and we have paid an aggregate of $4.1 million to university licensors since Erivedge was approved.
The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society
In November 2011, we entered into an agreement with Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, or LLS, pursuant to which LLS agreed to provide us with up to $4.0 million in payments to support our ongoing development of fimepinostat, subject to the achievement of specified milestones.
In August 2015, we entered into an amendment of the November 2011 agreement with LLS. Under the amendment, LLS agreed to provide advisory services regarding both the fimepinostat and IRAK4 programs, and LLS is no longer obligated to make further milestone payments related to ongoing clinical development of fimepinostat.
We agreed to make up to $1.7 million in future payments to LLS, which represents the aggregate payments previously received from LLS under the November 2011 agreement, pursuant to achievement of certain objectives, including a licensing, sale, or other similar transaction, as well as regulatory and commercial objectives, in each case related to the fimepinostat program in hematological malignancies. However, if fimepinostat does not meet its clinical safety endpoints in clinical trials in the defined field, or fails to obtain necessary regulatory approvals, all funding provided to us by LLS will be considered a non-refundable grant.
Table of Content
Financial Operations Overview
General. Our future operating results will largely depend on the progress of drug candidates currently in our research and development pipeline. The results of our operations will vary significantly from year to year and quarter to quarter and depend on, among other factors, the cost and outcome of any preclinical development or clinical trials then being conducted. For a discussion of our liquidity and funding requirements, see “Liquidity” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Funding Requirements.”
Debt. In March 2017, we and Curis Royalty entered into a credit agreement with HealthCare Royalty, collateralized with certain future Erivedge royalty and royalty related payment streams. Pursuant to the credit agreement, HealthCare Royalty made a $45.0 million loan at an annual interest rate of 9.95% to Curis Royalty, with the net proceeds distributed to us as sole equity holder of Curis Royalty. In March 2019, we terminated and repaid the outstanding principal and interest of $35.8 million that was due under the loan.
In April 2020, we entered into a promissory note evidencing an unsecured $0.9 million loan, or the PPP Loan, under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA. The PPP Loan was made by Silicon Valley Bank and had a term of 24-months and an interest rate of 1%. Under the terms of the CARES Act and the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020, PPP Loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP. We applied for such forgiveness in 2020 and received notification in June 2021 that the SBA had forgiven the PPP Loan in full, including interest accrued on the PPP Loan. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain of $0.9 million to Other income (expense), net for extinguishment of the debt. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded short- and long-term debt related to the PPP Loan of $0.6 million and $0.3 million, respectively.
Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties. In connection with the termination and repayment in full of the loan with HealthCare Royalty, the Company and Curis Royalty entered into the royalty interest purchase agreement, or Oberland Purchase Agreement, with entities managed by Oberland Capital Management, LLC, or the Purchasers. Upon closing of the Oberland Purchase Agreement, Curis Royalty received an upfront purchase price of $65.0 million from the Purchasers, approximately $33.8 million of which was used to pay off the remaining loan principal to HealthCare Royalty, and $3.7 million of which was used to pay transaction costs, including $3.4 million to HealthCare Royalty in accrued and unpaid interest and prepayment fees under the loan, resulting in net proceeds of $27.5 million. Curis Royalty will also be entitled to receive milestone payments of $53.5 million if the Purchasers receive payments pursuant to the Oberland Purchase Agreement in excess of $117.0 million on or prior to December 31, 2026, which milestone payments may each be paid, at the option of the Purchasers, in a lump sum in cash or out of the Purchaser’s portion of future payments under the Oberland Purchase Agreement. For further discussion of the Oberland Purchase Agreement, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Royalty Interest Purchase Agreement”.
Revenue. We do not expect to generate any revenues from our direct sale of products for several years, if ever. Substantially all of our revenues to date have been derived from license fees, research and development payments, and other amounts that we have received from our strategic collaborators and licensees, including royalty payments. Since the first quarter of 2012, we have recognized royalty revenues related to Genentech’s sales of Erivedge and we expect to continue to recognize royalty revenue in future quarters from Genentech’s sales of Erivedge in the U.S. and Roche’s sales of Erivedge outside of the U.S. However, a portion of our royalty and royalty-related revenues under our collaboration with Genentech will be paid to the Purchasers, pursuant to the Oberland Purchase Agreement. The Oberland Purchase Agreement will terminate upon the earlier to occur of (i) the date on which Curis Royalty’s rights to receive the Purchased Receivables owed by Genentech under the Genentech collaboration agreement have terminated in their entirety and (ii) the date on which payment in full of the put/call price is received by the Purchasers pursuant to the Purchasers’ exercise of their put option or Curis Royalty’s exercise of its call right. For additional information regarding the terms and termination provisions of this agreement, see Note 9, “Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this annual report on Form 10-K.
We could receive additional milestone payments from Genentech, provided that contractually specified development and regulatory objectives are met. Also, we could receive milestone payments from the Purchasers, provided that contractually specified royalty payment amounts are met within applicable time periods. Our only source of revenues and/or cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future will be royalty payments that are contingent upon the continued commercialization of Erivedge under our collaboration with Genentech, and contingent cash payments for the achievement of clinical, development and regulatory objectives, if any, that are met, under our collaboration with Genentech. Our receipt of additional payments under our collaboration with Genentech cannot be assured, nor can we predict the timing of any such payments, as the case may be.
Table of Content
Cost of Royalty Revenues. Cost of royalty revenues consists of all expenses incurred that are associated with royalty revenues that we record as revenues in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. These costs currently consist of payments we are obligated to make to university licensors on royalties that Curis Royalty receives from Genentech on net sales of Erivedge. Our obligation is equal to 5% of the royalty payments that we receive from Genentech for a period of 10 years from the first commercial sale of Erivedge, which occurred in February 2012 in the U.S.
Research and Development. Research and development expense consists of costs incurred to develop our drug candidates. These expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related expenses for personnel, including stock-based compensation expense;
•costs of conducting clinical trials, including amounts paid to clinical centers, clinical research organizations and consultants, among others;
• other outside service costs including costs of contract manufacturing;
•sublicense payments;
•the costs of supplies and reagents;
•occupancy and depreciation charges;
•certain payments that we make to Aurigene and ImmuNext under our collaboration agreements, including, for example, option exercise fees and milestone payments; and
•payments that we are obligated to make to certain third-party university licensors upon our receipt of payments from Genentech related to the achievement of clinical development and regulatory objectives under our collaboration agreement.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We are currently incurring research and development costs under our Hedgehog signaling pathway antagonist collaboration with Genentech related to the maintenance of third-party licenses to certain background technologies.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. As a result, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially over the next several years as we conduct our clinical trials of emavusertib (CA-4948) and CI-8993; prepare regulatory filings for our product candidates; continue to develop additional product candidates; and potentially advance our product candidates into later stages of clinical development.
The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. This uncertainty is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, including the uncertainty of:
•our ability to successfully enroll our current and future clinical trials and our ability to initiate future clinical trials, which has been and may continue to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and responsive measures relating thereto;
•the scope, quality of data, rate of progress and cost of clinical trials and other research and development activities undertaken by us or our collaborators;
•the results of future preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•the cost and timing of regulatory approvals and maintaining compliance with regulatory requirements;
•the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
•the cost of establishing clinical and commercial supplies of our drug candidates and any products that we may develop;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•the cost and effectiveness of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
Table of Content
Any changes in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of these product candidates. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to delay our clinical trials or require us to conduct clinical trials or other testing beyond those that we currently expect, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time to complete clinical development of that product candidate. We may never obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. Drug commercialization will take several years and millions of dollars in development costs.
A further discussion of some of the risks and uncertainties associated with completing our research and development programs on schedule, or at all, and some consequences of failing to do so, are set forth under “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation expense and other related costs for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal, information technology, corporate communications and human resource functions. Other costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expense, insurance, and professional fees for legal, patent and accounting services. Patent costs include certain patents covered under collaborations, a portion of which is reimbursed by collaborators and a portion of which is borne by us.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and disclosure of certain assets and liabilities at our balance sheet date. Such estimates and judgments include the carrying value of property and equipment and intangible assets, revenue recognition, the value of certain liabilities, debt classification and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to understanding the judgments and estimates we use in preparing our financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Our business strategy includes entering into collaborative license and development agreements with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies for the development and commercialization of our drug candidates. The terms of the agreements typically include non-refundable license fees, funding of research and development, payments based upon achievement of clinical development and regulatory objectives, and royalties on product sales.
Royalty Revenue. Since the first quarter of 2012, we have recognized royalty revenues related to Genentech’s and Roche’s sales of Erivedge. For arrangements that include sales based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). We expect to continue recognizing royalty revenue from Genentech’s sales of Erivedge in the U.S. and in other markets where Genentech and Roche successfully obtain marketing approval, if any (see Note 11). However, a portion of Erivedge royalties will be paid to the Purchasers under the Oberland Purchase Agreement (see Note 9).
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation transactions using a grant-date fair-value based method under FASB Codification Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation.
We have recorded employee and director stock-based compensation expense of $5.3 million, $2.7 million, and $2.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively.
We measure compensation cost for stock-based compensation at fair value, including our estimate of forfeitures, and recognize the expense as compensation expense over the period that the recipient is required to provide service in exchange for the award, which generally is the vesting period. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to measure the fair value of stock options. This model requires significant estimates related to the award’s expected life and future stock price volatility of the underlying equity security. In determining the amount of expense to be recorded, we estimate forfeiture rates for awards,
Table of Content
based on the probability that employees will complete the required service period. We estimate the forfeiture rate based on historical experience. If actual forfeitures differ significantly from our estimates, additional adjustments to compensation expense may be required in future periods. Ultimately, the actual expense recognized over the vesting period will only be for those shares that vest.
Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties
As a result of the obligation to pay future royalties to Oberland, we recorded the proceeds from this transaction as a liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheet that will be accounted for using the interest method over the estimated life of the Oberland Purchase Agreement. As a result, we impute interest on the transaction and record imputed interest expense at the estimated interest rate. Our estimate of the interest rate under the agreement is based on the amount of royalty payments expected to be received by Oberland over the life of the arrangement. We periodically assess the expected royalty payments to Curis Royalty from Genentech using a combination of historical results and forecasts from market data sources. To the extent such payments are greater or less than the initial estimates or the timing of such payments is materially different than the original estimates, we will adjust the amortization of the liability.
Our discussion of our critical accounting policies is not intended to be a comprehensive discussion of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by generally accepted accounting principles, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Results of Operations (all amounts rounded to the nearest thousand)
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Revenues
Total revenues are summarized as follows:
Total revenues decreased by $0.2 million, or 2%, to $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to a decrease in Erivedge royalties.
Cost of Royalty Revenues. Cost of royalty revenues remained consistent at $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These amounts primarily relate to payments to university licensors on royalties that Curis Royalty earns on Genentech’s net sales of Erivedge.
Table of Content
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses are summarized as follows:
Research and development expenses increased by $11.8 million, or 51%, to $34.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $23.1 million for the prior year. Direct research and development expenses increased by $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year period primarily due to increased clinical and manufacturing costs for our programs. The increase in costs is partially offset by a $1.3 million upfront license fee expense from our option and license agreement with ImmuNext that occurred during the first quarter of 2020. Additionally, employee related costs increased by $6.2 million, primarily attributable to increased stock compensation and personnel costs as a result of additional headcount.
We expect that a majority of our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future will be incurred in connection with our efforts to advance our programs, including clinical and preclinical development costs, manufacturing, option exercise fees, and potential payments upon achievement of certain milestones.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses are summarized as follows:
General and administrative expenses increased by $5.2 million, or 43%, to $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $12.1 million for the prior year. The increase in general administrative expense was driven primarily by higher costs for stock-based compensation, professional and consulting services, personnel, and insurance as compared to the prior year.
Other Expense
Other expense, net, was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $5.0 million for the same period in 2020. Net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of $4.5 million of imputed interest expense related to future royalty payments, partly offset by $0.9 million related to the gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loan and $0.2 million of interest income. Net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $5.1 million of imputed interest expense related to future royalty payments, partially offset by $0.1 million of interest income.
As a result of the foregoing, we incurred a net loss of $45.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Table of Content
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Revenues
Total revenues are summarized as follows:
Total revenues increased by $0.8 million, or 8%, to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily related to a decrease in the reserve for contractual royalty reductions arising from Genentech and Roche’s net sales of Erivedge. Other revenue related to sub-license revenues earned in 2020.
Cost of Royalty Revenues. Cost of royalty revenues remained consistent at $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. These amounts primarily relate to payments to university licensors on royalties that Curis Royalty earns on Genentech’s net sales of Erivedge.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses are summarized as follows:
Our total research and development expenses increased by $0.8 million, or 3%, to $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $22.3 million for the prior year. Direct research and development expenses decreased by $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year period primarily due to reduced clinical and manufacturing costs for CA-170 and fimepinostat, partially offset by $2.3 million in costs related to our option and license agreement with ImmuNext and increased clinical and manufacturing costs for emavusertib (CA-4948) and CI-8993.
We expect that a majority of our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future will be incurred in connection with our efforts to advance our programs, including clinical and preclinical development costs, manufacturing, option exercise fees, and potential payments upon achievement of certain milestones.
Table of Content
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses are summarized as follows:
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.6 million, or 5%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The increase in general administrative expense was driven primarily by an increase in personnel, legal and occupancy related costs as compared to 2019. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in stock-based compensation expense, professional and consulting fees and other expenses as compared to 2019.
Other Expense
Other expense, net, was $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $7.8 million for the same period in 2019. Net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of $5.1 million of imputed interest expense related to future royalty payments, partially offset by $0.1 million of interest income. Net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included a loss on extinguishment of debt of $3.5 million and imputed interest expense of $4.1 million.
As a result of the foregoing, we incurred a net loss of $29.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $32.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through private and public placements of our equity securities, license fees, contingent cash payments and research and development funding from our corporate collaborators, debt financings, and the monetization of certain royalty rights. See “Funding Requirements” and Note 1 “Nature of Business” for a further discussion of our liquidity.
At December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of cash, cash equivalents, and investments of $139.8 million, excluding our restricted cash of $0.7 million. Our cash and cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at date of purchase. Our investments short and long-term primarily include commercial paper and securities. We maintain cash balances with financial institutions in excess of insured limits.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement
In February 2020, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, for the sale of up to $30.0 million of our common stock with Aspire Capital Fund, LLC, or Aspire Capital. Under the terms of the Purchase Agreement, Aspire Capital made an initial investment of $3.0 million through the purchase of 2,693,965 shares of our common stock. In addition, Aspire Capital committed to purchase shares of our common stock, at our request from time to time during a 30-month period at prices based on the market price at the time of each sale, subject to specified terms and limitations. As consideration for Aspire Capital’s obligation under the Purchase Agreement, we issued 646,551 shares of our common stock to Aspire Capital as a commitment fee. We also entered into a registration rights agreement with Aspire Capital in connection with our entry into the Purchase Agreement setting forth our obligation to maintain an effective registration statement covering any shares of common stock sold or to be sold to Aspire Capital, subject to the terms of the registration rights agreement.
To date, we have received gross proceeds of $8.4 million from our sales of common stock to Aspire Capital and the remaining balance of common stock available to be sold pursuant to the Purchase Agreement is $21.6 million. The extent to which we utilize the Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital as a source of funding will depend on a number of factors, including the prevailing market price of our common stock, the volume of trading in our common stock and the extent to which we are able to secure funds from other sources. The number of shares that we may sell to Aspire Capital under the Purchase Agreement on any given day and during the term of the agreement is subject to certain limitations and restrictions. We have the
Table of Content
right to sell up to 150,000 shares of common stock per day to Aspire Capital, which total may be increased by mutual agreement up to an additional 2,000,000 shares per day.
Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we will control the timing and amount of the further sale of our common stock to Aspire Capital. We plan to use the proceeds for general corporate purposes, including research and development, clinical trial activity and working capital. There are no restrictions on future financings and there are no financial covenants, participation rights, rights of first refusal, or penalties in the purchase agreement. We have the right to terminate the Purchase Agreement at any time without any additional cost or penalty.
Equity Offerings
In July 2015, we entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we could sell from time to time up to $30.0 million of our common stock through an “at-the-market” equity offering program, under which Cowen was to act as sales agent. We terminated this sales agreement in March 2020. As of the termination date, we had sold an aggregate of 420,796 shares of common stock pursuant to this sales agreement, for net proceeds of $6.2 million and no further sales may be made under this sales agreement.
In March 2020, we entered into a Capital on Demand™ Sales Agreement with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC , or JonesTrading, to sell from time to time up to $30.0 million of our common stock through an “at the market offering” program under which JonesTrading acted as sales agent. We terminated this sales agreement effective as of December 9, 2020. We did not incur any termination penalties as a result of the termination. As of the effective date of the termination of this sales agreement, we had sold an aggregate of 6,298,648 shares of common stock under the sales agreement for aggregate gross proceeds of $8.3 million and net proceeds of $7.9 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses. The $21.7 million of common stock that remained unsold under this sales agreement at the time of termination is no longer available.
In June 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors, pursuant to which we issued and sold, in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 14,000,000 shares of our common stock at a purchase price per share of $1.25, for aggregate gross proceeds of $17.5 million, before deducting fees of approximately $1.0 million paid to the placement agent and other offering expenses of approximately $0.5 million paid by us. JonesTrading acted as the exclusive placement agent for the transaction, and we offered the shares pursuant to our universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3, or the 2018 Shelf, which was filed with the SEC on May 3, 2018 and declared effective by the SEC on May 17, 2018 (File No. 333-224627), and a prospectus supplement thereunder.
In December 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 29,500,000 shares of our common stock, including 3,847,826 shares issued and sold upon the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $5.75 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $169.6 million before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $10.2 million. The securities in this transaction were offered pursuant to the 2018 Shelf and an additional registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-251211) filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) which became automatically effective on December 9, 2020, and a prospectus supplement thereunder.
In March 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor, and JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC, or JonesTrading, to sell from time to time up to $100.0 million of our common stock through an “at the market offering” program under which Cantor and JonesTrading act as sales agents. To date, we have not made any sales of common stock pursuant to the sales agreement.
Debt Financing
In April 2020, we entered into a promissory note evidencing an unsecured $0.9 million loan, or the PPP Loan, under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA. The PPP Loan was made by Silicon Valley Bank and had a term of 24-months and an interest rate of 1%. Under the terms of the CARES Act and the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020, PPP Loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of loans granted under the PPP. We applied for such forgiveness in 2020 and received notification in June 2021 that the SBA had forgiven the PPP Loan in full, including interest accrued on the PPP Loan. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain of $0.9 million to Other income (expense), net for extinguishment of the debt.
Royalty Interest Purchase Agreement
In March 2019, we and Curis Royalty entered into the royalty interest purchase agreement, or Oberland Purchase Agreement with the Purchasers. We sold to the Purchasers a portion of our rights to receive royalties from Genentech on potential net sales of Erivedge.
Table of Content
As upfront consideration for the purchase of the royalty rights, at closing the Purchasers paid to Curis Royalty $65.0 million less certain transaction expenses. Curis Royalty will also be entitled to receive up to $53.5 million in milestone payments based on sales of Erivedge if the Purchasers receive payments pursuant to the Oberland Purchase Agreement in excess of $117.0 million on or prior to December 31, 2026. For further discussion please refer to Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties."
Milestone Payments and Monetization of Royalty Rights
We began receiving royalty revenues in 2012 in connection with Genentech’s sales of Erivedge in the U.S. and Roche’s sales of Erivedge outside of the U.S. Erivedge royalty revenues received after December 2012 have been used to repay Curis Royalty’s outstanding principal and interest under credit agreements. A portion of Erivedge royalty and royalty-related revenue payments will be paid to the Purchasers pursuant to the Oberland Purchase Agreement. We also remain entitled to receive any contingent payments upon achievement of clinical development objectives and royalty payments related to sales of Erivedge pursuant to our collaboration agreement with Genentech and certain contingent payments upon achievement of contractually specified royalty revenue payment amounts related to sales of Erivedge pursuant to the Oberland Purchase Agreement. Upon receipt of any such payments, as well as on royalties received, we are required to make payments to certain university licensors totaling 5% of these amounts.
Cash Flows
Cash flows for operations have primarily been used for salaries and wages for our employees, facility and facility-related costs for our office and laboratory, fees paid in connection with preclinical and clinical studies, laboratory supplies, consulting fees and legal fees. We expect that costs associated with clinical studies will increase in future periods.
Net cash used in operating activities of $37.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the result of our net loss for the period of $45.4 million, partially offset by non-cash charges primarily consisting of $5.3 million in stock-based compensation. In addition, accounts payable and accrued and other liabilities increased $5.0 million, operating lease liability decreased $1.7 million, accounts receivable increased $0.2 million, and prepaid expenses and other assets increased $2.0 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of $25.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of our net loss for the period of $29.9 million, partially offset by non-cash charges primarily consisting of $2.7 million in stock-based compensation. In addition, accounts payable and accrued and other liabilities increased $1.0 million, accounts receivable decreased $0.2 million related to an increase in fourth quarter 2020 Erivedge royalties and prepaid expenses and other assets increased $0.2 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of $26.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of our net loss for the period of $32.1 million, partially offset by non-cash charges consisting of $2.7 million in stock-based compensation, $3.5 million related to the loss on extinguishment of debt, $1.0 million of non-cash lease expense, and $0.3 million of non-cash imputed interest expense related to the sale of future royalties. Accounts payable and accrued and other liabilities increased $0.1 million, accounts receivable increased $0.4 million related to an increase in fourth quarter Erivedge royalties, prepaid expenses and other assets increased $0.2 million and our operating lease liability reflected a decrease of $1.0 million following the adoption of ASC 842.
We expect to continue to use cash in operations as we seek to advance our drug candidates and our programs under our collaboration agreements with Aurigene and ImmuNext. In addition, in the future we may owe royalties and other contingent payments to our licensors based on the achievement of developmental milestones, product sales and other specified objectives.
Investing activities used cash of $47.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. These changes primarily resulted from net investment activity from purchases and sales or maturities of investments for those respective periods.
Investing activities used cash of $49.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change primarily resulted from net investment activity from purchases and sales or maturities of investments. The increase in purchases of investments resulted primarily from the investment of cash proceeds from the public offering of common stock in December 2020.
Investing activities used cash of $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This change primarily resulted from net investment activity from purchases and sales or maturities of investments.
Financing activities used cash of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to payments related to the royalty interest purchase agreement with Oberland Capital.
Table of Content
Financing activities provided cash of $188.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to the $159.4 million in net proceeds we received from the public offering of our common stock in December 2020, $16.0 million in net proceeds from our registered direct offering in June 2020, aggregate net proceeds of $8.1 million under our sales agreement with Aspire Capital, aggregate net proceeds of $7.9 million under our prior sales agreement with JonesTrading, aggregate net proceeds of $0.8 million from the issuance of common stock under our equity compensation plans and net proceeds of $0.9 million from the PPP Loan. In addition, we made payments of $4.3 million related to the royalty interest purchase agreement with Oberland Capital.
Financing activities provided cash of $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to the $65.0 million in gross proceeds we received from Oberland Capital which was partially offset by $37.2 million in payments made to terminate our credit agreement with HealthCare Royalty Partners. For more information, see Note 9, “Liability Related to the Sale of Future Royalties,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this annual report on Form 10-K. In addition, we made payments of $2.2 million related to the royalty interest purchase agreement with Oberland Capital and we made principal payments on Curis Royalty's loan with HealthCare Royalty of $1.8 million and received $0.1 million in proceeds from the sale of common stock related to our stock-based compensation plans.
Funding Requirements
We have incurred significant losses since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $1.1 billion. We will require substantial funds to continue our research and development programs and to fulfill our planned operating goals. Our planned operating and capital requirements currently include the support of our current and future research and development activities for emavusertib (CA-4948) and CI-8993 as well as development candidates we have and continue to license under our collaborations with Aurigene and ImmuNext. We will require substantial additional capital to fund the further development of these programs, as well as to fund our general and administrative costs and expenses. Moreover, our agreements with collaborators impose significant potential financial obligations on us. For example, under our collaboration, license and option agreement with Aurigene, we are required to make milestone, royalty and option fee payments for discovery, research and preclinical development programs that will be performed by Aurigene, which impose significant potential financial obligations on us. In addition, if we choose to exercise our option under the option and license agreement with ImmuNext, or the ImmuNext Agreement, we will be required to make milestone, royalty, and option fee payments in connection with the development of CI-8993.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments of $139.8 million as of December 31, 2021, should enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2024. We have based this assessment on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. If we are unable to obtain sufficient funding, we will be forced to delay, reduce in scope or eliminate some of our research and development programs, including related clinical trials and operating expenses, potentially delaying the time to market for, or preventing the marketing of, any of our product candidates, which could adversely affect our business prospects and our ability to continue operations, and would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. Our ability to raise additional funds will depend on financial, economic and market conditions, many of which are outside of our control, and we may be unable to raise financing when needed, or on terms favorable to us, or at all. Furthermore, high volatility in the capital markets resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic has had, and could continue to have, a negative impact on the price of our common stock, and could adversely impact our ability to raise additional funds. In addition, we may seek to engage in one or more strategic alternatives, such as a strategic partnership with one or more parties, the licensing, sale or divestiture of some of our assets or proprietary technologies or the sale of our company, but there can be no assurance that we would be able to enter into such a transaction or transactions on a timely basis or on terms favorable to us, or at all. Our failure to raise capital through a financing or strategic alternative as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. If we are unable to raise sufficient capital we would be unable to fund our operations and may be required to evaluate alternatives, which could include dissolving and liquidating our assets or seeking protection under the bankruptcy laws, and a determination to file for bankruptcy could occur at a time that is earlier than when we would otherwise exhaust our cash resources. If we decide to dissolve and liquidate our assets or to seek protection under the bankruptcy laws, it is unclear to what extent we would be able to pay our obligations, and, accordingly, it is further unclear whether and to what extent any resources would be available for distributions to stockholders.
Furthermore, there are a number of factors that may affect our future capital requirements and further accelerate our need for additional working capital, many of which are outside our control, including the following:
•unanticipated costs in our research and development programs;
Table of Content
•the timing and cost of obtaining regulatory approvals for our drug candidates and maintaining compliance with regulatory requirements;
•payments due to licensors, including Aurigene and ImmuNext if we exercise our option under the ImmuNext Agreement, for patent rights and technology used in our drug development programs;
•the costs of commercialization activities for any of our drug candidates that receive marketing approval, to the extent such costs are our responsibility, including the costs and timing of establishing drug sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing capabilities;
•unplanned costs to prepare, file, prosecute, defend and enforce patent claims and other patent-related costs, including litigation costs and technology license fees;
•unexpected losses in our cash investments or an inability to otherwise liquidate our cash investments due to unfavorable conditions in the capital markets;
•impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and responsive actions relating thereto; and
•our ability to continue as a going concern.
To become and remain profitable, we, either alone or with collaborators, must develop and eventually commercialize one or more drug candidates with significant market potential. This will require us to be successful in a range of challenging activities, including completing preclinical testing and clinical trials of our drug candidates, obtaining marketing approval for these drug candidates, manufacturing, marketing and selling those drugs for which we may obtain marketing approval and satisfying any post marketing requirements. We may never succeed in these activities and, even if we do, may never generate revenues that are significant or large enough to achieve profitability. Other than Erivedge, which is being commercialized by Genentech and Roche, our most advanced drug candidates are currently only in early clinical testing.
For the foreseeable future, we will need to spend significant capital in an effort to develop and commercialize products and we expect to incur substantial operating losses. Our failure to become and remain profitable would, among other things, depress the market price of our common stock and could impair our ability to raise capital, expand our business, diversify our research and development programs or continue our operations.
Contractual Obligations
In December 2019, we entered into a seven-year operating lease for a 21,772 square foot real estate property that commenced in May 2020. The leased property is used for office, research and laboratory space and is located at 128 Spring Street. In addition to the base rent, we are responsible for our share of operating expenses and real estate taxes, in accordance with the terms of the lease agreement. The future minimum lease payments and related obligations under the agreement are $8.9 million over six years. In addition, our cash commitments for outside service obligations are $0.5 million over four years.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this annual report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.