Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this report. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements included in this report are based on information available to us on the date hereof and, except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
Creek Road Miners, Inc. (formerly known as Wizard Brands, Inc., Wizard Entertainment, Inc., Wizard World, Inc., and GoEnergy, Inc.) was incorporated in Delaware on May 2, 2001. Prior to Cryptocurrency mining operations that began in October 2021, the Company produced live and virtual pop culture conventions and events, and sold a gelatin machine and related consumables (known collectively as “legacy operations”). All legacy operations were discontinued during 2021. The Company operates an eCommerce site selling pop culture memorabilia and will evaluate whether to continue the eCommerce operations in 2022.
On August 6, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Informa Pop Culture Events, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Informa”). Pursuant to the Agreement, Creek Road Miners Corp. (fka Kick the Can Corp.) sold, transferred, and assigned certain assets, properties, and rights to Informa related to the business of operating and producing live pop culture events. The Company released deferred revenue and other liabilities totaling $722,429 and recognized other income of this amount.
On September 15, 2021, we sold our wholly owned subsidiary which contained our Jevo assets and all rights to our Jevo operations for $1,500,000 and recognized a gain on the transaction of approximately $1,130,740.
Cryptocurrency Mining
We currently generate substantially all our revenue through cryptocurrency we earn through our mining activities, which we may strategically hold or sell at beneficial prices and times. We currently mine and hold Bitcoin exclusively and do not have the intention of mining any other cryptocurrencies in the near future. While we plan to hold our mined Bitcoin until the next halving event (expected to occur around March 2024), we may sell the Bitcoin we mine as necessary for operations or as dictated by market conditions. Our mining operations commenced on October 24, 2021. We use special cryptocurrency mining computers (known as “miners”) to solve complex cryptographic algorithms to support the Bitcoin blockchain and, in return, receive Bitcoin as our reward. Miners measure their processing power, which is known as “hashing” power, in terms of the number of hashing algorithms solved (or “hashes”) per second, which is the miner’s “hash rate.” We participate in Mining Pools (“mining pool(s)”) that pool the resources of groups of miners and split cryptocurrency rewards earned according to the “hashing” capacity each miner contributes to the mining pool.
Mining Equipment
All of the miners we operate were manufactured by Bitmain, and incorporate application-specific integrated circuit (“ASIC”) chips specialized to solve blocks on the Bitcoin blockchains using the 256-bit secure hashing algorithm (“SHA-256”) in return for Bitcoin cryptocurrency rewards. In October 2021 we put 156 Bitmain S19J Pro miners into production, and added another 84 into production in December 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had 240 miners with 24 Ph/s of hashing capacity in production, and had deposits for an additional 1,140 miners with 135.3 Ph/s hashing capacity to be delivered in 2022 as follows:
● Bitmain S19 (90 Th/s per miner, total 24.3 Ph/s hashing capacity) delivery expected March 2022
● Bitmain S19J Pro (100 Th/s per miner, total 27 Ph/s hashing capacity) delivery expected May 2022
● Bitmain S19XP (140 Th/s per miner, total 84 Ph/s hashing capacity) delivery expected July through December 2022
After the delivery of the miners above we will have a total of 1,380 miners with 159.3 Ph/s of hashing capacity.
The purchase commitments for the miners total approximately $11.5 million, of which $7,089,000 was paid as a deposit during the year ending December 31. 2021. The remaining commitments of approximately $4.4 million are anticipated to be paid monthly from the proceeds of the sale of earned Bitcoin during the year ending December 31, 2022 or, if necessary or advisable, with earned Bitcoin to the extent that if the vendor accepts Bitcoin as a form of payment or from additional capital raising, which may be debt or equity, or a combination thereof pursuant to a private or public offering, with the last payment scheduled to occur on November 10, 2022.
Mobile Data Centers
We utilize mobile data centers to house our miners. Our mobile data centers are located close to natural gas wellheads. We use natural gas to power a mobile turbine that produces electricity that, in turn, is used to power our miners.
Mining Results
The Company measures its operations by the number and U.S. Dollar (US$) value of the cryptocurrency rewards it earns from its cryptocurrency mining activities. The following table presents additional information regarding our cryptocurrency mining operations:
Factors Affecting Profitability
Our business is heavily dependent on the market price of Bitcoin. The prices of cryptocurrencies, specifically Bitcoin, have experienced substantial volatility. Further affecting the industry, and particularly for the Bitcoin blockchain, the cryptocurrency reward for solving a block is subject to periodic incremental halving. Halving is a process designed to control the overall supply and reduce the risk of inflation in cryptocurrencies using a Proof-of-Work consensus algorithm. At a predetermined block, the mining reward is cut in half, hence the term “halving”. For Bitcoin the reward was initially set at 50 Bitcoin currency rewards per block. The Bitcoin blockchain has undergone halving three times since its inception as follows: (1) on November 28, 2012 at block 210,000; (2) on July 9, 2016 at block 420,000; and (3) on May 11, 2020 at block 630,000, when the reward was reduced to its current level of 6.25 Bitcoin per block. The next halving for the Bitcoin blockchain is anticipated to occur in March 2024 at block 840,000, when the reward will be reduced to 3.125 Bitcoin per block. This process will reoccur until the total amount of Bitcoin currency rewards issued reaches 21 million and the theoretical supply of new Bitcoin is exhausted. Many factors influence the price of Bitcoin, and potential increases or decreases in prices in advance of, or following, a future halving is unknown.
While we currently plan to hold our mined Bitcoin until the next halving event, we may use or sell our Bitcoin as necessary for operations or as dictated by market conditions.
Competition
Our business environment is constantly evolving, and cryptocurrency miners can range from individuals to large-scale commercial mining operations. We compete with other companies that focus all or a portion of their activities on mining activities at scale, including several public and private companies. We face significant competition in every aspect of our business, including, but not limited to, the acquisition of mining equipment, the ability to raise capital, and the ability to obtain the lowest cost energy to power our mining operations.
Government Regulation
Cryptocurrency is increasingly becoming subject to governmental regulation, both in the U.S. and internationally. State and local regulations also may apply to our activities and other activities in which we may participate in the future. Numerous regulatory bodies have shown an interest in regulating blockchain or cryptocurrency activities. For example, on March 9, 2022 President Biden signed an executive order on cryptocurrencies. While the executive order does not mandate any specific regulations, it instructs various federal agencies to consider potential regulatory measures, including the evaluation of the creation of a U.S. Central Bank digital currency. Future changes to existing regulations or entirely new regulations may affect our business in ways it is not presently possible for us to predict with any reasonable degree of reliability. As the regulatory and legal environment evolves, we may become subject to new laws and regulation which may affect our mining and other activities. For additional discussion regarding our belief about the potential risks existing and future regulation pose to our business, see the Section entitled “Risk Factors” herein.
Strategic Initiatives
Our objective is to mine and hold select cryptocurrencies. We seek to own multiple oil and natural gas producing assets, utilize the natural gas to power environmentally friendly, state of the art cryptocurrency mining facilities. By directing income from oil and excess natural gas sales to cover operating expenses we will have the opportunity to retain our mined cryptocurrencies as assets.
COVID-19
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the responses that we, other businesses and governments are taking continue to evolve. Furthermore, capital markets and economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it is possible that it could cause a local and/or global economic recession. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industry and economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain.
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on our customers, service providers and suppliers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the date of issuance of our financial statements, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future materially impact our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP, requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. When making these estimates and assumptions, we consider our historical experience, our knowledge of economic and market factors and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ under different estimates and assumptions. The accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and uncertainties.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying financial statements are consolidated and include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. Intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Reclassification
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to current period presentation.
Cash and cash equivalents
For purposes of the statements of cash flows, the Company defines cash equivalents as all highly liquid debt instruments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less. In all periods presented, cash equivalents consist primarily of money market funds.
Fair value of financial instruments
Under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, fair value is defined as the price at which an asset could be exchanged or a liability transferred in a transaction between knowledgeable, willing parties in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability. Where available, fair value is based on observable market prices or parameters or derived from such prices or parameters. Where observable prices or parameters are not available, valuation models are applied. A fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value into three broad levels as follows:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Inputs, other than the quoted prices in active markets, are observable either directly or indirectly.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs based on the Company’s assumptions.
The Company is required to use observable market data if such data is available without undue cost and effort. The Company has no fair value items required to be disclosed as of December 31, 2021 or 2020 under these requirements. The carrying amounts of financial assets and liabilities, such as cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable and accounts payable, approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Transactions involving related parties typically cannot be presumed to be carried out on an arm’s-length basis, as the requisite conditions of competitive, free market dealings may not exist. However, in the case of the secured convertible debentures due to related parties, the Company obtained a fairness opinion from an independent third party which supports that the transaction was carried out at an arm’s length basis.
Cryptocurrency
Cryptocurrency (Bitcoin) is included in current assets in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The classification of cryptocurrencies as a current asset has been made after the Company’s consideration of the significant consistent daily trading volume on readily available cryptocurrency exchanges and the absence of limitations or restrictions on Company’s ability to sell Bitcoin. Cryptocurrencies awarded to the Company through its mining activities are accounted for in connection with the Company’s revenue recognition policy disclosed below. Cryptocurrencies held are accounted for as intangible assets with indefinite useful lives. An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but assessed for impairment annually, or more frequently, when events or changes in circumstances occur indicating that it is more likely than not that the indefinite-lived asset is impaired. Impairment exists when the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is measured using the quoted price of the cryptocurrency at the time its fair value is being measured. In testing for impairment, the Company has the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. If it is determined that it is not more likely than not that an impairment exists, a quantitative impairment test is not necessary. If the Company concludes otherwise, it is required to perform a quantitative impairment test. To the extent an impairment loss is recognized, the loss establishes the new cost basis of the asset. Subsequent reversal of impairment losses is not permitted. Cryptocurrencies awarded to the Company through its mining activities are included within operating activities on the accompanying consolidated statements of cash flows.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are comprised of intangible assets and property and equipment. Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. An estimate of undiscounted future cash flows produced by the asset, or the appropriate grouping of assets, is compared to the carrying value to determine whether an impairment exists, pursuant to the provisions of FASB ASC 360-10 “Accounting for the Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets to Be Disposed Of”. If an asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured based on quoted market prices in active markets, if available. If quoted market prices are not available, the estimate of fair value is based on various valuation techniques, including a discounted value of estimated future cash flows and fundamental analysis. The Company reports an asset to be disposed of at the lower of its carrying value or its estimated net realizable value.
Property and equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost and are depreciated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives of 3 to 9 years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the useful lives of the related assets, or the lease term. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to operations as incurred while renewals and betterments are capitalized. Gains and losses on disposals are included in the consolidated statements of operations.
Management assesses the carrying value of property and equipment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If there is indication of impairment, management prepares an estimate of future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If these cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized to write down the asset to its estimated fair value.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), (“ASC 606”). The underlying principle of ASC 606 is to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers at the amount expected to be collected.
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to a customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We apply the following five steps in order to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements:
● identify the contract with a customer;
● identify the performance obligations in the contract;
● determine the transaction price;
● allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognize revenue as the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company has entered into digital asset mining pools by executing contracts with the mining pool operators to provide computing power to the mining pool. The contracts are terminable at any time by either party and the Company’s enforceable right to compensation only begins when the Company provides computing power to the mining pool operator. In exchange for providing computing power, the Company is entitled to a fractional share of the fixed cryptocurrency award the mining pool operator receives (less digital asset transaction fees to the mining pool operator which are recorded as a component of cost of revenues), for successfully adding a block to the blockchain. The Company’s fractional share is based on the proportion of computing power the Company contributed to the mining pool operator to the total computing power contributed by all mining pool participants in solving the current algorithm.
Providing computing power in digital asset transaction verification services is an output of the Company’s ordinary activities. The provision of providing such computing power is the only performance obligation in the Company’s contracts with mining pool operators. The transaction consideration the Company receives, if any, is noncash consideration, which the Company measures at fair value on the date received, which is not materially different than the fair value at contract inception or the time the Company has earned the award from the pools. The consideration is all variable. Because it is not probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur, the consideration is constrained until the mining pool operator successfully places a block (by being the first to solve an algorithm) and the Company receives confirmation of the consideration it will receive, at which time revenue is recognized. There is no significant financing component in these transactions.
Fair value of the cryptocurrency award received is determined using the market rate of the related cryptocurrency at the time of receipt. There is currently no specific definitive guidance under GAAP or alternative accounting framework for the accounting for cryptocurrencies recognized as revenue or held, and management has exercised significant judgment in determining the appropriate accounting treatment. In the event authoritative guidance is enacted by the FASB, the Company may be required to change its policies, which could have an effect on the Company’s consolidated financial position and results from operations.
Cryptocurrency Mining Costs
The Company’s cryptocurrency mining costs consist primarily of direct costs of earning Bitcoin related to mining operations, including mining pool fees, natural gas costs, turbine rental costs, and mobile data center rental costs, but exclude depreciation and amortization, which are separately stated in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Reverse Stock Split
We implemented a 1-for-20 reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock that was effective on January 23, 2020. Unless otherwise noted, all share and related option, warrant, and convertible security information presented has been retroactively adjusted to reflect the reduced number of shares, and the increase in the share price which resulted from this action.
Stock-Based Compensation
We periodically issue stock options, warrants and restricted stock to employees and non-employees for services, in capital raising transactions, and for financing costs. We account for share-based payments under the guidance as set forth in the Share-Based Payment Topic 718 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees, officers, directors, and consultants, including employee stock options, based on estimated fair values. We estimate the fair value of stock option and warrant awards to employees and directors on the date of grant using an option-pricing model, and the value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the required service period in our Statements of Operations. We estimate the fair value of restricted stock awards to employees and directors using the market price of our common stock on the date of grant, and the value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the required service period in our Statements of Operations.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences, and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Discontinued Operations
On August 6, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Informa Pop Culture Events, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Informa”). Pursuant to the Agreement, Creek Road Miners Corp (fka Kick the Can Corp.) sold, transferred, and assigned certain assets, properties, and rights to Informa related to the business of operating and producing live pop culture events. The Company released deferred revenue and other liabilities totaling $722,429 and recognized other income of this amount.
On September 15, 2021, we sold our wholly owned subsidiary which contained our Jevo assets and all rights to our Jevo operations for $1,500,000 and recognized a gain on the transaction of approximately $1,130,740.
The related assets and liabilities associated with the discontinued operations in our consolidated balance sheets for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, are classified as discontinued operations. Additionally, the financial results associated with discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of operations for the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020, are classified as discontinued operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased $395,252, or 96%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, due to the following:
Operating Costs and Expenses
Our operating costs and expenses increased $16,207,632, or 603%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, due to the following:
Net Income (Loss)
Net loss from continuing operations increased $16,176,986 or 557%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to increased operating costs and expenses as described above.
Going Concern Analysis
Historically, we have relied upon cash from financing activities to fund substantially all of the cash requirements of our activities and have incurred significant losses and experienced negative cash flow. The Company had net losses from continuing operations of $19,078,727, and $2,901,741, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. On December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $2.7 million and working capital of approximately $4.8 million. We have evaluated the significance of these conditions in relation to our ability to meet our obligations, which had previously raised doubts about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. However, the Company believes that the effects of the sale of its legacy operations during 2021, and the entrance into cryptocurrency mining operations that began in October 2021, will guide the Company in a positive direction as we continue to strive to attain profitability.
Additionally, if necessary, management believes that both related parties (management and members of the Board of Directors of the Company) and potential external sources of debt and/or equity financing may be obtained based on management’s history of being able to raise capital from both internal and external sources. However, although there have been recent external source financings, there is no absolute certainty that any such external source or related-party financing can be obtained in the future. Therefore, the accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets, or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the matters discussed herein. While the Company believes in the viability of management’s strategy to obtain debt and/or equity financing, generate sufficient revenue, and control costs, there can be no assurances to that effect. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the ability to obtain debt and/or equity financing, generate sufficient revenues, and to control operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2,785,187, compared to $1,897,703 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $887,484. This increase was primarily due to cash provided by financing activities, and partially offset by cash used in operating and investing activities.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $6,969,723 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and resulted primarily from a net loss of $17,270,703, an adjustment for the gain on sale of discontinued operations of $1,853,169, a decrease in liabilities associated with discontinued operations of $1,228,911, and partially offset by stock based compensation of $12,585,009.
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,070,718 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and resulted primarily from a net loss of $1,940,401, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,100,458.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $9,928,726 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and resulted primarily from deposits on mining equipment of $7,613,230, and the purchase of property and equipment, specifically mining equipment, of $2,315,496.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company entered into purchase agreements with mining equipment suppliers for the acquisition of the mining equipment to be shipped and delivered during 2022 as presented below:
● Bitmain S19 (90 Th/s per miner, total 24.3 Ph/s hashing capacity) delivery expected March 2022
● Bitmain S19J Pro (100 Th/s per miner, total 27 Ph/s hashing capacity) delivery expected May 2022
● Bitmain S19XP (140 Th/s per miner, total 84 Ph/s hashing capacity) delivery expected July through December 2022
The purchase commitment for these new miners totals approximately $11.5 million, including $7,089,000 paid as deposits during the year ending December 31. 2021, and the remaining $4.4 million due to be paid monthly from the proceeds of the sale of earned Bitcoin during the year ending December 31, 2022 or, if necessary or advisable, with earned Bitcoin to the extent that if the vendor accepts Bitcoin as a form of payment or from additional capital raising, which may be debt or equity, or a combination thereof pursuant to a private or public offering, with the last payment scheduled to occur on November 10, 2022.
Net cash used in investing activities was $156,733 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and resulted primarily from the purchase of intangible assets of $132,000.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $17,785,933 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and resulted primarily from proceeds from the issuance of common and preferred stock and warrants, net of approximately $16 million, and from proceeds from of the sale of discontinued operations of $1.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $347,500 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and resulted from the proceeds of PPP/SBA loans.
Working Capital (Deficit)
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities, and working capital for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $4,788,662, compared to a working capital deficit of $4,848,414 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 9,637,247. The increase was primarily due to an increase in deposits on mining equipment, property and equipment, specifically mining equipment, and cash, and a decrease in liabilities associated with discontinued operations.
Non-U.S. GAAP Measure - Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to our U.S. GAAP results, we present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our performance. However, Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized measurement under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income, income from operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP or as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), plus interest expense, other income (expense), provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, income from discontinued operations, and gain on sale of discontinued operations. Management considers our core operating performance to be that which our managers can affect in any particular period through their management of the resources that affect our underlying revenue and profit generating operations that period. Non-U.S. GAAP adjustments to our results prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP are itemized below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
We present Adjusted EBITDA because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use Adjusted EBITDA in developing our internal budgets, forecasts and strategic plan; in analyzing the effectiveness of our business strategies in evaluating potential acquisitions; and in making compensation decisions and in communications with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, which includes, among others, the following:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts; and
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For information about recently issued accounting standards, refer to Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this report.