Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage pharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of novel therapeutics for rare endocrine diseases and endocrine-related tumors. Endocrine pathways function to maintain homeostasis and commonly use peptide hormones acting through G protein coupled receptors, or GPCRs, to regulate many aspects of physiology including growth, energy, metabolism, gastrointestinal function and stress responses. We have assembled a seasoned team with extensive expertise in drug discovery and development in endocrine GPCRs and built a highly productive drug discovery organization. We have discovered a pipeline of oral nonpeptide (small molecule) new chemical entities that target peptide GPCRs to treat a variety of rare endocrine diseases where treatment options have significant efficacy, safety and/or tolerability limitations. Our product candidates include paltusotine (formerly CRN00808), which is in clinical development for the treatment of acromegaly and neuroendocrine tumors, or NETs, CRN04777, which is in clinical development for congenital hyperinsulinism, or HI, and CRN04894, which is in clinical development for diseases of excess adrenocorticotrophic hormone, or ACTH, including Cushing’s Disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and Ectopic ACTH Syndrome. We are advancing additional product candidates through preclinical discovery and development studies in parallel. Our vision is to build the leading endocrine company which consistently pioneers new therapeutics to help patients better control their disease and improve their daily lives.
We focus on the discovery and development of oral nonpeptide therapeutics that target peptide GPCRs with well-understood biological functions, validated biomarkers and the potential to substantially improve the treatment of endocrine diseases and/or endocrine-related tumors.
To date, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to drug discovery, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, obtaining and maintaining patents related to our product candidates, licensing activities, and the provision of general and administrative support for these operations. We have recognized revenues from various research and development grants and our Collaboration and License agreement with Radionetics, or the CLA, but do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any product sales. We have funded our operations to date primarily through our grant revenues, the private placement of our preferred stock, and sales of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and investment securities of $333.7 million.
We have incurred cumulative net losses since our inception and, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $275.3 million. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and preclinical studies and our expenditures on other research and development activities. We expect our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially as we conduct our ongoing and planned clinical trials, continue our research and development activities and conduct preclinical studies, hire additional personnel, protect our intellectual property and incur costs associated with being a public company, including audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs.
We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, scale back or discontinue the development of our existing product candidates or our efforts to expand our product pipeline.
Australian operations
In January 2017, we established Crinetics Australia Pty Ltd, or CAPL, a wholly-owned subsidiary which was formed to conduct various preclinical and clinical activities for our product and development candidates. We believe CAPL will be
eligible for certain financial incentives made available by the Australian government for research and development expenses. Specifically, the Australian Taxation Office provides for a refundable tax credit in the form of a cash refund equal to 43.5% of qualified research and development expenditures under the Australian Research and Development Tax Incentive Program, or the Australian Tax Incentive, to Australian companies that operate the majority of their research and development activities associated with such projects in Australia. A wholly-owned Australian subsidiary of a non-Australian parent company is eligible to receive the refundable tax credit, provided that the Australian subsidiary retains the rights to the data and intellectual property generated in Australia, and provided that the total revenues of the parent company and its consolidated subsidiaries during the period for which the refundable tax credit is claimed are less than $20.0 million Australian dollars. If we lose our ability to operate CAPL in Australia, or if we are ineligible or unable to receive the research and development tax credit, or the Australian government significantly reduces or eliminates the tax credit, the actual refund amounts we receive may differ from our estimates.
COVID-19
As we continue to actively advance our programs, we are in close contact with our principal investigators and clinical sites and continue to assess any impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic on our drug manufacturing, nonclinical activities, and clinical trials, expected timelines, and costs on an ongoing basis. In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, and consistent with the FDA’s updated industry guidance for conducting clinical trials issued on March 18, 2020, and updated most recently on January 27, 2021, clinical trials may be deprioritized in favor of treating patients who have contracted the virus or to prevent the spread of the virus. The direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19 on our business could alter our forecasted timelines. In addition, in response to the spread of COVID-19, we have limited the number of staff in our offices. We will continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Financial operations overview
Revenues
To date, all of our revenue has been derived from grant awards and licenses. We have not generated any revenues from the commercial sale of approved products, and we do not expect to generate revenues from the commercial sale of our product candidates for at least the foreseeable future, if ever.
License revenues
License revenues for 2021 were derived from the majority equity stake obtained in Radionetics pursuant to the CLA, under which Radionetics was granted an exclusive world-wide license to our radiotherapeutics technology platform and associated intellectual property for the development of radiotherapeutics and related radio-imaging agents.
Grant revenues
Grant revenues for 2020 and 2019 were derived from Small Business Innovation Research Grants, or SBIR Grants, awarded to us by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases of the National Institutes of Health. There were no grant revenues in 2021. We do not currently have any active SBIR Grants nor do we expect grant revenues to be a material source of future funding.
Research and development
To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to discovery efforts and preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received.
Research and development expenses include:
•salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation charges for those individuals involved in research and development efforts;
•external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, investigative sites and consultants to conduct our clinical trials and preclinical and nonclinical studies;
•costs related to manufacturing our product candidates for clinical trials and preclinical studies, including fees paid to third-party manufacturers;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements;
•laboratory supplies; and
•facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses for rent, facilities maintenance, insurance, equipment and other supplies.
We recognize the Australian Tax Incentive as a reduction of research and development expense. The amounts are determined based on eligible research and development expenditures. The Australian Tax Incentive is recognized when there is
reasonable assurance that the Australian Tax Incentive will be received, the relevant expenditure has been incurred, and the amount of the Australian Tax Incentive can be reliably measured.
Our direct research and development expenses consist principally of external costs, such as fees paid to CROs, investigative sites and consultants in connection with our clinical trials, preclinical and non-clinical studies, and costs related to manufacturing clinical trial materials. The majority of our third-party expenses during the three years ended December 31, 2021 related to the research and development of paltusotine. We deploy our personnel and facility related resources across all of our research and development activities.
Our clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•number of doses that patients receive;
•drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
•the phase of development of our product candidates; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates.
We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates and the discovery of new product candidates. We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each product candidate’s commercial potential. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and other administrative functions. Other significant costs include facility-related costs, legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting and consulting services, insurance costs, and commercial planning expenses. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued research and development activities and, if any of our product candidates receive marketing approval, commercialization activities. We also anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs associated with operating as a public company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those listed below. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, information received from third parties and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. There were no material differences between estimates and actual results for the years presented in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based compensation expense
Stock-based compensation expense represents the cost of the estimated grant date fair value of stock option awards and employee stock purchase plan rights amortized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. We estimate the fair value of all stock award grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Estimating the fair value of equity awards as of the grant date using valuation models, such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model, is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables, including the expected stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected term of stock options, the expected dividend yield and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
Due to the lack of an adequate history of a public market for the trading of our common stock and a lack of adequate company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. For these analyses, we have selected companies with comparable characteristics to ours, including enterprise value, risk profiles, and position within the industry, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily close prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until sufficient historical information regarding the volatility of our common stock price becomes available. We have estimated the expected life of our employee stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The expected term for employee stock purchase plan awards represents the term the awards are expected to be outstanding. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the awards are based on the yields of zero-coupon U.S. treasury securities.
Equity Method Investment
We first analyze our investment in another entity to determine if the entity is a variable interest entity, or VIE, and if so, whether we are the primary beneficiary requiring consolidation. An entity is considered a VIE if (1) the entity does not have enough equity to finance its own activities without additional support, (2) the entity’s at-risk equity holders lack the characteristics of a controlling financial interest, or (3) the entity is structured with non-substantive voting rights. VIEs are consolidated by the primary beneficiary, which is the entity that has both the power to direct the activities that most
significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that potentially could be significant to the VIE. Variable interests in a VIE can be contractual, ownership, or other financial interests. We re-assess our investment upon reconsideration events to determine whether we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, in which case we would consolidate the VIE. If it has been determined that we are not the primary beneficiary or do not have control but do have the ability to exercise significant influence over the VIE, we account for the unconsolidated investment under the equity method of accounting.
Radionetics is considered to be a VIE due to its insufficient equity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support. We maintain an equity interest in Radionetics and account for our investment under the equity method of accounting as we are not the primary beneficiary of Radionetics but have the ability to exercise significant influence. The valuation method and primary inputs used in valuing the Radionetics investment are discussed below under Revenue Recognition. We record our share of Radionetics income (loss) outside of operations in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss on a quarterly lag. Since our investment in Radionetics was obtained on October 15, 2021, we will record its share of income (loss) beginning in the first quarter of 2022.
Valuation of Financial Instruments
Investment Securities
We hold investment securities that consist of highly liquid, investment grade debt securities. We determine the fair value of our investment securities based upon one or more valuations reported by its investment accounting and reporting service provider. The investment service provider values the securities using a hierarchical security pricing model that relies primarily on valuations provided by an industry-recognized valuation service. Such valuations may be based on trade prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 inputs) or valuation models using inputs that are observable either directly or indirectly (Level 2 inputs), such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, yield curves, volatility factors, credit spreads, default rates, loss severity, current market and contractual prices for the underlying instruments or debt, and broker and dealer quotes, as well as other relevant economic measures.
Derivative Asset
Derivatives are recorded at fair value and changes in fair value are recorded through the statements of operations and comprehensive loss each period. We have a single derivative instrument, a warrant from Radionetics, or the Radionetics Warrant, to purchase the greater of 3,407,285 additional shares of common stock or the number of additional shares of common stock that would allow us to maintain an aggregate equity interest of 22% of the fully diluted capitalization of Radionetics. We record the Radionetics Warrant as long-term on the balance sheets due to the lack of marketability, such that it is not expected to be available for current operations. Changes in fair value of the Radionetics Warrant are recognized in other income (expense) in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The valuation method and primary inputs used in valuing the Radionetics Warrant are discussed below under revenue recognition. Such valuation is based on valuations provided by a third-party valuation specialist using unobservable inputs due to little to no market data (Level 3 inputs). There were no material changes in the inputs or total the valuation of the Radionetics Warrant between October 15, 2021 (date of the warrant) and December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
We have generated revenue from the CLA, as well as from grants from government agencies. We have recognized revenues when, or as, the promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements, we perform the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the performance obligation(s) are satisfied. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and identify those that are performance obligations. We recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
We consider a variety of factors in determining the appropriate estimates and assumptions under the arrangements, such as whether the elements are distinct performance obligations, whether there are observable stand-alone prices, and whether the license is functional or symbolic. We evaluate each performance obligation to determine if it can be satisfied and recognized as revenue at a point in time or over time.
Collaboration and License Agreement
We have entered into the CLA, which includes the following: (i) upfront noncash considerations; (ii) payments associated with achieving certain milestones; and (iii) royalties based on specified percentages of net product sales, if any. At the
initiation of an agreement, we analyze each unit of account within the contract to determine if the counterparty is a customer in the context of the unit of account.
Under the CLA, we will not be supporting or maintaining the intellectual property and do not plan on continuing to undertake those activities from which the utility of the intellectual property is derived. The collaborative provisions per the CLA are deemed to be protective measures for the advancement of the technology and not deemed to be a separate performance obligation. Our performance obligation under the CLA consisted of the license and know-how of the technology.
The upfront noncash considerations consist of the initial common stock investment in Radionetics and the Radionetics Warrant and are fixed considerations for functional intellectual property as it exists at a point in time, being the time that the CLA was executed. Revenues for sales-based royalties and milestones are recognized at the later of the subsequent sale or satisfaction of the performance obligation.
We engaged a third-party valuation specialist to determine the estimated fair value of these upfront noncash considerations received. The valuation specialist utilized a cost approach to determine the implied value of Radionetics' equity since it was newly formed with early development stage technology from the CLA for which there are not reliable long-term forecasts. Next, the total equity value was allocated to various share classes using the current value method and option pricing method. The current value method allocates the value of the business to the shareholders' given consideration of senior obligations such as debt, equity certificates and other preferred equity. The option pricing method entails allocating the total shareholders’ equity value to the various share classes based upon their respective claims on a series of call options with strike prices at various value levels depending upon the rights and preferences of each class.
Estimating the fair value of the Radionetics common stock and Radionetics Warrant is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables, including the expected term for a liquidity event, the risk-free interest rate and stock price volatility. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the value of license revenues, initial investment in Radionetics, and the Radionetics Warrant. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
We estimated the expected term based on the expected time to a liquidity event. The risk-free interest rate was based on the yields of zero-coupon U.S. treasury securities. Volatility was estimated based upon an analysis of historical equity and asset volatilities of companies deemed comparable to Radionetics. The valuation amounts were adjusted by a discount for lack of marketability to account for the lack of liquidity an owner of the interest would experience for common stock in an early-stage company.
Grant Revenue Recognition
Our grant revenues are derived from SBIR Grants. Our performance obligation under SBIR Grants consists of research activities and we recognize SBIR Grants revenue over time as reimbursable grant costs are incurred up to pre-approved award limits within the budget period. The costs associated with these reimbursements are reflected as a component of research and development expense.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
License Revenues. License revenues relate to upfront noncash considerations and totaled $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our license revenue is associated with the CLA, which was entered into during the fourth quarter of 2021. There were no license revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Grant revenues. Grant revenues relate to reimbursable expenses incurred in connection with our SBIR Grants and totaled $71,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our 2020 revenues were primarily associated with research activities for one SBIR Grant, which was completed during the first quarter of 2020. There were no grant revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021. We do not expect grant revenues to be significant in future periods.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses were $84.3 million and $57.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to increased spending on manufacturing and development activities of $13.5 million associated with our clinical and nonclinical activities for paltusotine and our other clinical and preclinical research programs. Additionally, our 2021 results reflect an increase in costs of $12.3 million primarily due to the hiring of additional personnel (which includes $4.4 million of additional stock-based compensation), expenditures for consulting and outside services of $0.8 million and other corporate expenditures of $0.4 million.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $24.5 million and $18.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to increases in personnel-related costs of $4.5 million (which includes $2.5 million of additional stock-based compensation) and spending on recruiting, consulting and professional services and pre-commercialization activities of $2.1 million.
Other income (expense). Other income (expense), net was $0.1 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease resulted from the impact of foreign currency fluctuations and a reduction of the income generated by our investment securities portfolio due to declining market yields available for such securities.
Cash Flows
We have incurred cumulative net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $275.3 million and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and investment securities of $333.7 million.
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $88.6 million and $62.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used in operations was primarily attributable to development and manufacturing activities associated with paltusotine as well as our other clinical and preclinical programs, and higher personnel-related costs. The net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our net loss of $107.6 million, adjusted for $18.0 million of noncash charges, including stock-based compensation, depreciation expense, noncash license revenues, and a $1.1 million change in our operating assets and liabilities. The net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss of $73.8 million adjusted for $11.4 million of noncash charges, including stock-based compensation and depreciation expense and a $0.4 million change in our operating assets and liabilities.
Investing activities. Investing activities consist primarily of purchases and maturities of investment securities and, to a lesser extent, the cash outflow associated with purchases of property and equipment. Such activities resulted in net cash outflows of approximately $56.5 million and net cash inflows of approximately $0.2 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $252.7 million and $114.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was primarily the result of the net proceeds of $234.6 million from the sale of shares of common stock in our follow-on public offerings in April 2021 and October 2021, as well as $15.0 million from the sale of shares through our Private Placement, as defined
below, in July 2021 and $3.1 million from the exercise of common stock options. The net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was primarily the result of the net proceeds of $107.9 million from the sale of shares of common stock in our public offering in April 2020, as well as $6.4 million from the sale of shares in our ATM Offering, as defined below, and $0.3 million from the exercise of common stock options.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and investment securities of $333.7 million. Based on our current and anticipated level of operations, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to meet our anticipated obligations for at least one year from the date this Annual Report on Form 10-K is filed with the SEC. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress and expenses in these trials is uncertain.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results, costs and timing of, our preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates, including commercial manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our preclinical and clinical activities increase;
•the timing and the extent of any Australian Tax Incentive refund and future grant revenues that we receive;
•the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities if any product candidate is approved;
•our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, adequate coverage and reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements;
•costs associated with any products or technologies that we may in-license or acquire;
•the funding of any co-development arrangements we enter into; and
•our ability to participate in future equity offering by Radionetics, including our option to exercise our warrant for the purchase of Radionetics stock.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
In August 2019, we entered into a Sales Agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with SVB Leerink LLC and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or collectively, the Sales Agents, under which we may, from time to time, sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million through the Sales Agents, or the ATM Offering. Sales of our common stock made pursuant to the Sales Agreement will be made directly on or through the Nasdaq Global Select Market under our effective shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 filed on August 19, 2019 by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions at market prices. Additionally, under the terms of the Sales Agreement, we may also sell shares of our common stock through the Sales Agents, on the Nasdaq Global Select Market or otherwise, at negotiated prices or at prices related to the prevailing
market price. We are not obligated to, and we cannot provide any assurances that we will continue to, make any sales of the shares under the Sales Agreement. The Sales Agreement may be terminated by either Sales Agent (with respect to itself) or us at any time upon 10 days’ notice to the other parties, or by either Sales Agent, with respect to itself, at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material adverse change. We will pay the Sales Agents a commission for their services in acting as agent in the sale of common stock in an amount equal to 3% of the gross sales price per share sold. During 2020, we issued 275,764 shares of common stock in the ATM Offering for net proceeds of $6.4 million, after deducting commissions. No shares were issued under the ATM Offering during the year ended December 31, 2021.
On April 17, 2020, we completed a public offering of 8,222,500 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $14.00 per share. We received proceeds of approximately $107.9 million from that offering, net of offering discounts and commissions and offering costs of $7.3 million.
On April 12, 2021, we completed an underwritten follow-on offering of 4,562,044 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $16.44 per share. Proceeds from the offering were approximately $72.6 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs of $2.4 million.
On July 28, 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement for the private placement of 851,306 shares of our common stock at a price of $17.62 per share, or the Private Placement, which shares were issued on July 30, 2021. The Private Placement yielded net proceeds of $15.0 million.
on August 10, 2021, we filed a universal shelf registration statement with the SEC for the future sale of an unlimited amount of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depositary shares, warrants and rights, and the resale of up to 851,306 shares by the investor who purchased shares in the Private Placement. The securities may be offered from time to time, separately or together, directly by us, by selling security holders, or through underwriters, dealers or agents at amounts, prices, interest rates and other terms to be determined at the time of the offering.
On October 21, 2021, we completed an underwritten follow-on offering of 8,712,400 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $19.80 per share. Proceeds from the offering were approximately $162.0 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs of $10.5 million.