Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the following sections, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. For a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties, see the “Risk Factors” section in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements, which reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company. Our strategy is to focus our efforts on the development of immune modulator product candidates with the potential to treat solid cancers, T-cell lymphomas, autoimmune diseases and infectious diseases. We have built a pipeline of five programs, three of which are in clinical development.
Our lead product candidate is mupadolimab (formerly CPI-006), a humanized monoclonal antibody that is designed to react with a specific site on CD73. In both preclinical and in vivo studies in cancer patients and patients with COVID-19, mupadolimab has demonstrated binding to various immune cells and the enhancement of immune responses by activating B cells. We believe mupadolimab has the potential to be an important new therapeutic agent with a novel mechanism of action for the treatment of a broad range of cancers and infectious diseases.
Our next product candidate, CPI-818, is a selective, covalent inhibitor of ITK and is in a multi-center Phase 1/1b clinical trial in patients with various malignant T-cell lymphomas. CPI-818 is designed to inhibit the proliferation of certain malignant T-cells, and we believe it also has the potential to regulate the growth of abnormal T cells involved in autoimmunity and allergy.
Our third product candidate, ciforadenant (formerly CPI-444), is an oral, small molecule antagonist of the A2A receptor for adenosine with which we completed a Phase 2 expansion protocol in combination with Genentech, Inc.’s cancer immunotherapy, Tecentriq® (atezolizumab) for patients with either advanced or refractory renal cell cancer (“RCC”). Ciforadenant is designed to disable a tumor’s ability to subvert attack by the immune system by blocking the binding of immunosuppressive adenosine in the tumor microenvironment to the A2A receptor.
Our molecularly targeted product candidates are designed to exhibit a high degree of specificity, which we believe has the potential to provide greater safety compared to other cancer therapies and may facilitate their development either as monotherapies or in combination with other cancer therapies such as immune checkpoint inhibitors or chemotherapy.
We believe the breadth and status of our pipeline demonstrates our management team’s expertise in understanding and developing immunology focused assets as well as in identifying product candidates that can be in-licensed and further developed internally to treat many types of cancer.
Our diverse and versatile product candidates have also enabled us to address opportunities in foreign markets. In October 2020, we announced the formation and launch of Angel Pharmaceuticals Co., Ltd. (“Angel Pharmaceuticals”), a new China based biopharmaceutical company with a mission to bring innovative quality medicines to Chinese patients for treatment of serious diseases including cancer, autoimmune diseases and infectious diseases. We formed Angel Pharmaceuticals as a wholly owned subsidiary and it launched with a post-money valuation of approximately $106.0 million, based on an approximate $41.0 million cash investment from a Chinese investor group that includes funds associated with Tigermed and Betta Pharmaceuticals, Hisun Pharmaceuticals and Zhejiang Puissance Capital. Such cash is not available for our use. Contemporaneously with the financing, Angel Pharmaceuticals licensed the rights to develop and commercialize our three clinical-stage candidates - mupadolimab, CPI-818 and ciforadenant - in greater China and obtained global rights to our BTK inhibitor preclinical programs. Under the collaboration, we currently have a 49.7% equity interest in Angel Pharmaceuticals, excluding 7% of Angel’s equity reserved for issuance
under the Employee Stock Ownership Plan (“ESOP”), and are entitled to designate three individuals on Angel’s five-person Board of Directors.
To date, the majority of our efforts have been focused on the research, development and advancement of mupadolimab, CPI-818 and ciforadenant, and we have not generated any revenue from product sales and, as a result, we have incurred significant losses. We expect to continue to incur significant research and development and general and administrative expenses related to our operations. Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $43.2 million and $6.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $266.4 million. We expect to continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we anticipate these losses will increase as we continue our development of, seek regulatory approval for and begin to commercialize mupadolimab, CPI-818 and ciforadenant, and as we develop other product candidates. Even if we achieve profitability in the future, we may not be able to sustain profitability in subsequent periods.
Since our inception and through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations primarily through the sale and issuance of stock, including through our initial public offering (“IPO”) in March 2016, in which we raised net proceeds of approximately $70.6 million, a follow-on offering of our common stock in March 2018, in which we raised net proceeds of approximately $64.9 million and a follow on offering in February 2021, in which we raised net proceeds of approximately $32.0 million, in each case net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Immediately prior to the consummation of the IPO, all of our outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock were converted into 14.3 million shares of our common stock.
In March 2020, we entered into an open market sale agreement (the “2020 Sales Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”) to sell shares of the Company’s common stock, from time-to-time, with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $50,000,000, through an at-the-market equity offering program under which Jefferies will act as our sales agent. In November 2021, we entered into another Sale Agreement (“2021 Sales Agreement”) with Jefferies to sell shares of our common stock from time-to-time, with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $40,000,000. Jefferies is entitled to compensation for its services equal to up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of any shares of common stock sold through Jefferies under the 2020 Sales Agreement and 2021 Sales Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 6,609,605 shares under our at-the-market offering program resulting in net proceeds of $29.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, $18.9 million remained for sale under the 2020 Sales Agreement and $40.0 million remained for sale under the 2021 Sales Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had capital resources consisting of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of approximately $69.5 million. While we believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least 12 months from the date of the issuance of these financial statements, we do not expect our existing capital resources to be sufficient to enable us to fund the completion of all of our ongoing or planned clinical trials and remaining development program of any of mupadolimab, CPI-818 or ciforadenant through commercialization. In addition, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors, including those described in the section of this report entitled “Risk Factors” and others currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned, through public or private equity, debt financings or other sources, such as strategic collaborations. Such financing would result in dilution to stockholders, imposition of debt covenants and repayment obligations or other restrictions that may affect our business. If we raise additional capital through strategic collaboration agreements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, including possible future revenue streams. In addition, additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all and any additional fundraising efforts may divert our management from its day-to-day activities, which may adversely affect our ability to develop and commercialize our product candidates. Furthermore, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations.
We currently have no manufacturing capabilities and do not intend to establish any such capabilities. We have no commercial manufacturing facilities for our product candidates. As such, we are dependent on third parties to supply our product candidates according to our specifications, in sufficient quantities, on time, in compliance with appropriate regulatory standards and at competitive prices.
Impact of COVID-19
COVID-19 has placed strains on the providers of healthcare services, including the healthcare institutions where we conduct our clinical trials. These strains have resulted in institutions prohibiting the initiation of new clinical trials, enrollment in existing clinical trials and restricting the on-site monitoring of clinical trials. We also follow FDA guidance on clinical trial conduct during the COVID-19 pandemic, including the remote monitoring of clinical data.
In alignment with public health guidance designed to slow the spread of COVID-19, as of mid-March 2020, we implemented a reduced onsite staffing model and transitioned to a remote work plan for all employees other than those providing essential services, such as our laboratory staff. In July 2021, we started transitioning back to office work for employees not providing essential services. For our onsite employees, we have implemented heightened health and safety measures designed to comply with applicable federal, state and local guidelines in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are further supporting all of our employees by leveraging virtual meeting technology and encouraging employees to follow local health authority guidance. We may need to undertake additional actions that could impact our operations if required by applicable laws or regulations or if we determine such actions to be in the best interests of our employees.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenues. We do not expect to receive any revenues from any product candidates that we develop unless and until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize our products or enter into revenue-generating collaboration agreements with third parties.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to conduct research and development of our product candidates. We record research and development expenses as incurred. Research and development expenses include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expense;
● external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, preclinical testing organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, academic and non-profit institutions and consultants;
● costs to acquire technologies to be used in research and development that have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use;
● license fees; and
● other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs.
We plan to increase our research and development expenses substantially as we continue the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. Our current planned research and development activities include the following:
● enrollment and completion of our Phase 1/1b clinical trial of mupadolimab in patients with NSCLC and advanced, HPV+ head and neck cancer;
● enrollment and completion of our ongoing Phase 1/1b clinical trial of CPI-818;
● enrollment and completion of our Phase 2 clinical trial of mupadolimab;
● process development and manufacturing of drug supply of mupadolimab, CPI-818 and ciforadenant; and
● preclinical studies under our other programs in order to select development product candidates.
In addition to our product candidates that are in clinical development, we believe it is important to continue substantial investment in potential new product candidates to build the value of our product candidate pipeline and our business.
Our expenditures on current and future preclinical and clinical development programs are subject to numerous uncertainties related to timing and cost to completion. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including many of which are beyond our control. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is uncertain. The risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development projects are discussed more fully in “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.” As a result of these risks and uncertainties, we are unable to determine with any degree of certainty the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include personnel costs, expenses for outside professional services and allocated expenses. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Outside professional services consist of legal, accounting and audit services and other consulting fees. Allocated expenses consist of rent expense related to our office and research and development facility.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the periods below as indicated (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, consisted of the following costs by program (specific program costs consist solely of external costs):
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in ciforadenant costs of $2.3 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of a decrease of $1.9 million in clinical trial expenses and a decrease of $0.5 million in other outside services, partially offset by an increase of $0.1 million in drug manufacturing costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase in mupadolimab costs of $5.2 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of an increase of $3.1 million in clinical trial expenses, an increase of $1.8 million in drug manufacturing costs as well as an increase of $0.3 million in other outside services.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in CPI-818 costs of $1.8 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of a decrease of $1.0 million in clinical trial expenses, a decrease of $0.1 million in other outside services and a decrease of $0.1 million in drug manufacturing costs. Additionally, $0.6 million in drug manufacturing costs, which were expensed in prior years, were billed to Angel Pharmaceuticals during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in costs related to other programs of $0.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of a decrease of $0.5 million in manufacturing costs and a decrease of $0.1 million in other outside services.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in unallocated costs of $3.3 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of a decrease of $2.7 million in personnel and related costs and a decrease of $0.6 million in outside services.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in ciforadenant costs of $2.0 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of a decrease of $1.5 million in clinical trial expenses, a decrease of $0.2 million in drug manufacturing costs and a decrease of $0.3 million in other outside services.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in mupadolimab costs of $2.2 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of an increase of $3.5 million in clinical trial expenses as well as an increase of $0.4 million in other outside services, partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 million in drug manufacturing costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in CPI-818 costs of $3.8 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of a decrease of $2.7 million in drug manufacturing costs, a decrease of $0.4 million in clinical trial expenses and a decrease of $0.7 million in other outside services.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in costs related to other programs of $0.3 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of a decrease of $0.6 million in outside services, partially offset by an increase of $0.3 million in drug manufacturing costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in unallocated costs of $2.2 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of a decrease of $1.5 million in outside services and a decrease of $0.7 million in personnel and related costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in general and administrative expenses of $2.4 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of an increase of $1.3 million in outside professional services and an increase of $1.1 million in personnel and related costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in general and administrative expenses of $1.1 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of an increase of $1.9 million in outside professional services, which was partially offset by a decrease of $0.8 million in personnel and related costs.
Interest Income and Other Expense, net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in interest income and other expense, net of $0.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of a decrease in interest income earned due to a decrease in interest rates.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in interest income and other expense, net of $1.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily consisted of a decrease in interest income earned due to a decrease in cash equivalents and marketable securities and a decrease in interest rates.
Gain on deconsolidation of Angel Pharmaceuticals
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the gain on deconsolidation of Angel Pharmaceuticals of $37.5 million represents the fair value of our investment in Angel Pharmaceuticals at the date Angel Pharmaceuticals was deconsolidated from our financial statements.
Sublease income - related party
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the sublease income - related party of $0.2 million represents rent payments made by Angel Pharmaceuticals pursuant to the facility sublease entered into in August 2021.
Loss from equity method investment
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase in loss from equity method investment of $4.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisted of an increase in our share of Angel Pharmaceutical’s loss for the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the loss from equity method investment of $0.2 million represents our share of Angel Pharmaceutical’s loss for the period from deconsolidation of our investment in Angel Pharmaceuticals through December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $69.5 million and an accumulated deficit of $266.4 million, compared to cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $44.3 million and an accumulated deficit of $223.1 million as of December 31, 2020. We have financed our operations primarily through sales of our common stock and convertible preferred stock.
Since our inception and through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations primarily through the sale and issuance of stock, including through our IPO in March 2016, in which we raised net proceeds of approximately $70.6 million, a follow-on offering of our common stock in March 2018, in which we raised net proceeds of approximately $64.9 million and a follow on offering in February 2021, in which we raised net proceeds of approximately $32.0 million, in each case net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Immediately prior to the consummation of the IPO, all of our outstanding shares of convertible preferred stock were converted into 14.3 million shares of our common stock.
In March 2020, we entered into the 2020 Sales Agreement with Jefferies to sell shares of the Company’s common stock, from time-to-time, with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $50,000,000, through an at-the-market equity offering program under which Jefferies will act as our sales agent. In November 2021, we entered into the 2021 Sales Agreement with Jefferies to sell shares of our common stock from time-to-time, with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $40,000,000. Jefferies is entitled to compensation for its services equal to up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of any shares of common stock sold through Jefferies under the 2020 Sales Agreement and 2021 Sales Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 6,609,605 shares under its at-the-market offering program resulting in net proceeds of $29.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, $18.9 million remained for sale under the 2020 Sales Agreement and $40.0 million remained for sale under the 2021 Sales Agreement.
We believe our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our planned expenditures and meet our obligations through at least the next twelve months from the issuance of our consolidated financial statements as of and for year ended December 31, 2021. The amounts and timing of our actual expenditures depend on numerous factors, including:
● the progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for mupadolimab, CPI-818 and ciforadenant;
● the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business, including our clinical trials and financial condition;
● the timing, progress, costs and results of preclinical and clinical development activities for our other product candidates;
● the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
● the costs involved in prosecuting, maintaining and enforcing patent and other intellectual property rights;
● the cost and timing of regulatory approvals;
● our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates and satisfy our obligations as a public company; and
● other factors described in the section of this report entitled “Risk Factors.”
We expect to increase our spending in connection with the development and commercialization of our product candidates. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to fund our operations and capital funding needs through equity and/or debt financings. We may also enter into additional collaboration arrangements or selectively partner for clinical development and commercialization. The sale of additional equity would result in dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the governing documents would likely include operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. In addition, sufficient additional funding may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible and/or suspend or curtail planned programs. Any of these actions could have a material effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Summary of Statement of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $36.7 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $43.2 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $9.8 million, primarily consisting of $4.2 million of stock compensation expense and $4.8 million in loss from equity method investment, and an increase of $0.2 million in other assets, partially offset by a decrease of $2.4 million in accounts payable and accrued and other liabilities, an increase of $0.5 million in accounts receivable - related party, an increase of $0.3 million in prepaid and other current assets and an increase of $0.2 million in operating lease right-of-use asset, net of operating lease liability.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $34.8 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $6.0 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $6.8 million, primarily consisting of $5.7 million of stock compensation expense, a non-cash gain on deconsolidation of Angel Pharmaceuticals of $37.5 million, an increase of $1.7 million in accounts payable and accrued and other liabilities and a decrease of $0.4 million in prepaid and other current and non-current assets, partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in operating lease liability, net of operating lease right-of-use asset amortization.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $37.3 million, which primarily consisted of a net loss of $46.7 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $7.4 million, primarily consisting of $7.3 million of stock compensation expense, an increase of $2.5 million in accounts payable and accrued and other liabilities and an increase of $0.4 million in prepaid and other current assets, primarily associated with the timing of payments to vendors.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $21.6 million, which consisted of proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $30.9 million, which were partially offset by purchases of marketable securities of $9.4 million
Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.8 million, which consisted of proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $86.4 million and proceeds from sales of marketable securities of $1.0 million, partially offset by purchases of marketable securities of $42.5 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.1 million.
Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $3.3 million, which consisted of proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $141.9 million, which were partially offset by purchases of marketable securities of $138.6 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $62.2 million, which consisted of $32.0 million in net proceeds from our February 2021 follow-on public offering, $29.0 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our at-the-market offering program, and $1.2 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 million, which consisted of $1.2 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our at-the-market offering program and $0.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was negligible.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our non-cancelable operating lease for our facilities that expires in 2025 and non-cancellable purchase commitments of $9.3 million for the purchase of drug substance in 2022.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, our management evaluates its estimates including, but not limited to: those related to the accrual for certain liabilities, including accrued clinical trial liabilities; valuations of equity awards used to determine stock-based compensation; valuation of intangible assets and long-lived assets; going concern assessment; and the amounts of deferred tax assets and liabilities, including the related allowance. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe our critical accounting policies relating to clinical trial accruals and stock-based compensation reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10 K.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities
We consider all highly liquid investment securities with remaining maturities at the date of purchase of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
Investments with remaining maturities, at the date of purchase, greater than three months, but less than one year are considered short-term. We determined the appropriate classification of marketable securities at the time of purchase and evaluates such designation as of each balance sheet date. To date, all marketable securities have been classified as available-for-sale and are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, if any, included as a component of
accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in stockholders’ equity (deficit). Interest and realized gains and losses are included in interest income. Realized gains and losses are recognized based on the specific identification method.
Research and Development Expenses
We record research and development expenses as incurred. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the goods have been received or when the service has been performed rather than when the payment is made. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred by us for the discovery and development of our product candidates and include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expense;
● external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, academic and non-profit institutions and consultants;
● costs to acquire technologies to be used in research and development that have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use;
● license fees; and
● other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs.
Clinical Trial Accruals
Costs for preclinical studies and clinical trial activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the vendors’ progress towards completion of specific tasks. We apply significant judgment in developing estimates for clinical trial accruals based on assumptions related to vendors’ progress towards completion. In developing these estimates, we estimate vendors’ progress towards completion using data such as clinical site activations, patient enrollment or information provided to us by our vendors regarding their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of individual contracts and payment timing may differ significantly from the period in which the services are performed. We determine accrual estimates through reports from and discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion, or the services completed. Our estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on the facts and circumstances known at the time.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Segment Information
We have one primary business activity and operate as one reportable segment.