ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with the information set forth under our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Going Concern, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Accounting standards require management to evaluate whether the Company can continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date of the filing of this Form 10-K (“evaluation period”). In evaluating the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, Management considers the conditions and events that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of twelve months after the Company issues its financial statements. For the year ended December 31, 2021, Management considers the Company’s current financial condition and liquidity sources, including current funds available, forecasted future cash flows, and the Company’s conditional and unconditional obligations due before March 31, 2023.
The Company is subject to risks like those of healthcare technology companies whereby revenues are generated based on both on a sales-based and subscription-based business model such as dependence on key individuals, uncertainty of product development, generation of revenues, positive cash flow, dependence on outside sources of capital, risks associated with research, development, and successful testing of its products, successful protection of intellectual property, ability to maintain and grow its customer base, and susceptibility to infringement on the proprietary rights of others. The attainment of profitable operations is dependent on future events, including obtaining adequate financing to fulfill the Company’s growth and operating activities and generating a level of revenues adequate to support the Company’s cost structure.
The Company has experienced net losses and significant cash outflows from cash used in operating activities over the past years. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $197,890,000, a loss from operations of approximately $(10,080,000), net cash provided by operating activities of $678,766 and an ending cash balance of $659,226.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and a working capital deficit of approximately $87,000,000 consisting primarily of notes payables and senior secured notes. Management has evaluated the significance of the conditions described above in relation to the Company’s ability to meet its obligations and concluded that, without additional funding, the Company will not have sufficient funds to meet its obligations within one year from the date the consolidated financial statements were issued. While management will look to continue funding operations by increased sales volumes and raising additional capital from sources such as sales of its debt or equity securities or loans to meet operating cash requirements, there is no assurance that management’s plans will be successful.
Management continues to monitor the immediate and future cash flows needs of the company in a variety of ways which include forecasted net cash flows from operations, capital expenditure control, new inventory orders, debt modifications, increases sales outreach, streamlining and controlling general and administrative costs, competitive industry pricing, sale of equities, debt conversions, new product or services offerings, and new business partnerships.
The Company’s net losses, cash outflows, and working capital deficit raise substantial doubt exists about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern 12 months from the date the financial statement are issued. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. This basis of accounting contemplates the recovery of the Company’s assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. A successful transition to attaining profitable operations is dependent upon achieving a level of positive cash flows adequate to support the Company’s cost structure.
Operating loss was approximately $1,147,000 and $1,878,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Our net loss was approximately $10,080,000 and $11,683,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
The following is a summary of cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Net increase in cash during the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $301,000. The principal use of cash in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was to fund our current expenses primarily related to research and development activities and administrative changes, adjusted for non-cash items. The change in cash flows used in operating activities between 2021 and 2020 of approximately $1,469,000 is primarily a result of increased revenue from our sales-based contracts, reducing net loss by $1,602,000. The change in cash flows used in investing activities between 2021 and 2020 of approximately $75,000 is primarily a result of the reduction of purchases and installation of CareView Patient Systems and costs associated with patents and trademarks. The change in cash flows provided by financing activities between 2021 and 2020 of approximately $1,331,000 is primarily due to receiving funds from our payroll protection program loan in 2020.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue, net
Revenue increased approximately $1,314,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in revenue results from the increase in our sales-based contracts. In 2021, just the equipment portion of ten sales-based contracts provided approximately 1,950,000 of revenue.
Operating Expenses
Our principal operating costs include the following items as a percentage of total expense.
Operating expenses increased by approximately $583,000 (or 6.96%) as a result of the following items:
Human resource related costs (including salaries and benefits and non-cash compensation) increased approximately $372,000 primarily because of additional sales and marketing and research and development staffing during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. This includes an increase of employee commissions, paid upon sales-based contracts. Professional and consulting fees decreased approximately $101,000, primarily because of lower legal costs in obtaining and defending patents as well as increase in staff to reduce consulting costs. Depreciation and amortization expense increased by approximately $85,000, due to the purchase of additional assets being placed in service, including deployable network equipment and company vehicle for network operations. Travel and entertainment expense decreased approximately $42,000 due to lower product installations and a greater range of technicians to handle service calls during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. Other product development costs decreased approximately $82,000 primarily because of decreases in product deployment and installation costs and related non-capital equipment costs. The increase of approximately $198,000 in other expense is due to a number of factors, including increased insurance premium costs, higher software license costs and utility costs.
Critical Accounting Estimates and New Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures in the financial statements. Management considers an accounting estimate to be critical if:
● if requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made, and
● changes in the estimate or different estimates that could have been selected could have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition.
We base our estimates and judgments on our experience, our current knowledge, our beliefs of what could occur in the future, our observation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates as those that we believe are most critical to our financial condition and results of operations and that require management’s most subjective and complex judgments in estimating the effect of inherent uncertainties: income taxes, impairment of long-lived assets, sales-based revenue recognition and credit agreement amendments.
Income Taxes. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Our provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach to account for income taxes. A current liability is recorded for the estimated taxes payable for the current year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the timing differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of changes in tax rates or tax laws are recognized in the provision for income taxes in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount more-likely-than-not to be realized. Changes in valuation allowances will flow through the statement of operations unless related to deferred tax assets that expire unutilized or are modified through translation, in which case both the deferred tax asset and related valuation allowance are similarly adjusted. Where a valuation allowance was established through purchase accounting for acquired deferred tax assets, any future change will be credited or charged to income tax expense. See NOTE 5 in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion related to Tax Reform.
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates, and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. In the ordinary course of our business, there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Despite our belief that we have appropriate support for all the positions taken on our tax returns, we acknowledge that certain positions may be successfully challenged by the taxing authorities. We determine the tax benefits more likely than not to be recognized with respect to uncertain tax positions. Although we believe our recorded tax assets and liabilities are reasonable, tax laws and regulations are subject to interpretation and inherent uncertainty; therefore, our assessments can involve both a series of complex judgments about future events and rely on estimates and assumptions. Although we believe these estimates and assumptions are reasonable, the final determination could be materially different than that which is reflected in our provision for income taxes and recorded tax assets and liabilities.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. Carrying values of property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying values may not be recoverable. If impairment indicators are present, we determine whether an impairment loss should be recognized by testing the applicable asset or asset group’s carrying value for recoverability. This assessment requires the exercise of judgment in assessing the future use of and projected value to be derived from the eventual disposal of the assets to be held and used. Assessments also consider changes in asset utilization, including the temporary idling of capacity and the expected timing for placing this capacity back into production. If the carrying value of the assets is not recoverable, then a loss is recorded for the difference between the assets’ fair value and respective carrying value. The fair value of the assets is determined using an “income approach” based upon a forecast of all the expected discounted future net cash flows associated with the subject assets. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions include market size and growth, market share, projected selling prices, manufacturing cost and discount rate. Our estimates are based upon historical experience, commercial relationships, market conditions and available external information about future trends.
Sales-based Revenue Recognition: We enter into contracts with customers that may provide multiple combinations of our products, software solutions, and other related services which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. Performance obligations that are not distinct at contract inception are combined. Customer contract fulfillment typically involves multiple procurement promises which are include various equipment, software subscription, project-related installation and training services, and support. We have implemented formal documentation of customer acceptance for these various performance obligations to help alleviate certain estimates needed to establish specific dates of contract fulfillment. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on estimated relative standalone selling price. General assessment must be made to establish the standalone selling price of our equipment and services based on limited comparable market values, which therefore makes the determination of our revenue allocations. Revenue is then recognized for each performance obligation upon transferring control of the hardware, software, and services to the customer and in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive and the estimated benefit the customer receives over the term of the contract.
Generally, we recognize revenue under Topic 606 for each of our performance obligations as follows:
● Hardware packages - We recognize revenue related to the sale of hardware packages when control has been transferred to the customer (“point in time”).
● Software bundle and related services - We recognize on a straight-line basis over the estimated contracted license period (“over time”).
Credit Agreement Amendments: The company has entered into certain credit agreements in which further amendments have been established. At the time of modification, a classification must be made of the credit risk and economical condition to determine whether the respective modification is granted as a Troubled Debt Restructuring (TDR). Each amendment must be assessed and established to direct the appropriate calculations and accounting treatment. Due to the complexity of certain agreements, necessary judgements are encompassed to establish the appropriate calculations based on the associated effective borrowing rates.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires entities to record expected credit losses for certain financial instruments, including trade receivables, as an allowance that reflects the entity’s current estimate of credit losses expected to be incurred. For available-for-sale debt securities in unrealized loss positions, the new standard requires allowances to be recorded instead of reducing the amortized cost of the investment. The Company does not currently hold or plan to invest in available-for-sale securities and has not historically experienced collection issues or bad debts with trade receivables. Accordingly, the Company does not expect this to have a significant impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures at this time. The Company will adopt this guidance on its effective date for smaller reporting companies, January 1, 2023.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (ASU 2020-06), which simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments by reducing the number of accounting models available for convertible debt instruments. This guidance also eliminates the treasury stock method to calculate diluted earnings per share for convertible instruments and requires the use of the if-converted method. The Company does not expect this to have a significant impact on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures at this time. The Company will adopt this guidance on its effective date for smaller reporting companies, January 1, 2024.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), issued Accounting Standards Update ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework- Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement that eliminates certain disclosure requirements for fair value measurements for all entities, requires public entities to disclose certain new information and modifies some disclosure requirements. The FASB developed the amendments to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820 as part of its broader disclosure framework project, which aims to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to financial statements by focusing on requirements that clearly communicate the most important information to users of the financial statements. The new guidance is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019 and for interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity is permitted to early adopt either the entire standard or only the provisions that eliminate or modify requirements. With the adoption of Topic 820, there has been no material change for our company’s fair value measurements as defined by U.S. GAAP and required disclosures included herein above, for each asset class.
There have been no material changes to our significant accounting policies as summarized in NOTE 2 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021. We do not expect that the adoption of any recent accounting pronouncements will have a material impact on our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Recent Events Since December 31, 2021
On March 8, 2022, we agreed with the HealthCor Parties to (i) amend the 2011 HealthCor Notes to extend the maturity date of the 2011 HealthCor Notes from April 20, 2022 to April 20, 2023 by entering into Allonge No. 4 to the 2011 HealthCor Notes (the “Fourth 2011 Note Allonges”) and (ii) amend the 2012 HealthCor Notes to extend the maturity date of the 2012 HealthCor Notes from April 20, 2022 to April 20, 2023 by entering into Allonge No. 4 to the 2012 HealthCor Notes (the “Fourth 2012 Note Allonges”) . In connection with the Fourth 2011 Note Allonges and the Fourth 2012 Note Allonges, we issued warrants to purchase an aggregate of 3,000,000 shares of our Common Stock at an exercise price equal to $0.09 per share and with an expiration date of March 8, 2032 to the HealthCor Parties.