ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Objective
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide material information relevant to an assessment of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, as well as an evaluation of the amounts and certainty of cash flows from operations and from outside sources. This discussion and analysis is further intended to provide details concerning material events and uncertainties known to management that are reasonably likely to cause reported financial information to not be necessarily indicative of future operating results or future financial condition. This data includes descriptions and amounts of matters that have had a material impact on reported operations, as well as matters that management has assessed to be reasonably likely to have a material impact on future operations. Management expects that this discussion and analysis will enhance a reader’s understanding of the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and capital resources. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
The following table contains results of operations for fiscal years 2022 and 2021 and the dollar and percentage changes for those periods (in thousands, except percentages).
Net Sales:
Sales of $87.4 million for 2022 were $8.2 million higher than 2021, an increase of 10.4%. Sales of bibs, bath, developmental toys, feeding, baby care and disposable products increased by $9.9 million, which was partially offset by a decrease of $1.7 million in sales of bedding, blankets and accessories, which included a decrease of $3.5 million due to the closure of Carousel. The increases in sales are partially due to a strong new modular set and higher replenishment orders at a major retailer. Also, in advance of the expectation that shipments to customers from the Company’s Compton warehouse would be suspended during the first days of April 2022 due to the Company’s annual count of its inventory, customers were encouraged to place their orders earlier than they ordinarily would have. In this manner, approximately $700,000 of sales were “shifted” from fiscal year 2023 into fiscal year 2022. Finally, the results for fiscal 2022 also include an additional week compared with fiscal 2021, as the Company operated under a 53-week calendar for fiscal 2022. These increases were somewhat offset by declines in sales to online retailers as consumers have begun to return to stores.
Gross Profit:
Gross profit decreased by $789,000 and decreased from 30.4% of net sales for 2021 to 26.7% of net sales for 2022. The closure of Carousel resulted in a $2.2 million decrease in gross profit, which in fiscal year 2022 included the sale of inventory below cost and the recognition of charges of $334,000 associated with the settlement with a supplier of a commitment to purchase fabric and $265,000 associated with the liquidation of Carousel’s remaining inventory upon the closure of the business. The Company’s gross profit was also adversely impacted in fiscal year 2022 by increases in costs across the entire supply chain.
Marketing and Administrative Expenses:
Marketing and administrative expenses decreased by $1.2 million, and decreased from 18.0% of net sales for fiscal year 2021 to 14.9% of net sales for fiscal year 2022. The decrease in amount included lower charges incurred by Carousel of $2.1 million for fiscal year 2022 as compared with fiscal year 2021.
Loss from Impairment of Long-Lived Assets:
The Company recognized a loss of $2.2 million from the impairment of Carousel’s long-lived assets during the fiscal year ended March 28, 2021, and did not recognize such a loss during the fiscal year ended April 3, 2022. The loss from impairment did not result in any cash expenditures and did not have an adverse effect on the covenant calculations under the Company’s financing agreement with The CIT Group/Commercial Services, Inc. (“CIT”), a subsidiary of CIT Group Inc.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt:
During fiscal year 2022, the Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt in the amount of $1,985,000 associated with the forgiveness of the PPP Loan, which has been presented below income from operations in the accompanying consolidated statements of income, and did not record such a gain during fiscal year 2021.
Income Tax Expense:
The Company’s provision for income taxes is based upon an annual effective tax rate (“ETR”) on continuing operations, which was 20.1% and 24.0% during fiscal years ended April 3, 2022 and March 28, 2021, respectively.
Management evaluates items of income, deductions and credits reported on the Company’s various federal and state income tax returns filed and recognizes the effect of positions taken on those income tax returns only if those positions are more likely than not to be sustained. The Company applies the provisions of accounting guidelines requiring a minimum recognition threshold that a tax benefit must meet before being recognized in the financial statements. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
After considering all relevant information regarding the calculation of the state portion of its income tax provision, the Company believes that the technical merits of the tax position that the Company has taken with respect to state apportionment percentages would more likely than not be sustained. However, the Company also realizes that the ultimate resolution of such tax position could result in a tax charge that is more than the amount realized based upon the application of the tax position taken. Therefore, the Company’s measurement regarding the tax impact of the revised state apportionment percentages resulted in the Company recording discrete reserves for unrecognized tax liabilities during fiscal years 2022 and 2021 of $59,000 and $88,000, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
In December 2016, the Company was notified by the FTB of its intention to examine the Company’s claims for refund made in connection with amended consolidated income tax returns that the Company had filed. On January 10, 2021, the Company’s California consolidated income tax returns for the fiscal year ended April 3, 2016 became closed to examination or other adjustment. Accordingly, the Company reversed the reserve for an unrecognized tax liability that it had previously recorded for that fiscal year, which resulted in the recognition of a discrete income tax benefit of $233,000 during the fiscal year ended March 28, 2021 in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
During the fiscal years ended April 3, 2022 and March 28, 2021, the Company recorded discrete income tax benefits of $34,000 and $74,000, respectively, to reflect the aggregate effect of certain tax credits claimed on its consolidated federal income tax returns.
During the fiscal years ended April 3, 2022 and March 28, 2021, the Company recorded discrete income tax benefits of $83,000 and $12,000, respectively, to reflect the effects during the periods of the excess tax benefits from the exercise of stock options and the vesting of non-vested stock.
The ETR on continuing operations and the discrete income tax charges and benefits discussed above contributed to an overall provision for income taxes of 19.5% and 21.3% for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Known Trends and Uncertainties
The Company’s financial results are closely tied to sales to the Company’s top two customers, which represented approximately 73% of the Company’s gross sales in fiscal year 2022. A significant downturn experienced by either or both of these customers could lead to decreased sales.
During fiscal years 2022 and 2021, the Company at times faced higher costs associated with the Company’s sourcing activities in China, including freight and higher duties on some products. Future increases in these costs could adversely affect the profitability of the Company if it cannot pass the cost increases along to its customers in the form of price increases or if the timing of price increases does not closely match the cost increases.
Due to the uncertainties associated with the duration and widespread nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, the effectiveness of the vaccines on COVID-19 and variants thereof, and the extent to which the vaccines will be administered, the Company cannot currently predict the long-term impact on its operations and financial results. The uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic include potential adverse effects on the overall economy, the impact on the Company’s supply chain, manufacturing and distribution operations, transportation services, customers and employees and consumer sentiment in general. The COVID-19 pandemic, and the government and private sector responses thereto, has negatively impacted certain of the Company’s customers who have been forced to temporarily close retail stores or have seen a significant decline in their sales. As a result, the Company experienced a decrease in sales to these customers beginning in March 2020. This decrease, however, has been somewhat offset by higher sales to other customers and sales in other channels, such as e-commerce. The Company cannot predict with certainty when or if these customers will reopen their retail stores or if demand from consumers will return to the same level as it was prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. If the Company’s customers experience financial difficulties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such difficulties may cause them to close their retail stores permanently, reduce orders, file for bankruptcy or liquidate, any of which may negatively impact the Company’s sales.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led global government authorities to implement numerous public health measures, including quarantines, business closures, travel bans and lockdowns to confront the pandemic. China’s unwavering commitment to controlling the spread of the COVID-19 virus by locking down its largest cities has placed a strain on already-stressed global supply chains. On the other side of the Pacific Ocean, the Company’s supply chain has also been disrupted because nearly all of the Company’s products are imported from China into the Port of Long Beach in California. A global shortage of shipping containers, primarily caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with the belated return of dockworkers to ports worldwide, have led to shipping delays and vessels being backed up in the Pacific Ocean awaiting the opportunity to dock at the Port in Long Beach. These conditions have resulted in significant inflation in overall freight costs and increased interruptions in the receipt of the Company’s products. The Company could experience even higher freight costs in future operating periods.
The Company continues to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its supply chain, manufacturing and distribution operations, customers and employees, as well as the U.S. economy in general. The COVID-19 pandemic could adversely affect the Company’s revenues, earnings, liquidity and cash flows and may require significant actions in response, including employee furloughs, closings of Company facilities, expense reductions or discounts of the pricing of the Company’s products, all in an effort to mitigate such effects. Conditions surrounding COVID-19 change rapidly, and additional impacts of which the Company is not currently aware may arise.
For an additional discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact the Company’s operating results, refer to “Risk Factors” in Item 1A, Part I. of this Annual Report.
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased from $8.7 million for the fiscal year ended March 28, 2021 to $8.3 million for the fiscal year ended April 3, 2022. The Company in the current year experienced an increase in its accounts receivable balances that was $2.4 million higher than the increase in the prior year; the Company recognized a non-cash loss of $2.2 million from the impairment of Carousel’s long-lived assets in the prior year that did not occur in the current year; and the Company recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $1,985,000 that was associated with the forgiveness of the PPP Loan in the current year that did not occur in the prior year. As offsets to these decreases in cash provided by operating activities, the Company in the current year experienced an increase in its net income that was $3.8 million higher than in the prior year; and the Company experienced an increase in its inventory balances that was $2.3 million lower than the increase in the prior year.
Net cash used in investing activities was $733,000 in fiscal year 2021 compared with $490,000 in fiscal year 2022. The decrease in fiscal year 2022 was due to payments in the current year for expenditures for property, plant and equipment that were $202,000 lower than the prior year, and $41,000 in proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment in the current year that did not occur in the prior year.
Net cash used in financing activities was $7.7 million in fiscal year 2021 compared with $6.8 million in fiscal year 2022. The Company made net repayments under its revolving line of credit of $2.6 million in the prior year that did not occur in the current year; the Company made purchases of treasury stock in the prior year that were $2.4 million higher than in the current year, primarily related to a cash payment of $1.9 million made to acquire shares of the Company’s common stock in the prior year from E. Randall Chestnut, the Company’s then Chief Executive Officer, that did not occur in the current year. Offsetting these increases in cash used in financing activities were proceeds of the PPP Loan received in the prior year of $1,963,800 that did not occur in the current year, and dividend payments that were $1.7 milion higher in the current year than in the prior year.
The Company’s future performance is, to a certain extent, subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors beyond its control. Based upon the current level of operations, the Company believes that its cash flow from operations and the availability on its revolving line of credit will be adequate to meet its liquidity needs.
The Company’s credit facility at April 3, 2022 consisted of a revolving line of credit under a financing agreement with CIT of up to $26.0 million, which includes a $1.5 million sub-limit for letters of credit, bearing interest at the rate of prime minus 0.5% or LIBOR plus 1.75%, and which is secured by a first lien on all assets of the Company. On May 13, 2021, the Company and CIT entered into an agreement whereby CIT’s lien on Carousel’s assets was automatically released upon the sale of such assets.
The financing agreement was scheduled to mature on July 11, 2022, but on May 31, 2021 the financing agreement was amended to extend the maturity date to July 11, 2025 and to change the interest rates to prime minus 1.0% or LIBOR plus 1.5%, effective as of May 31, 2021. The financing agreement was also amended on June 2, 2022 to transition from the LIBOR reference rate to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) plus 1.6%. As of April 3, 2022, the Company had elected to pay interest on balances owed under the revolving line of credit, if any, under the LIBOR option, which was 1.95% as of April 3, 2022. The financing agreement also provides for the payment by CIT to the Company of interest on daily negative balances, if any, held by CIT at the rate of prime as of the beginning of the calendar month minus 2.0%, which was 1.5% as of April 3, 2022.
As of April 3, 2022 and March 28, 2021, there was no balance owed on the revolving line of credit, there was no letter of credit outstanding and $26.0 million was available under the revolving line of credit based on the Company’s eligible accounts receivable and inventory balances. The financing agreement contains usual and customary covenants for agreements of that type, including limitations on other indebtedness, liens, transfers of assets, investments and acquisitions, merger or consolidation transactions, transactions with affiliates, and changes in or amendments to the organizational documents for the Company and its subsidiaries. The Company believes it was in compliance with these covenants as of April 3, 2022.
To reduce its exposure to credit losses, the Company assigns substantially all of its trade accounts receivable to CIT pursuant to factoring agreements, which have expiration dates that are coterminous with that of the financing agreement described above. Under the terms of the factoring agreements, CIT remits customer payments to the Company as such payments are received by CIT.
CIT bears credit losses with respect to assigned accounts receivable from approved shipments, while the Company bears the responsibility for adjustments from customers related to returns, allowances, claims and discounts. CIT may at any time terminate or limit its approval of shipments to a particular customer. If such a termination or limitation occurs, then the Company either assumes (and may seek to mitigate) the credit risk for shipments to the customer after the date of such termination or limitation or discontinues shipments to the customer. Factoring fees, which are included in marketing and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income, were $344,000 and $291,000 during fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company prepares its financial statements to conform with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”) as promulgated by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). References herein to GAAP are to topics within the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (the “FASB ASC”), which the FASB periodically revises through the issuance of an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) and which has been established by the FASB as the authoritative source for GAAP recognized by the FASB to be applied by nongovernmental entities.
Use of Estimates: The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated balance sheets and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The listing below, while not inclusive of all of the Company's accounting policies, sets forth those accounting policies which the Company's management believes embody the most significant judgments due to the uncertainties affecting their application and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions.
Revenue Recognition: Revenue is recognized upon the satisfaction of all contractual performance obligations and the transfer of control of the products sold to the customer. The majority of the Company’s sales consists of single performance obligation arrangements for which the transaction price for a given product sold is equivalent to the price quoted for the product, net of any stated discounts applicable at a point in time. Each sales transaction results in an implicit contract with the customer to deliver a product as directed by the customer. Shipping and handling costs that are charged to customers are included in net sales, and the Company’s costs associated with shipping and handling activities are included in cost of products sold.
A provision for anticipated returns, which are based upon historical returns and claims, is provided through a reduction of net sales and cost of products sold in the reporting period within which the related sales are recorded. Actual returns and claims experienced in a future period may differ from historical experience, and thus, the Company’s provision for anticipated returns at any given point in time may be over-funded or under-funded. The Company recognizes revenue associated with unredeemed store credits and gift certificates at the earlier of their redemption by customers, their expiration or when their likelihood of redemption becomes remote, which is generally two years from the date of issuance.
Revenue from sales made directly to consumers is recorded when the shipped products have been received by customers, and excludes sales taxes collected on behalf of governmental entities. Revenue from sales made to retailers is recorded when legal title has been passed to the customer based upon the terms of the customer’s purchase order, the Company’s sales invoice, or other associated relevant documents. Such terms usually stipulate that legal title will pass when the shipped products are no longer under the control of the Company, such as when the products are picked up at the Company’s facility by the customer or by a common carrier. Payment terms can vary from prepayment for sales made directly to consumers to payment due in arrears (generally, 60 days of being invoiced) for sales made to retailers.
Allowances Against Accounts Receivable: Revenue from sales made to retailers is reported net of allowances for anticipated returns and other allowances, including cooperative advertising allowances, warehouse allowances, placement fees, volume rebates, coupons and discounts. Such allowances are recorded commensurate with sales activity or using the straight-line method, as appropriate, and the cost of such allowances is netted against sales in reporting the results of operations. The provision for the majority of the Company’s allowances occurs on a per-invoice basis. When a customer requests to have an agreed-upon deduction applied against the customer’s outstanding balance due to the Company, the allowances are correspondingly reduced to reflect such payments or credits issued against the customer’s account balance. The Company analyzes the components of the allowances for customer deductions monthly and adjusts the allowances to the appropriate levels. Although the timing of funding requests for advertising support can cause the net balance in the allowance account to fluctuate from period to period, such timing has no impact on the consolidated statements of income since such costs are accrued commensurate with sales activity or using the straight-line method, as appropriate.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets and Identifiable Intangible Assets: In addition to the systematic annual depreciation and amortization of the Company’s fixed assets and identifiable intangible assets, the Company reviews for impairment long-lived assets and identifiable intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of any asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss must be recognized if the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. Assets to be disposed of, if any, are recorded at the lower of net book value or fair market value, less estimated costs to sell at the date management commits to a plan of disposal, and are classified as assets held for sale on the consolidated balance sheets. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Inventory Valuation: On a periodic basis, management reviews its inventory quantities on hand for obsolescence, physical deterioration, changes in price levels and the existence of quantities on hand which may not reasonably be expected to be sold within the Company’s normal operating cycle. To the extent that any of these conditions is believed to exist or the market value of the inventory expected to be realized in the ordinary course of business is otherwise no longer as great as its carrying value, an allowance against the inventory value is established. To the extent that this allowance is established or increased during an accounting period, an expense is recorded in cost of products sold in the Company's consolidated statements of income. Only when inventory for which an allowance has been established is later sold or is otherwise disposed is the allowance reduced accordingly. Significant management judgment is required in determining the amount and adequacy of this allowance.
In the event that actual results differ from management's estimates or these estimates and judgments are revised in future periods, the Company may not fully realize the carrying value of its inventory or may need to establish additional allowances, either of which could materially impact the Company's financial position and results of operations.