ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis are intended to help you understand our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes to the consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 in this report. Statements in the following discussion that are not historical in nature are forward looking statements, and inherently subject to risk. Our future financial condition and results of operations will vary from our historical financial condition and results of operations described below based on a variety of factors. You should carefully review the risks described under Item 1A and elsewhere in this report, which identify certain important factors that could cause our future financial condition and results of operations to vary from our historical operations and from our current expectations of future results.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company focused on pre-clinical, clinical and commercialization of angiogenic gene therapy biotherapeutics for strategic niche markets, primarily for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. Our technology platform is designed to biologically activate the human body’s innate angiogenic healing process to stimulate the growth of microvascular networks for patients with ischemic cardiovascular, cerebral, and other medical conditions and diseases, as well as for advanced tissue engineering applications. Historically, we have developed and sold various medical devices, product candidates and products.
We operated throughout the period covered by this report, with severely limited financial resources. During 2015 and 2016, prior to the period covered in this report, we took significant actions to reduce our operating expenses, including headcount reductions, downsizing offices, and suspending some operations while we sought capital to continue our business operations. In 2016 we contributed our assets related to our Generx product candidate into our Angionetics, Inc. subsidiary. We then sold a 15% non-dilutive preferred equity ownership interest in Angionetics, Inc. to Huapont in exchange for $3.0 million.
Our current business is focused exclusively on the development of Generx, a gene therapy product candidate targeted for men and women with advanced ischemic heart disease and refractory angina. We have received FDA clearance and FAST Track designation covering our conduct of the AFFIRM Phase 3 clinical trial. We do not currently have any other products or other product candidates under clinical study and have not generated any revenues from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our operations currently comprise one segment for financial reporting purposes.
Significant Developments
● On April 10, 2020, we entered into the Ratification Agreement with Shanxi. In connection with the Ratification Agreement, we terminated all prior agreements with Shanxi and cancelled a prepaid $600,000 common stock subscription and entered into a mutual release of claims.
● On April 10, 2020, our Angionetics, Inc. subsidiary entered into the Shanxi License Agreement, granting Shanxi certain license rights with respect to our Generx product candidate. The distribution and license rights commence only after we obtain U.S. FDA approval for marketing and sale of Generx in the United States. The license rights include (a) a non-exclusive right to manufacture Generx products in China, and (b) an exclusive right to market and sell Generx products in Singapore, Macau, Hong Kong, Taiwan, any other municipality other than mainland China where Chinese (Mandarin or Cantonese) is the common language, the Russian Federation, and the CIS (i.e., Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan). The Shanxi License Agreement provided for payment of $600,000 upfront, which was paid by application of the prepaid equity subscription, and a royalty ranging from 5% up to 10% based on the level of annual net sales of the Generx product sold by Shanxi in the licensed territory.
● On April 10, 2020, our Activation Therapeutics, Inc. subsidiary entered into the Shanxi Assignment Agreement pursuant to which we transferred all of our license rights to manufacture, use, market and sell Excellagen to Shanxi. We also assigned to Shanxi a Chinese patent that we received on Excellagen. As a result, we no longer have an interest in Excellagen, other than the right to the royalty payments from Olaregen.
● In May 2020, we entered into a Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement with Nostrum, selling Nostrum 1,700,000 shares of our newly authorized Series B Convertible Preferred Stock in exchange for $1,700,000. We will use the proceeds from the sale of the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock to fund working capital requirements in preparation for conducting a Phase 3 clinical trial in the U.S. for our Generx product candidate. We believe that Nostrum’s assets and experience in the formulation and commercialization of pharmaceutical products will facilitate the administration and completion of the Phase 3 clinical trial for Generx on a cost-effective basis.
● The Series B Convertible Preferred Stock financing resulted in a reset of the conversion price of our outstanding Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, such that each Series A Convertible Preferred Stock is convertible into Common Stock at a conversion rate of 88,496. In a separate but concurrent transaction, when Nostrum acquired the 1,700,000 shares of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, it also acquired 220 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock from a previous investor, Sabby Healthcare Master Fund (“Sabby”), which is convertible into 19,469,026 shares of Common Stock.
● Since May 20, 2020, through April 30, 2021, Sabby Healthcare Master Fund fully converted its 570 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, into 50,442,491 shares of our Common Stock that has increased our outstanding Common Stock to 64,931,888 shares as of December 31, 2021.
● During 2020, we entered into additional settlement agreements with third party vendors resulting in additional gains on vendor payables of $68,032 on our accounts payable.
In March 2021, during the period not covered by this report, the Company entered into an agreement with FUJIFILM Diosynth Biotechnologies (“FDB”) to manufacture the Generx [Ad5FGF-4] angiogenic gene therapy product candidate for Phase 3 clinical evaluation for the treatment of refractory angina due to late-stage coronary artery disease. Manufacturing operations will be conducted at FDB’s facilities in College Station, Texas where FDB will perform technology transfer and process development activities for Phase 3 clinical and commercial-scale GMP manufacturing of Generx. The required funding for the Fuji agreement is approximately $3.8 million. At present, we do not have the requisite financial resources to initiate FDB’s manufacturing of Generx [Ad5FGF-4] necessary to the conduct of the planned FDA-cleared Phase 3 clinical study. We are currently evaluating alternative financing arrangements, but there are no agreements in place for such financing at this time. As a result, we are unable to provide a start date for the initiation of the planned FDA-cleared Phase 3 AFFIRM clinical study.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements included in this report have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and their accompanying notes. These estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and our recognition and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
Accounting estimates or assumptions are inherently subject to change, and certain estimates or assumptions are difficult to measure or value. Our estimates are based on historical experience, industry standards, and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. If results differ materially from our estimates, we will adjust our financial statements prospectively as we become aware of the necessity for an adjustment.
Preferred Stock
The Company applies the accounting standards for distinguishing liabilities from equity when determining the classification and measurement of its preferred stock. Shares that are subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. The Company classifies conditionally redeemable preferred shares, which includes preferred shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control, as temporary equity. At all other times, preferred shares are classified as stockholders’ equity.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating losses and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income(loss) in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Due to the Company’s history of losses, a full valuation allowance has been recognized against the deferred tax assets.
The Company has adopted the provisions of ASC 740-10, which clarifies the accounting for uncertain tax positions. ASC 740-10 requires that the Company recognize the impact of a tax position in its financial statements if the position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination base on the technical merits of the position. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had no material unrecognized tax benefits, and based on the information currently available, no significant changes in unrecognized tax benefits are expected in the next twelve months.
The Company’s policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has not recorded any interest or penalties related to income tax matters. The Company does not foresee any material changes in unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months.
When tax returns are filed, there may be uncertainty about the merits of positions taken or the amount of the position that would be ultimately sustained. The benefit of a tax position is recognized in the financial statements in the period during which, based on all available evidence, management believes it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including the resolution of appeals or litigation processes, if any. Tax positions taken are not offset or aggregated with other positions.
Tax positions that meet the more likely than not recognition threshold is measured at the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement with the applicable taxing authority. The portion of the benefit associated with tax positions taken that exceed the amount measured as described above should be reflected as a liability for uncertain tax benefits in the accompanying balance sheet along with any associated interest and penalties that would be payable to the taxing authorities upon examination. The Company believes our tax positions are all more likely than not to be upheld upon examination. As such, the Company has not recorded a liability for uncertain tax benefits.
Warrants
Warrants issued to third parties in connection with consulting and other services do not trade in an active securities market, and as such, we estimate the fair value of these warrants using an option pricing model. Following the authoritative accounting guidance, warrants with variable exercise price features or with potential cash settlement outside of our control are accounted for as liabilities, with changes in the fair value included in operating expenses, otherwise warrants determined to be equity classified are fair valued at the date of issuance, with no change in the fair value recorded in subsequent periods. We estimated the fair value of the warrants using the Black Scholes option pricing model. The Black Scholes model requires that our management make certain estimates regarding the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the warrant’s expected life, and the expected forfeiture rate, to derive an estimated fair market value.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
The following tables sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the relative dollar and percentage change between the two years.
Research and development costs decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 by $25,871 or 10.6 % due to the lack of specific R&D activity. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased in 2020 by $451,051 or 75.9% compared to 2019. This was due to increased professional expenses paid to accounting and legal firms to become compliant with our SEC filings, costs incurred in connection with the Nostrum financing and other various working capital costs such as compensation, rent, IT costs, etc.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a gain of $600,000 from the transfer to Shanxi of all of its licensing and patent rights to manufacture, use and market Excellagen in China. In connection with this transaction the Company terminated all prior agreements with Shanxi related to its prepaid $600,000 common stock subscription and entered into a mutual release of claims.
Other Income (Expenses) for the year ended December 31, 2020, included a gain on debt forgiveness from accounts payables of $68,032. The debt forgiveness is the result of settlement agreements reached with certain vendors as part of the pre-financing restructuring efforts of the Company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our liquidity and working capital position on December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Following the period covered by this report:
● We entered into several agreements with employees, former employees, and vendors to restructure claims reducing the amount of our accounts payable and our other current liabilities and/or extending the payment terms until after commercialization and Generx products sales commence.
● In May 2020 we secured $1,700,000 financing from the sale of our newly authorized Series B Convertible Preferred Stock to Nostrum. We will use the proceeds from the sale of the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock to fund working capital requirements in preparation for conducting a Phase 3 clinical trial in the U.S. for our Generx product candidate.
The following table summarizes our cash flows from (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company has not generated cash from operating activities. We did not generate revenue in any of the years covered by this report, and generally record operating losses in each of the years.
Differences in net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 compared to cash from financing activities in 2019 is primarily due to Nostrum providing $1,700,000 in exchange for Series B preferred stock.
We anticipate that negative cash flows from operations will continue for the foreseeable future. We do not have any unused credit facilities. Our cash position, even after the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock financing with Nostrum, will not be sufficient to sustain our operations. We intend to secure additional working capital to support our continued operations through sales of additional equity and debt securities. As long as any shares of our Series A Preferred Stock are outstanding, we have agreed that we will not, without the consent of the holders of two-thirds of the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, incur indebtedness other than specified “Permitted Indebtedness”, or incur any liens other than specified “Permitted Liens”.
Our principal business objective is to advance our Generx product candidate through the AFFIRM Phase 3 clinical trial and to begin commercialization of Generx in the United States. We expect that support from Nostrum will decrease the overall costs of the trial, but we estimate that we will still need approximately $20.0 million to $25.0 million in additional capital to complete manufacturing of Generx clinical supplies for the conduct of the planned Phase 3 AFFIRM clinical study, and administrative and operating expenses that include the costs associated with Gene Biotherapeutics remaining a public company. We plan to secure that capital through the sale of additional equity or debt securities or through other transactions that could include strategic partnering and distribution agreements. There are no agreements or arrangement for any additional financing in place at this time.
Our history of recurring losses and uncertainties as to whether our operations will become profitable raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability of assets or classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any significant off-balance sheet debt, nor did we have any transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations) or other relationships with any unconsolidated entities or other persons that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, capital resources, or significant components of revenue or expenses material to investors.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for disclosure and discussion of new accounting standards.