ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. See “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report.
General Overview
Cryomass Technologies Inc began as Auto Tool Technologies Inc., which was incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada on May 10, 2011. The Company’s name was changed to AFC Building Technologies Inc. effective January 10, 2014. Effective April 26, 2018, the Company changed its name to First Colombia Development Corp. Effective October 14, 2019, the Company changed its name to Redwood Green Corp. Effective September 1, 2020, the Company changed its name to Andina Gold Corp. On July 15, 2021, the Company entered into a plan of merger with its wholly-owned subsidiary, Cryomass Technologies Inc. a Nevada corporation, for the purpose of changing our name to Cryomass Technologies Inc. effective August 27, 2021. Our ticker symbol changed from AGOL to CRYM.
The Company’s corporate headquarters are located in Denver, Colorado.
In April 2018, the Company effected a forward stock split of our authorized and issued and outstanding shares of common stock on a one (1) old for two (2) new basis. Upon effect of the forward split, authorized capital increased from 250,000,000 shares of common stock to 500,000,000 shares of common stock and correspondingly, the issued and outstanding shares of common stock increased from 34,760,008 to 73,520,016 shares of common stock, all with a par value of $0.001. The stock split was subsequently reviewed and approved by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) on April 26, 2018.
On May 10, 2018, the Company acquired all the issued and outstanding share capital of First Colombia Devco S.A.S. (“Devco”) a Colombian company, and began to establish various business ventures in Colombia in the agriculture and real estate development, tourism, and infrastructure sectors before commencing to phase them out in April 2019.
On July 1, 2019, the Company acquired 100% of the membership interests in General Extract, LLC (“General Extract”), a Colorado limited liability company. General Extract was founded in 2015 as an importer, distributor, broker and postprocessor of hemp and hemp derivatives. The Company acquired all of the issued and outstanding membership interests, including business plans and access to contacts. In consideration of the sale and transfer of the membership interests, the Company delivered 299,170 shares, representing 100% of the ownership of First Colombia Devco. Effective August 27, 2021, General Extract became Cryomass LLC.
On July 15, 2019, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary Good Acquisition Co., entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement to acquire cannabis brands and other assets of Critical Mass Industries, LLC DBA Good Meds (“CMI”), a Colorado limited liability company (“CMI Transaction”). CMI is licensed by the Marijuana Enforcement Division of Colorado Department of Revenue to produce cannabis and cannabis products under its six licenses. These licenses allow for cultivation, manufacturing of infused products and retail distribution. At the time, Colorado law prohibited public companies, including the Company, from owning cannabis licenses. Therefore, CMI spun off assets acquired by the Company into two new entities, Good Holdco, LLC and Good IPCo, LLC. Under the terms of the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement, CMI retained the cannabis licenses, inventory and accounts receivable and continues to operate the cannabis business related to these assets under the agreements entered into with Cryomass Technologies. In consideration for the transfer of the acquired assets, the Company delivered 13,553,233 shares of the Company common stock, in addition to $1,999,770 in cash paid to CMI.
Effective December 31, 2021, we entered into a restated and amended administrative services agreement, terminated our license and marketing agreements, and restated the asset purchase agreement with CMI and affiliates. As a result of these agreements, we disposed of all CMI-related assets and extinguished any and all related obligations. For clarity, we have no management or operations decision-making right or responsibility, nor any access to future economic benefits from operation of the assets. Therefore, upon commencing these agreements, we determined that CMI no longer qualifies as a variable interest entity (“VIE”) as of December 31, 2021.
On June 23, 2021, the Company consummated purchase of assets of Cryocann USA Corp, a designer and seller of equipment developed on the basis of patented technology for cannabis varieties harvesting, refinement, and extraction. The technology reduces processing costs, increases the quality of the extracted compounds and has potential for other agricultural applications including hemp and hops. The Company is exploring the application of the underlying technology to a broad range of industries that handle high-value materials and that could benefit from our precision capture methods. We anticipate that cannabis and hemp will be the first in a series of such industries.
Update on COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, which has spread throughout the world, including the United States. On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern,” and on March 11, 2020, it characterized the outbreak as a “pandemic”. The impact of COVID-19 developments and uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic has introduced significant volatility in the financial markets.
To date, COVID-19 has surfaced in nearly all regions around the world and resulted in travel restrictions, both domestic and international, closing of borders and business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas. As a result, COVID-19 has impacted the Company’s business. Although deemed an essential business during the pandemic, many dispensaries and cannabis manufacturers have suspended or reduced operations on a temporary basis due to matters associated with COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic and responses to this crisis, including actions taken by federal, state and local governments, have had an impact on the operations of the Company, including, without limitation, the following: reduced staffing due to employee suspected conditions and social distancing measures; constraints on productivity; management and staff non-essential business-related travel was constrained due to stay-at-home orders; some employees have shifted to remote work resulting in loss of productivity; consumers visiting dispensaries operated under license impacted by stay-at-home orders. Management continues to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic situation and federal, state and local recommendations and will provide updates as appropriate.
Our Current Business
Our business portfolio includes the accounts of Cryomass LLC (formerly known as General Extract), which is controlled by the Company through its 100% ownership interest. The Company dissolved its previously reported VIE relationship with Critical Mass Industries Inc., such that we no longer report the VIE as discontinued operations held for sale.
On June 23, 2021, the Company consummated purchase of assets of Cryocann USA Corp through its wholly-owned subsidiary Cryomass LLC. We are currently finalizing research and development work of our patented technology. We intend to begin commercial-scale testing of the system prototype in the first half of 2022 and plan to target specific markets and industries to employ this ground-breaking technology.
To develop and commercialize the technology, we contracted with an independent engineering and manufacturing firm to refine the design of our cryo-mechanical system for the handling of harvested hemp, cannabis and other high-value plants. The system exploits CryoMass’s U.S.-patented process for the controlled application of liquid nitrogen to stabilize and separate the structural elements of gross plant material. The device currently under development is scaled for highway transportability and is being optimized for the low-cost collection of fully intact hemp and cannabis trichomes. It can be used within minutes after plants have been cut and can also efficiently capture trichomes from fresh frozen or even dried plant parts, including trim. The device’s through-put capacity is expected to be approximately 600 kilograms of gross plant material per hour. The advanced design for the equipment has been completed, and testing of a prototype machine is currently underway. The engineering and manufacturing firm has indicated that it has the capacity to build 10 to 15 such devices per month.
In November we retained a second engineering and manufacturing firm to independently develop a separate machine design that applies our patented process. We expect their work to help strengthen the power and robustness of our technology. In addition, it opens a channel to a second manufacturing source.
The first functional “beta” machine is expected to be ready for field testing by a third-party cannabis producer in mid-2022. The first production-run machine is expected to be ready for use towards the end of the second quarter 2022. At that moment, we expect to start helping our first tolling client (fee for service) increase its margins by cutting the cost of handling, processing and refining its hemp or cannabis and increasing the resulting material’s value to formulators of end products.
Management believes the CryoMass system will deliver a compelling combination of cost and time savings while enhancing product quality and quantity for largescale cultivators and processors of hemp and cannabis. The use of a CryoMass system - which can be trucked to and operated on the fields of most large hemp and cannabis growers or be permanently installed at a user’s processing facility - should eliminate many of the costs that come with traditional practices, especially the labor, fuel and capital costs of drying and curing hemp or cannabis that is grown for the extraction of end products. With traditional practices, harvested plants are transported to a specially constructed drying house and then treated for a week or longer under controlled conditions of temperature and humidity. It’s a costly method. With our system, harvested plants are simply fed into the front end of a CryoMass machine, and minutes later fully intact trichomes are collected at the back end of the machine. With traditional practices and their seven-to-ten days of handling and drying, a large share of a plant’s valuable trichomes break off and are lost. Then the remaining trichomes are damaged by long exposure to oxygen and by the evaporation of their volatile terpenes. The CryoMass system, on the other hand, stabilizes and collects fully intact trichomes at harvest, leaving no opportunity for such wasteful loss. Field-captured trichomes are the cleanest element of a hemp or cannabis plant because, unlike the rest of the plant, trichomes do not readily take up heavy metals, pesticides or other common soil contaminants. As a product for end-users, field-captured trichomes are closest to being contaminant free. As feedstock for manufacturers of extracts and oils, they are the key to the purest products possible.
Because the trichomes collected with CryoMass technology represent only 10% or so of a plant’s weight and volume, they are cheaper to ship and store than gross plant material. For the same reason and because trichomes are free of the waxes and other unwanted materials found in the rest of the plant, processing trichomes into oils and extracts can be far quicker, cheaper and easier than processing gross plant material. Even trichomes captured from dried or frozen plant parts deliver this cost-saving advantage to processors of oils and extracts. The three-dimensional advantage achievable with the CryoMass system - first-stage cost savings, product enhancement and downstream cost savings - can as much as double a crop’s wholesale value. And in some jurisdictions, users may enjoy a reduction in excise taxes levied on cannabis and hemp harvests, which typically are tied to the gross weight of hemp or cannabis that is removed from the field.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The historical results presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period.
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 specifically relating to our variable interest entity, CMI, which is classified as discontinued operations above. The historical results presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period.
Net Sales and Cost of Goods Sold
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0, which represented a decrease of $784,455, or 100%, compared to $781,455 of net sales for year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue generating activities for continuing operations are attributable to Cryomass LLC. The decrease in net sales is due to the fact that the Company exited the cultivation industry in 2020 and therefore has not had revenue-producing operations in 2021. CMI net sales were $5,891,894 for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $4,032,719 was related to medical retail, $1,864,314 was related to medical wholesale, $12,791 was related to recreational wholesale, and $(17,930) was related to other revenues. Revenue generating activities for discontinued operations are attributable to CMI. CMI net sales were $4,698,428 for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $1,319,944 was related to medical wholesale, $837,414 was related to recreational wholesale, and $4,496 was related to other revenues. The overall decrease in CMI net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was $968,388, or 14%, which is primarily attributable to new regulations in the state of Colorado placing limitations on the amount of medical marijuana sold to individuals.
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0, which represented a decrease of $744,279 or 100%, compared to $744,279 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of goods sold primarily consisted of the cost of CBD isolate. The decrease in cost of goods sold is due to the fact that Cryomass LLC did not have revenue generating operations in 2021. CMI’s cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of allocated salaries and wages of employees directly related to the production process, allocated depreciation directly related to the production process, cultivation supplies, rent and utilities. CMI’s cost of goods sold were $4,132,696 and $4,901,237 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing an decrease of $768,541, or 16%. This decrease is primarily attributable to new regulations in the state of Colorado placing limitations on the amount of medical marijuana sold to individuals.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses encompass personnel costs, sales and marketing, general and administrative expenses, legal and professional fees, and research and development. Total operating expenses were $7,991,827 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $6,572,017 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1,419,810, or 22%, was primarily attributable to the following changes in operating expenses of:
● General and administrative expenses - $1,600,532 increase
● Personnel costs - $733,380 increase
●
Legal and professional fees - $987,006 decrease
The increase of $1,600,532, or 68%, in general and administrative expenses and increase of $733,380, or 30%, in personnel costs resulted from Cryomass Technologies Inc. hiring employees, including significant stock compensation, as its operations began. The decrease of $987,006, or 57%, in legal and professional fees primarily resulted from a large invoice from one vendor related to investor-relations services in 2020 as well as high first year audit fees from a new auditor.
CMI operating expenses encompass personnel costs, sales and marketing, general and administrative, legal and professional fees, and amortization expense. Total operating expenses for CMI were $1,402,437 and $1,725,950 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a decrease of $323,513, or 19%. This decrease is primarily attributable to the following changes in operating expenses of:
●
●
General and administrative expenses - $118,442 decrease
Legal and professional fees - $112,690 decrease
● Sales and marketing - $91,819 decrease
The decrease is primarily due to a slowdown in operations from new regulations in the state of Colorado placing limitations on the amount of medical marijuana sold to individuals as well as higher regulatory compliance consulting fees in 2020.
Other Expense
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $2,189,959 interest expense and $47,144 gain on foreign exchange. Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $236,912 interest expense and $88,690 loss on foreign exchange. The increase in interest expense was a predominantly a result of entering into a convertible note payable, recognizing a debt discount of $1,444,542 which was fully amortized in 2021. The 2021 gain on foreign exchange relates to a payable agreement with Cryomass LLC’s supplier.
CMI’s other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $49,803 interest expense, which primarily relates to the related party note. CMI’s other expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $153,592 interest expense, which primarily relates to the related party note, $4,663,514 goodwill impairment, and $361,218 intangibles impairment.
Net Loss
For the foregoing reasons, we had a net loss of $12,859,643 for the year ended December 31, 2021, or $0.08 net loss per common share - basic and diluted, compared to a net loss of $11,815,907 for the year ended December 31, 2020, or $0.12 net loss per common share - basic and diluted.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows
During 2021 Q2 and Q3, the Company obtained a total of $4,900,000 cash through a convertible debt unit offering consisting of a convertible note and a warrant to purchase shares. These funds are available to cover operating expenses while exploring new business opportunities. On June 23, 2021, the Company consummated purchase of assets of Cryocann USA Corp.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had working capital of $10,647,804 and cash balance of $5,772,839. The Company estimates that it needs approximately $3,000,000 to cover overhead costs plus an additional $1-$2,000,000 to support the capital expenditures and operations and growth of the assets acquired from CryoCann USA Corp, over the next twelve months. Management believes it has sufficient cash available, based on proceeds from two private placements completed during the year to support the anticipated level of operations for the foreseeable future.
COVID-19 has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of financial markets, which may reduce the Company’s ability to access capital or its customers’ ability to pay the Company for past or future purchases, which could negatively affect the Company’s liquidity. The Company believes that the cash balances and cash from operations will be sufficient to satisfy its cash needs for the next few months until it can obtain new long-term financing or other sources of capital. If we are unable to attain additional financing, we will have to seek additional strategic alternatives and relief from our additional liabilities accumulated during COVID-19.
The impact of COVID-19 developments and uncertainty with respect to the economic effects of the pandemic have introduced significant volatility in the financial markets. The uncertainties associated with COVID-19 related to our industry present risk and doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Going Concern
Management believes it has sufficient cash available to support an anticipated level of operations for at least 12 months following the date of this report.
Capital Resources
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital for the periods indicated:
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a cash balance of $5,772,839 and $329,839, respectively.
Summary of Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $5,600,512 during the year ended December 31, 2021. This included a net loss of $10,134,642, a non- cash charge related to depreciation and amortization of $43,663, a non-cash charge related to the amortization of debt discount of $1,547,181, a non-cash charge related to bad debt expense of $540,000, a non-cash charge related to the fair value of common stock issued pursuant to service and advisory agreements of $1,011,075, a payable extinguishment for services not provided of $318,970, a non-cash charge related to stock-based compensation of $2,653,271, a non-cash charge related to deferred income tax expense of $(14,926), and cash used in operating activities from discontinued operations of $501,609. This was partially offset by net changes in prepaid expenses and accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,063,495.
Net cash used in operating activities was $3,749,621 during the year ended December 31, 2020. This included a net loss of $6,860,443, a non-cash charge related to provision for inventory loss of $400,787, a non-cash charge related to stock-based compensation of $1,440,284, a non-cash charge of deferred income tax expense of $10,235, a non-cash charge related to the amortization of debt discount of $52,083, a non-cash charge related to the fair value of common stock issued of $7,500, and cash provided by operating activities from discontinued operations of $276,719. This was partially offset by net changes in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses, inventories, accounts payable and accrued expenses, and taxes payable of $933,449.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $2,803,244 during the year ended December 31, 2021, due to the purchase of property and equipment and the CryoCann transaction.
Net cash used in investing activities was $693,255 during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the purchase of property and equipment for discontinued operations.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $13,846,756, which consisted primarily of $10,308,000 proceeds from the issuance of common stock and $4,900,000 proceeds from notes payable, primarily offset by repayment of the seller’s note associated with the CryoCann transaction.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1,298,945, which consisted of $636,385 proceeds from the issuance of common stock and common stock to be issued, $412,560 proceeds from loan payable (net of repayment), and $250,000 proceeds from notes payable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to intangibles, accounting for acquisitions, revenue recognition, income taxes, useful life and recoverability of long-lived assets and deferred income tax asset valuations. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Accounting for Acquisitions
In accordance with the guidance for business combinations, the Company determines whether a transaction or other event is a business combination, which requires that the acquired assets and liabilities assumed constitute a business. Each business combination is then accounted for by applying the acquisition method. If the assets acquired are not a business, the Company accounts for the transaction or other event as an asset acquisition. Under both methods, the Company recognizes the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity. In addition, for transactions that are business combinations, the Company evaluates the existence of goodwill or a gain from a bargain purchase. The Company capitalizes acquisition-related costs and fees associated with asset acquisitions and immediately expenses acquisition-related costs and fees associated with business combinations.
Revenue Recognition
Under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contacts with Customers (“ASC 606”), the Company recognizes revenue when the customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which is expected to be received in exchange for those goods or services. The Company recognizes revenue following the five-step model prescribed under ASC 606: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company’s revenue consists of sales of cannabis and ancillary products to both retail consumers and wholesale customers. Revenue for retail customers is recognized upon completion of the transaction in the point of sale system and satisfaction of the sale by providing the corresponding inventory at the retail location. Revenue for wholesale customers is recognized upon acceptance of the physical goods and confirmation by acceptance of the inventory in the regulatory marijuana enforcement tracking reporting compliance (“METRC”) system. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products to customers, generally as risk of loss pass, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those products. Taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities, are excluded from revenue.
Retail customer loyalty liabilities are recognized in the period in which they are incurred and will often be retired without being utilized. Shipping and handling costs are expensed as incurred and are included in cost of sales, which were not material for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company operates in a highly regulated environment in which state regulatory approval is required prior to the customer being able to purchase the product, either through the Colorado Marijuana Enforcement Division for wholesale clients or the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment for medical patients.
Inventory, net
Inventory, net is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The Company compares the cost of inventory with market value and write down inventories to net realizable value, if lower. The Company writes down inventory when conditions indicate that the net realizable value may be less than cost due to physical deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels or other factors. Due to changing market conditions, management conducted a thorough review of its inventory. As a result, a provision for inventory loss of $400,787 and $163,800 was charged against operations in 2020 and 2019, respectively, to write down inventory to its net realizable value. This was based on the Company’s best estimates of product sales prices and customer demand patterns. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimates used by the Company to determine its provision for inventory losses will be materially different from the actual amounts or results. These differences could result in materially higher than expected inventory provisions, which could have a materially adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition in the near term.
Variable Interest Entities
The Company accounts for variable interest entities in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 810, Consolidation. Management evaluates the relationship between the Company and VIEs and the economic benefit flow of the contractual arrangement with the VIEs. Management determines if the Company is the primary beneficiary of a VIE through a qualitative analysis that identifies which variable interest holder has the controlling financial interest in the VIE. The variable interest holder who has both of the following has the controlling financial interest and is the primary beneficiary: (1) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (2) the obligation to absorb losses of, or the right to receive benefits from, the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. In performing our analysis, we consider all relevant facts and circumstances, including: the design and activities of the VIE, the terms of the contracts the VIE has entered into, the nature of the VIE’s variable interests issued and how they were negotiated with or marketed to potential investors, and which parties participated significantly in the design or redesign of the entity. Previously, management concluded that the Company was the primary beneficiary of CMI and consolidated the financial results of this entity.
Effective December 31, 2021, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement involving its VIE with Critical Mass Industries, Inc. and John Knapp, the sole shareholder of Critical Mass Industries, Inc., to divest its discontinued operations in cannabis cultivation, where the buyer assumes all assets and liabilities from the Company. Therefore, with regards to both criteria discussed above, the Company no longer has the power to direct activities, absorb losses, or receive benefits from the VIE and as such will no longer consolidate with CMI.
Income Taxes
Potential benefits of income tax losses are not recognized in the accounts until realization is more likely than not. The Company has adopted ASC 740, Income Taxes as of its inception. ASC 740 prescribes the procedures for recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns. Pursuant to ASC 740 the Company is required to compute tax asset benefits for net operating losses carried forward. The potential benefits of net operating losses have not been recognized in these financial statements because the Company cannot be assured it is more likely than not it will utilize the net operating losses carried forward in future years. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company does not have an accrual relating to uncertain tax positions. It is not anticipated that unrecognized tax benefits would significantly increase or decrease within 12 months of the reporting date.
Assets and Liabilities of Discontinued Operations Held for Sale
Assets and liabilities are classified as held for sale when all of the following criteria for a plan of sale have been met: (1) management, having the authority to approve the action, commits to a plan to sell the assets; (2) the assets are available for immediate sale, in their present condition, subject only to terms that are usual and customary for sales of such assets; (3) an active program to locate a buyer and other actions required to complete the plan to sell the assets have been initiated; (4) the sale of the assets is probable and is expected to be completed within one year; (5) the assets are being actively marketed for a price that is reasonable in relation to their current fair value; and (6) actions required to complete the plan indicate that it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or the plan will be withdrawn. When all of these criteria have been met, the assets (and liabilities) are classified as held for sale in the balance sheet. Assets classified as held for sale are reported at the lower of their carrying value or fair value less costs to sell. Depreciation of assets ceases upon designation as held for sale.