ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
2021 FINANCIAL REVIEW
INTRODUCTION
CSB Bancorp, Inc. (the “Company” or “CSB”) was incorporated under the laws of the State of Ohio in 1991 and is a registered financial holding company. The Company’s wholly owned subsidiaries are The Commercial and Savings Bank (the “Bank”) and CSB Investment Services, LLC. The Bank is chartered under the laws of the State of Ohio and was organized in 1879. The Bank is a member of the Federal Reserve System, with deposits insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and its primary regulators are the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions and the Federal Reserve Board.
The Company, through the Bank, provides retail and commercial banking services to its customers including checking and savings accounts, time deposits, cash management, safe deposit facilities, personal loans, commercial loans, real estate mortgage loans, installment loans, IRAs, night depository facilities, and trust and brokerage services. Its customers are located primarily in Holmes, Stark, Tuscarawas, Wayne, and portions of surrounding counties in Ohio.
Economic activity in the Company’s market area expanded moderately in the fourth quarter of 2021 after solid growth earlier in the year stemming from a continued recovery following the COVID-19 pandemic economic effects of 2020. Demand for goods and services has been strong; however, supply chain challenges have affected growth in many sectors of the economy. Consumer spending has increased modestly, although in some sectors, limited inventory and higher prices have deterred some buyers. Reported unemployment levels in December 2021 ranged from 2.0% to 3.5% in the four primary counties served by the Company. These levels decreased from the December 2020 range of 2.7% to 5.2% in the four counties served by the Company. Labor demand remained solid as competition for workers has put upward pressure on labor costs. The local housing market continues to be strong with supply still relatively tight. Construction costs remain high as continued supply chain disruptions have contributed to the increase.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are not related to historical results but are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Any forward-looking statements made by the Company herein and in future reports and statements are not guarantees of future performance. Actual results may differ materially from those in forward-looking statements because of various risk factors as discussed in this annual report. The Company does not undertake, and specifically disclaims, any obligation to publicly release the result of any revisions to any forward-looking statements to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events or circumstances after the date of such statements.
FINANCIAL DATA
The following table set forth certain selected consolidated financial information:
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Income
CSB’s 2021 net income was $10.8 million compared to $10.6 million for 2020, an increase of 3%. Total revenue, net interest income plus noninterest income, decreased $246 thousand, or less than 1%, over the prior year to a total of $34.8 million. The provision for loan losses decreased to a $655 thousand recovery as compared to a provision for loan loss of $1.7 million for the prior year. Expense increases include noninterest expenses of $1.8 million and an increase in the provision for income tax of $39 thousand over the prior year due to an increase in taxable income. Basic and diluted earnings per share were $3.97, up 3% from the prior year. The return on average assets was 0.97% in 2021 compared to 1.13% in 2020 and return on average equity was 11.27% in 2021 compared to 11.71% in 2020.
CSB’s 2020 net income was $10.6 million compared to $10.4 million for 2019, an increase of 1%. Total revenue, net interest income plus noninterest income, increased 4% over the prior year to a total of $35 million. The provision for loan losses increased $510 thousand over the prior year. Expense increases include noninterest expenses of $573 thousand and an increase in the provision for income tax of $24 thousand over the prior year due to an increase in taxable income. Basic and diluted earnings per share were $3.85, up 1% from the prior year. The return on average assets was 1.13% in 2020 compared to 1.36% in 2019 and return on average equity was 11.71% in 2020 compared to 12.77% in 2019.
Net Interest Income
¹Taxable equivalent adjustments have been computed assuming a 21% tax rate in 2021, 2020 and 2019 (non-GAAP).
Net interest income is the largest source of the Company’s revenue and consists of the difference between interest income generated on earning assets and interest expense incurred on liabilities (deposits, short-term and long-term borrowings). Volumes, interest rates, composition of interest-earning assets, and interest-bearing liabilities affect net interest income.
Net interest income decreased $636 thousand, or 2%, in 2021 compared to 2020 as excess borrower liquidity and Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness led to a decrease in average loan balances of $47 million. Taxable securities average yields dropped 47 basis points while nontaxable investment yields dropped 46 basis points. The decrease in interest income was partially offset by a decrease in interest expense of $901 thousand as the average rate paid on interest bearing liabilities decreased 20 basis points in 2021. The FTE net interest margin decreased to 2.63% from 3.22% in 2020.
Net interest income decreased $246 thousand, or 1%, in 2020 compared to 2019 as managed and market rates fell in response to the Federal Reserve intervention to support markets and supply liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The average rate earned on interest-earning deposits decreased 180 basis points as CSB’s overnight liquidity increased an average of $86 million on a year over year basis. Taxable securities average yields dropped 78 basis points while nontaxable investment yields dropped 17 basis points. Loan yields decreased 52 basis points. The net interest margin FTE decreased to 3.22% from 3.97% in 2019.
Interest income decreased $1.5 million, or 5%, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to a decrease of $2.2 million in loan interest income as 2021 average loan balances were $47 million below the prior year. PPP loan average loan balances were $24 million lower than the prior year as customers applied for loan forgiveness from the SBA. Interest income on investments and interest-earning deposits increased $693 thousand due to an increase in average balances
of $221 million over the prior year, as businesses and consumers increased their savings balances and decreased spending retaining the monies received through stimulus packages during 2020.
Interest income decreased $1.4 million, or 4%, in 2020 compared to 2019 with a $763 thousand decrease in interest income from overnight funds sold primarily to the Federal Reserve due to a decline in average yield while balances grew as businesses and consumers increased their savings rates with decreased spending as well as retaining the monies received through stimulus packages during 2020. Interest income on taxable securities declined $365 thousand and interest income on nontaxable securities declined $68 thousand as the Federal Reserve substantially reduced rates and increased their purchases of securities to provide market liquidity. Loan yields decreased by 52 basis points as the prime rate was lowered 125 basis points in the first quarter of 2020 following decreases of 75 basis points during the third and fourth quarters of 2019.
Interest expense decreased $901 thousand, or 31%, in 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to rate decreases of 21 basis points on deposits and 9 basis points on other borrowed funds. Average interest-bearing demand and savings deposit balances increased $114 million during the year as savings rates continued to accelerate with consumers and businesses reluctant to spend during the ongoing pandemic uncertainty along with supply chain disruptions affecting spending. Average time deposit balances decreased $2.1 million, and the average interest rate decreased 55 basis points.
Interest expense decreased $1.1 million, or 28%, in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to rate decreases of 31 basis points on deposits and 63 basis points on other borrowed funds. Balances of all deposit types increased in the year as savings rates accelerated with consumers and businesses reacting to the COVID-19 pandemic insecurity.
The following table provides detailed analysis of changes in average balances, yield, and net interest income:
AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS AND NET INTEREST MARGIN ANALYSIS
¹Average balances have been computed on an average daily basis.
²Average rates have been computed based on the amortized cost of the corresponding asset or liability.
³Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans.
4Interest income is shown on a fully tax-equivalent basis (non-GAAP).
The following table compares the impact of changes in average rates and changes in average volumes on net interest income:
RATE/VOLUME ANALYSIS OF CHANGES IN INCOME AND EXPENSE¹
¹Changes attributable to both volume and rate, which cannot be segregated, have been allocated based on the absolute value of the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
Provision For Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is determined by management as the amount required to bring the allowance for loan losses to a level considered appropriate to absorb probable incurred net charge-offs inherent in the loan portfolio as of period end. During 2021 a recovery of credit losses of $655 thousand was recognized compared to a provision for loan losses of $1.7 million in 2020 and $1.1 million provision in 2019. The recapture of provision for loan losses for the year primarily reflects the improvement in credit quality including the reduction of impaired and adversely classified loans, as well as the improvement in economic indicators including unemployment, residential real estate prices and consumer confidence. Nonperforming loans decreased $3.4 million from 2020 to 2021. See “Financial Condition - Allowance for Loan Losses” for additional discussion and information relative to the provision for loan losses.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income increased $390 thousand, or 6%, in 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. Debit card interchange fees increased $389 thousand in 2021 compared to 2020 due to volume increases. Credit card interchange income, which is included in other income above, increased $149 thousand as business credit card usage continued to increase. Earnings on bank owned life insurance increased $97 thousand with the purchase of $2 million in policy
values in 2021. Trust and brokerage service revenue increased $163 thousand. Gains on sales of mortgage loans including mortgage servicing rights (“MSRs”) decreased $502 thousand due to fewer sales of real estate mortgage loans into the secondary market as many consumers took advantage of the large interest rate declines in 2020. The Bank sold $47 million in mortgage loans, including gains, in 2021 as compared to the sale of $61 million of loans in 2020. Service charges on deposits, which are primarily customer overdraft fees, decreased $64 thousand in 2021.
Noninterest income increased $1.5 million, or 28%, in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. Gains on sales of mortgage loans including mortgage servicing rights increased 322% due to increasing sales of real estate mortgage loans with low fixed rate thirty-year maturities into the secondary market. The Bank sold $61 million in mortgage loans, including gains, in 2020 as compared to the sale of $20 million of loans in 2019. Service charges on deposits, decreased 20% in 2020. Debit card interchange fees increased 12% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to volume increases. Earnings on bank owned life insurance increased $76 thousand with the addition of $2 million in policy values in 2020. Trust and brokerage service revenue decreased less than 1%.
Noninterest Expenses
Noninterest expense increased $1.8 million, or 9%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Salaries and employee benefits increased $892 thousand from increases in base compensation of $554 thousand and incentive compensation of $183 thousand. The capitalization of employee costs of loan originations increased the amount recognized in salary expense by $82 thousand in 2021, a result of decreased origination of commercial and mortgage loans. The FDIC insurance assessment increased $275 thousand, or 135%, a result of the increase in asset size and the expiration of small bank assessment credits. Software expense increased $241 thousand, or 22%, due to implementation of a new mobile banking platform along with core software provider increases. Debit card expense increased $89 thousand in 2021 due to increased volume. An increase of $67 thousand in the Ohio financial institutions tax was recognized as capital increased. Occupancy expense increased $80 thousand primarily from branch renovations. Equipment expense increased $57 thousand in 2021, as compared to 2020, with increased depreciation expense and equipment maintenance contracts. The provision for unfunded loan commitments increased $86 thousand due to unfunded construction loans to assisted living / retirement facilities that have been negatively affected by COVID-19. Other expenses increased $59 thousand, or 3%. Professional and director fees decreased $100 thousand primarily due to a decrease in legal expenses related to loan collections. Telecommunications expense decreased $42 thousand in 2021 over 2020 as data lines were replaced with more effective and cost-efficient means.
Noninterest expense increased $573 thousand, or 3%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Salaries and employee benefits increased $44 thousand due to base compensation increasing $449 thousand due to additional full-time employees and annual adjustments. The capitalization of employee costs of loan originations decreased the amount of recognized salary expense by $660 thousand and $217 thousand, in 2020 and 2019 respectively. Other increases in 2020 include retirement benefits and incentive compensation of $16 thousand and medical and dental expense rising $32 thousand.
Employment taxes decreased $16 thousand with refunds within Ohio workmen’s compensation. Professional and director fees decreased $48 thousand primarily due to a decrease in outside audit and accounting fees. Telecommunications expense increased $35 thousand in 2020 over 2019 with additional back-up redundancy added to the core systems. Debit card expense increased $67 thousand in 2020 due to increased volume. An increase in the Ohio financial institutions tax was recognized as capital increased. Equipment expense increased $86 thousand in 2020, as compared to 2019, with increased depreciation expense with the replacement of ATMs, PC’s and laptops, and branch market expansion. The FDIC insurance assessment increased $105 thousand, or 107%, as small bank “credits” expired. Occupancy expense increased $121 thousand, or 15% with the expansion of the branch footprint. Other expenses increased $51 thousand, or 2%.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes amounted to $2.6 million in 2021, $2.5 million in 2020, and $2.5 million in 2019. The slight increase in 2021 and 2020 resulted from an increase in income. The corporate statutory tax rate was 21% for 2021, 2020, and 2019. The effective tax rate in 2021, 2020, and 2019 approximates 19%.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Total assets of the Company were $1.1 billion on December 31, 2021, compared to $1 billion at December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $113 million, or 11%. Net loans decreased $59 million, or 10%, while investment securities increased $107 million, or 52%, and total cash and cash equivalents increased $62 million. Deposits increased $111 million and short-term borrowings decreased $685 thousand, while other borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) decreased by $1.3 million, or 27%.
Securities
Total investment securities increased $107 million, or 52%, to $311 million at year-end 2021. CSB’s portfolio is primarily comprised of agency mortgage-backed securities, obligations of state and political subdivisions, U.S. Treasury notes, other government agencies’ debt, and corporate bonds. Restricted securities consist primarily of FHLB stock.
The Company has no exposure to government-sponsored enterprise preferred stocks, collateralized debt obligations, or trust preferred securities. The Company’s municipal bond portfolio consists of tax-exempt general obligation and revenue bonds. As of December 31, 2021, 73% of such bonds held an S&P or Moody’s investment grade rating, and 27% were non-rated local issues. The municipal portfolio includes a broad spectrum of counties, towns, universities, and school districts with 82% of the portfolio originating in Ohio, and 18% in Pennsylvania. Gross unrealized security losses within the portfolio were less than 1% of total securities on December 31, 2021, reflecting interest rate fluctuations, not credit downgrades.
During December 2021, investments with an amortized cost of approximately $79 million and a fair value of $77 million were transferred from available-for-sale to held-to-maturity as rising interest rates and a slowing of monthly cash payments were occurring. The transfer included $76 million of U.S. Government agency mortgage-backed securities and $3 million of U.S. Treasury notes. These bonds will still provide liquidity through pledging and for use as collateral against borrowings.
One of the primary functions of the securities portfolio is to provide a source of liquidity and it is structured such that maturities and cash flows provide a portion of the Company’s liquidity needs and asset/liability management requirements.
Loans
Total loans decreased $60 million, or 10%, during 2021 with decreases in commercial loans, residential real estate and consumer loans. Volume decreases were recognized as follows: commercial loans including PPP loans decreased $68 million, or 35%, during 2021, with PPP loan forgiveness comprising $66 million of the decrease. Remaining PPP loan balances were $4.6 million as of December 31, 2021. Construction and land development loans increased $10 million, or 28% as several commercial projects were under construction and consumer demand increased for 1-4 family residential construction at year end. Residential real estate loans decreased $9 million, or 5%. Commercial real estate loans increased $8 million, or 4%. Commercial real estate and construction loan demand resumed, however there was a slowing of commercial loan growth with increased competition from private lenders and excess business liquidity remaining from government stimulus programs.
The Company originated $53 million and $76 million of portfolio mortgage loans, which were predominately variable rate, in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Attractive interest rates in the secondary market also continued to drive consumer demand for longer-term 1-4 family fixed rate residential mortgages as the Company sold $46 million of originated mortgages into the secondary market in 2021 as compared to $59 million in 2020. Demand for home equity loans declined in 2021, with balances decreasing $5 million, as outstanding loan balances were paid down, or balances were refinanced into new first mortgages at lower fixed rates. Installment loans declined $2 million with consumer loans decreasing from a slowdown in the Company’s origination of Recreational Vehicle finance loans.
Management anticipates modest economic growth in the Company’s local service areas will continue to improve. Commercial and commercial real estate loans, in aggregate, comprise approximately 58% and 62% of the total loan portfolio at year-end 2021 and 2020, respectively. Residential real estate loans increased to 31% in 2021 from 29% of the total loan portfolio in 2020. Construction and land development loans increased to 8% of the portfolio as loan demand for commercial construction projects increased by $10 million and residential construction loans increased by $483 thousand, year over year. The Company is well within the respective regulatory guidelines for investment in construction, development, and investment property loans that are not owner occupied.
Most of the Company’s lending activity is with customers primarily located within Holmes, Stark, Tuscarawas and Wayne counties in Ohio. The majority of the Company’s loan portfolio consists of commercial and industrial and commercial real estate loans. See concentration of credit discussion included in Note 3 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Nonperforming Assets, Impaired Loans, and Loans Past Due 90 Days or More
Nonperforming assets consist of nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days and still accruing, and other real estate acquired through or in lieu of foreclosure. Other impaired loans include certain loans internally classified as substandard or doubtful. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when they become past due 90 days or more, or when mortgage loans are past due as to principal and interest 120 days or more, unless they are both well secured and in the process of collection.
During 2021, $2.1 million in nonaccrual loans were collected, $1.6 million were returned to accrual, while $357 thousand entered nonaccrual status.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level considered by management to be adequate to cover loan losses currently anticipated based on past loss experience, general economic conditions, changes in mix and size of the loan portfolio, information about specific borrower situations, and other factors and estimates which are subject to change over time. Management periodically reviews selected large loans, delinquent and other problem loans, and selected other loans. Collectability of these loans is evaluated by considering the current financial position and performance of the borrower, estimated market value of the collateral, the Company’s collateral position in relationship creditors, guarantees, and other potential sources of repayment. Management forms judgments, which are in part subjective, as to the probability of loss and the amount of loss on these loans as well as other loans taken together. The Company’s
Allowance for Loan Losses Policy includes, among other items, provisions for classified loans, and a provision for the remainder of the portfolio based on historical data, including past charge offs.
The allowance for loan losses totaled $7.6 million, or 1.39%, of total loans at year-end 2021 as compared to $8.3 million, or 1.36%, of total loans at year-end 2020. The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans excluding the $4.6 million PPP loans, which are fully guaranteed by the SBA is 1.40% (non-GAAP) as of December 31, 2021. The Bank had net charge-offs of $1 thousand for 2021 as compared to net charge-offs of $393 thousand for 2020.
The Company maintains an internal watch list on which it places loans where management’s analysis of the borrower’s operating results and financial condition indicates the borrower’s cash flows are inadequate to meet its debt service requirements and loans where there exists an increased risk that such a shortfall may occur. Nonperforming loans, which consist of loans past due 90 days or more and nonaccrual loans, aggregated $1.1 million, or 0.20%, of loans at year-end 2021 as compared to $4.5 million, or 0.74%, of loans at year-end 2020. Impaired loans were $2 million at year-end 2021 as compared to $6.3 million at year-end 2020. Management has assigned loss allocations to absorb the estimated losses on impaired loans. These allocations are included in the total allowance for loan losses balance.
Other Assets
Net premises and equipment increased $1.2 million to $13.9 million at year-end 2021 with renovations to several banking locations and the replacement of laptops and personal computers. Total bank-owned life insurance increased from $21 million at year-end 2020 to $24 million at year-end 2021 as additional policies were purchased totaling $2 million along with $619 thousand of increases in the cash surrender value. There was no other real estate owned on December 31, 2021, or 2020. The Company recognized a net deferred tax asset of $325 thousand on December 31, 2021, as compared to a deferred tax liability of $153 thousand on December 31, 2020.
Deposits
The Company’s deposits are obtained primarily from individuals and businesses located in its market area. For deposits, the Company must compete with products offered by other financial institutions, as well as alternative investment options. Demand and savings deposits increased for the year ended 2021, due to continued government stimulus relief along with reduced spending during the COVID-19 pandemic. Market rates on deposits and cash management products decreased throughout the year as liquidity increased.
Other Funding Sources
The Company obtains additional funds through securities sold under repurchase agreements, overnight borrowings from the FHLB or other financial institutions, and advances from the FHLB. Short-term borrowings, consisting of securities sold under repurchase agreements, decreased $685 thousand. Other borrowings, consisting of FHLB advances, decreased $1.3 million as the result of principal repayments. All FHLB borrowings on December 31, 2021, have long term maturities with monthly amortizing payments.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Total shareholders’ equity increased to $97.3 million on December 31, 2021, as compared to $93.9 million on December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to $10.8 million of net income which was partially offset by the payment of $3.3 million of cash dividends in 2021. The Board of Directors approved a Stock Repurchase Program on February 26, 2021, allowing the repurchase of up to 5% of the Company’s then-outstanding common shares. Repurchased shares are to be held as treasury stock and are available for general corporate purposes. On December 31, 2021, approximately 113 thousand shares could still be repurchased under the current authorized program. Shares repurchased during 2021 totaled 24,326 in the amount of $939 thousand and no shares were repurchased in 2020.
Effective January 1, 2015, the Federal Reserve adopted final rules implementing Basel III and regulatory capital changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The rules apply to both the Company and the Bank. The rules established minimum risk-based and leverage capital requirements for all banking organizations. The rules include: (a) a common equity tier 1 capital ratio of at least 4.5%, (b) a tier 1 capital ratio of at least 6.0%, (c) a minimum total capital ratio of at least 8.0%, and (d) a minimum leverage ratio of 4%. Under the guidelines, capital is compared to the relative risk related to the balance sheet. To derive the risk included in the balance sheet, one of several risk weights is applied to different balance sheet and off-balance sheet assets primarily based on the relative credit risk of the counterparty. The capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors. The rules also place restrictions on the payment of capital distributions, including dividends, and certain discretionary bonus payments to executive officers if the company does not hold a capital conservation buffer of greater than 2.5% composed of common equity tier 1 capital above its minimum risk-based capital requirements. The Company and Bank’s actual and required capital amounts are disclosed in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements.
Dividends paid by the Bank to CSB are the primary source of funds available to the Company for payment of dividends to shareholders and for other working capital needs. The payment of dividends by the Bank to the Company is subject to restrictions by regulatory authorities, which generally limit dividends to current year net income and the prior two (2) years net retained earnings, as defined by regulation. In addition, dividend payments generally cannot reduce regulatory capital levels below the minimum regulatory guidelines discussed above.
LIQUIDITY
Liquidity refers to the Company’s ability to generate sufficient cash to fund current loan demand, meet deposit withdrawals, pay operating expenses, and meet other obligations. Liquidity is monitored by CSB’s Asset Liability Committee. The Company was within all Board-approved limits on December 31, 2021, and 2020. Additional sources of liquidity include net income, loan repayments, the availability of borrowings, and adjustments of interest rates to attract deposit accounts.
As summarized in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, the most significant investing activities for the Company in 2021 included net loan repayments of $58 million and securities purchases of $169 million, offset by maturities and repayment of securities totaling $57 million. The Company’s financing activities included a $111 million increase in deposits, $3 million in cash dividends paid, and a $1 million decrease in repayment of other borrowings.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
The most significant market risk the Company is exposed to is interest rate risk. The business of the Company and the composition of its balance sheet consist of investments in interest-earning assets (primarily loans and securities), which are funded by interest-bearing liabilities (deposits and borrowings). These financial instruments have varying levels of sensitivity to changes in the market rates of interest, resulting in market risk. None of the Company’s financial instruments are held for trading purposes.
The Board of Directors establishes policies and operating limits with respect to interest rate risk. The Company manages interest rate risk regularly through its Asset Liability Committee. The Committee meets periodically to review various asset and liability management information including, but not limited to, the Company’s liquidity position, projected sources and uses of funds, interest rate risk position, and economic conditions.
Interest rate risk is monitored primarily through the use of an earnings simulation model. The model is highly dependent on various assumptions, which change regularly as the balance sheet and market interest rates change. The earnings simulation model projects change in net interest income resulting from the effect of changes in interest rates. The analysis is performed quarterly over a twenty-four-month horizon. The analysis includes two (2) balance sheet models, one based on a static balance sheet and one on a dynamic balance sheet with projected growth in assets and liabilities. This analysis is performed by estimating the expected cash flows of the Company’s financial instruments using interest rates in effect at year-end 2021 and 2020. Interest rate risk policy limits are tested by measuring the anticipated change in net interest income over a two-year period. The tests assume a quarterly ramped 100, 200, 300, and 400 basis point increase and a 100 and 200 basis point decrease in 2021 and 2020 in market interest rates as compared to a stable rate environment or base model. The following table reflects the change to interest income for the first twelve-month periods of the twenty-four month horizon.
Net Interest Income at Risk
Management reviews Net Interest Income at Risk with the Board on a periodic basis. The Company was within all Board-approved limits at December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the first twelve-month periods of the twenty-four month horizon.
Economic Value of Equity at Risk
The economic value of equity is calculated by subjecting the period-end balance sheet to changes in interest rates and measuring the impact of the changes on the values of the assets and liabilities. Hypothetical changes in interest rates are then applied to the financial instruments. Then the cash flows and fair values are again estimated using these hypothetical rates. For the net interest income estimates, the hypothetical rates are applied to the financial instruments based on the assumed cash flows.
Management periodically measures and reviews the economic value of equity at risk with the Board. As of December 31, 2021, the percentage change of the market value of equity was outside the board policy limits in the +200 through +400 basis point rate scenarios as well as the -100 basis point change. In the rising rate scenarios, the exceptions are
positive as the market value of equity increases as interest rates increase. The technical fails have a favorable impact to equity in the rising rate scenarios. In the declining rate scenarios in 2021 and 2020, the duration of liabilities remains high and loan prepayment speeds increase causing decreases in the market value of equity of (18.4)% in the -100 basis point rate scenario as of December 31, 2021 and (23.8)% in the -100 basis point rate scenario as of December 31, 2020.
SIGNIFICANT ASSUMPTIONS AND OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
The above analysis is based on numerous assumptions, including relative levels of market interest rates, loan prepayments, and reactions of depositors to changes in interest rates and this should not be relied upon as being indicative of actual results. Further, the analysis does not contemplate all actions the Company may undertake in response to changes in interest rates.
U.S. Treasury securities, obligations of U.S. Government corporations and agencies, obligations of states and political subdivisions will generally repay at their stated maturity or if callable prior to their final maturity date. Mortgage-backed security payments increase when interest rates are low and decrease when interest rates rise. Most of the Company’s loans permit the borrower to prepay the principal balance prior to maturity without penalty. The likelihood of prepayment depends on a number of factors: current interest rate and interest rate index (if any) on the loan, the financial ability of the borrower to refinance, the economic benefit to be obtained from refinancing, availability of refinancing at attractive terms, as well as economic conditions in specific geographic areas, which affect the sales and price levels of residential and commercial property. In a changing interest rate environment, prepayments may increase or decrease on fixed and adjustable-rate loans depending on the current relative levels and expectations of future short-term and long-term interest rates. Prepayments on adjustable-rate loans generally increase when long-term interest rates fall or are at historically low levels relative to short-term interest rates, thus making fixed rate loans more desirable. While savings and checking deposits generally may be withdrawn upon the customer’s request without prior notice, a continuing relationship with customers resulting in future deposits and withdrawals is generally predictable, leading to a dependable and uninterrupted source of funds. Time deposits generally have early withdrawal penalties, which discourage customer withdrawal prior to maturity. Short-term borrowings have fixed maturities. Certain advances from the FHLB carry prepayment penalties and are expected to be repaid in accordance with their contractual terms.
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The Company discloses the estimated fair value of its financial instruments on December 31, 2021, and 2020 in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS, CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND COMMITMENTS
The following table summarizes the Company’s loan commitments, including letters of credit, as of December 31, 2021:
All lines of credit represent either fee-paid or legally binding loan commitments for the loan categories noted. Letters of credit are also included in the amounts noted in the table since the Company requires each letter of credit be supported by a loan agreement. The commercial and consumer lines represent both unsecured and secured obligations. The real estate lines are secured by mortgages on residential property. It is anticipated that a significant portion of these lines will expire without being drawn upon.
The following table summarizes the Company’s other contractual obligations, exclusive of interest, as of December 31, 2021:
The other borrowings noted in the preceding table represent borrowings from the FHLB. The notes require payment of interest on a monthly basis with principal due in monthly installments. The obligations bear stated fixed interest rates and stipulate a prepayment penalty if the note’s interest rate exceeds the current market rate for similar borrowings at the time of repayment. As the notes mature, the Company evaluates the liquidity and interest rate circumstances, at that time, to determine whether to pay off or renew the note. The evaluation process typically includes: the strength of current and projected customer loan demand, the Company’s federal funds sold or purchased position, projected cash flows from maturing investment securities, the current and projected market interest rate environment, local and national economic conditions, and customer demand for the Company’s deposit product offerings.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and follow general practices within the commercial banking industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments affecting the amounts reported in the financial statements. These estimates, assumptions, and judgments are based upon the information available as of the date of the financial statements.
The most significant accounting policies followed by the Company are presented in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. These policies, along with the other disclosures presented in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and the 2021 Financial Review, provide information about how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined. Management has identified the other-than-temporary impairment of securities, allowance for loan losses, goodwill, and the fair value of financial instruments as the accounting areas requiring the most subjective and complex estimates, assumptions, and judgments and, as such, could be the most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Securities are evaluated periodically to determine whether a decline in their value is other-than-temporary. Management utilizes criteria such as the magnitude and duration of the decline, in addition to the reasons underlying the decline, to determine whether the loss in value is other-than-temporary. The term “other-than-temporary” is not intended to indicate a permanent decline but indicates that the prospect for a near-term recovery of value is not necessarily favorable, or that there is a lack of evidence to support a realizable value equal to or greater than the carrying value of the investment. Once a decline in value is determined to be other-than-temporary, the value of the security is reduced and a corresponding charge to earnings is recognized.
As previously noted in the section entitled Allowance for Loan Losses, management performs an analysis to assess the adequacy of its allowance for loan losses. This analysis encompasses a variety of factors including: the potential loss exposure for individually reviewed loans, the historical loss experience, the volume of nonperforming loans (i.e., loans in nonaccrual status or past due 90 days or more), the volume of loans past due, any significant changes in lending or loan review staff, an evaluation of current and future local and national economic conditions, any significant changes
in the volume or mix of loans within each category, a review of the significant concentrations of credit, and any legal, competitive, or regulatory concerns.
The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized. Intangible assets with finite useful lives, consisting of core deposit intangibles, are amortized using accelerated methods over their estimated weighted-average useful lives, approximating ten years. Additional information is presented in Note 6, Core Deposit Intangible Assets.
The Company groups financial assets and financial liabilities measured at fair value in three (3) levels based on the markets in which the assets and liabilities are traded, and the reliability of the assumptions used to determine fair value. Level I valuations are obtained from readily available pricing sources for market transactions involving identical assets or liabilities. Level II valuations are for instruments traded in less active dealer or broker markets and incorporate values obtained for identical or comparable instruments. Level III valuations are derived from other valuation methodologies, including discounted cash flow models and similar techniques, and not based on market exchange, dealer, or broker traded transactions. Level III valuations incorporate certain assumptions and projections in determining the fair value assigned to each instrument.
IMPACT OF INFLATION AND CHANGING PRICES
The Consolidated Financial Statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, requiring measurement of financial position, and results of operations primarily in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Most assets and liabilities of the Company are monetary in nature. Therefore, interest rates have a more significant impact on the Company’s performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or magnitude as prices of goods and services. The liquidity, maturity structure, and quality of the Company’s assets and liabilities are critical to maintenance of acceptable performance levels.
COMMON STOCK AND SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
Common shares of the Company are not traded on an established market. Shares are traded on the OTC market through broker/ dealers under the symbol “CSBB” and through private transactions. The table below represents the range of high and low prices paid for transactions known to the Company. Management does not have knowledge of prices paid on all transactions. Because of the lack of an established market, these prices may not reflect the prices at which stock would trade in an active market. These quotations reflect interdealer prices, without mark-up, mark-down, or commission and may not represent actual transactions. The table specifies cash dividends declared by the Company to its shareholders during 2021 and 2020. No assurances can be given that future dividends will be declared, or if declared, what the amount of any such dividends will be. Additional information concerning restrictions over the payment of dividends is included in Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Quarterly Common Stock Price and Dividend Data
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had 1,112 shareholders of record and 2,718,024 outstanding shares of common stock.