Item 7. 	Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains a number of forward-looking statements relative to our future plans and our expectations concerning our business and the industries we serve. These forward-looking statements are based on assumptions about a number of important factors and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from estimates contained in the forward-looking statements. Some of the risks that are foreseen by management are outlined above within Item 1A., “Risk Factors”. Item 1A. constitutes an integral part of this report, and readers are strongly encouraged to review this section closely in conjunction with MD&A.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared a global pandemic related to the rapidly spreading coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak which has led to a global health emergency. Throughout the COVID-19 crisis, we have remained focused on protecting the health and safety of our employees, while meeting the needs of our customers. While we have taken measures to protect our employees, to include a remote working environment for those employees who are able to conduct business from home and reduced travel, we are still conducting business as usual and are working with our customers to minimize any potential disruption. Additionally, we have implemented a workplace of the future philosophy that supports work-life integration and employees' diverse needs, providing flexibility and personal choice so employees can do their best work from anywhere. We do not believe that our workplace philosophy and limited staffing in select office locations has adversely impacted our internal controls, financial reporting systems, or our operations.
The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. See Part II Item 1A. Risk Factors of this report for additional details. As we continue to manage our business in this uncertain environment, our priorities remain the health and safety of our employees, providing our customers with world-class services and solutions, and prudently managing our liquidity to ensure our continued financial strength. As a result of COVID-19 related supply chain issues, our capital expenditures may increase in the short-term as we forward purchase IT related hardware and other supplies. However, given our financial strength, we do not believe our liquidity will be significantly impacted by these conditions. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $234 million in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and an additional $450 million available to borrow under our revolving credit facility.
Acquisition Activity
During 2021, we completed the following acquisitions: (i) Tango Telecom Limited (“Tango”) in May; (ii) Kitewheel, LLC (“Kitewheel”) in July; (iii) Keydok, LLC in September; and (iv) DGIT Systems Pty Ltd (“DGIT”) in October. Additionally, in July 2021, we obtained a controlling interest in MobileCard Holdings, LLC (“MobileCard”). The results of these businesses are included in our 2021 results of operations from the acquisition date forward. As a result, our year-over-year results of operations may not be comparable between years due to the timing of the transactions. The comparable differences have been described below where relevant or significant.
These acquisitions are discussed in greater detail in Note 7 to our Financial Statements.
Executive Transition Costs
In 2020, we entered into a Separation Agreement and subsequent amendment with our former President and CEO, Bret Griess. Under the terms of the Separation Agreement, Mr. Griess was entitled to: (i) additional compensation totaling $7.3 million, which was expensed ratably over his remaining service period, for which approximately $5 million was paid in 2021 and approximately $2 million will be paid in 2022; and (ii) accelerated stock vestings, which resulted in additional stock-based compensation expense of $5.7 million in 2020. The total $13.0 million of executive transition costs for 2020 were recorded in selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense.
Management Overview
Results of Operations. A summary of our results of operations for 2021 and 2020, and other key performance metrics are as follows (in thousands, except percentages and per share amounts):
(1)Transaction fees are primarily comprised of interchange and other payment-related fees that we pay, in conjunction with the delivery of service to customers under our payment services contracts, to third-party payment processors and financial institutions. Because we control the integrated service provided under our payment services customer contracts, these transaction fees are presented gross, and not netted against revenue.
(2)Stock-based compensation included in the table above exclude amounts that have been recorded in restructuring and reorganization charges and executive transition costs.
(3)During 2021, we acquired a controlling interest in MobileCard (see Note 7 to our Financial Statements). Upon acquisition, we recognized a non-cash loss in other income (expense) related to the fair value remeasurement of the previously held equity investment interest.
Revenue. Revenue for 2021 was $1,046.5 million, a 5.6% increase when compared to $990.5 million for 2020, with the increase mainly attributed to the continued growth of our revenue management platforms, as the majority of the increase was attributed to organic growth.
Operating Results. Operating income for 2021 was $124.2 million, or an 11.9% operating income margin percentage, compared to $105.6 million, or a 10.7% operating income margin percentage for 2020. The increase in operating income in 2021 is reflective of the higher revenue generated. Additionally, operating income in 2020 was negatively impacted by the $13.0 million of executive transition costs, discussed above, and an approximately $10 million impairment charge, discussed below.
Diluted Earnings Per Share (“EPS”). Diluted EPS for 2021 was $2.26 compared to $1.82 for 2020, reflective of the higher operating income discussed above.
Balance Sheet and Cash Flows. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $233.7 million, compared to $240.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Cash flows from operating activities for 2021 were $140.2 million, compared to $173.0 million for 2020. See the Liquidity section below for further discussion of our cash flows.
Significant Customer Relationships
A large percentage of our historical revenue has been generated from our two largest customers, which are Charter Corporation Inc. (“Charter”) and Comcast Corporation (“Comcast”).
Charter. For 2021 and 2020, revenue from Charter was $221 million and $209 million, respectively, representing approximately 21% of our total revenue, for both periods. On November 2, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our current agreement with Charter (the “Amended Agreement”). The Amended Agreement provides the framework for Charter to consolidate its residential and small and medium business internet, video, and landline voice customer accounts (“Customer Account(s)”) onto ACP. The key terms of the Amended Agreement are as follows:
•The Amended Agreement is effective January 1, 2022, and extends our contractual relationship with Charter through December 31, 2027 (a six-year initial term). In addition, the Amended Agreement will automatically be extended for an additional one-year term, subject to Charter achieving certain conditional processing minimums on July 1, 2027, unless Charter provides us with written notice of non-renewal.
•Consistent with the previous agreements, the fees to be generated under the Amended Agreement will be based primarily on monthly recurring charges for our revenue and customer management solutions and related services per Customer Account, and various other ancillary services based on actual usage. Certain of the per-unit fees include volume-based pricing tiers, and may be subject to annual price escalators.
•The Amended Agreement contains modified pricing and a minimum commitment associated with the number of Customer Accounts that are to be processed on ACP which encompasses all subscribers receiving services. However, if Charter fails to achieve the minimum commitment by December 31, 2027, Charter will be obligated to pay a minimum commitment true-up, to be invoiced in January 2028. In order for Charter to meet the minimum commitment, Charter will need to convert additional Customer Accounts onto ACP. As such, the Amended Agreement outlines the estimated conversion and go-live for the remaining Customer Accounts not already on ACP, and includes incentives for the conversion of those additional Customer Accounts onto ACP.
•We maintain the exclusive right to provide print and mail services to all current and future Customer Accounts through the term of the Amended Agreement.
•The Amended Agreement contains certain rights and obligations of both parties, including the following key items: (i) the termination of the Amended Agreement under certain conditions; (ii) various service level commitments; and (iii) remedies and limitation on liabilities associated with specified breaches of contractual obligations.
During 2021, Charter migrated approximately five million Charter Customer Accounts onto ACP from a competitor's product. As outlined in the Amended Agreement, Charter currently plans to migrate their remaining Customer Accounts onto ACP over the next nine to fifteen months. The Amended Agreement did not have a material impact to our 2021 results of operations.
The anticipated revenue impact from the Amended Agreement in both the near and long terms may vary depending on the actual number of Customer Accounts converting, the timing of such conversion and the actual level of products and services consumed by Charter and actual results may vary depending upon a variety of factors. We undertake no duty to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
A copy of the Amended Agreement, with confidential information redacted, is filed as exhibit 10.26AW to this Form 10-K.
Comcast. For 2021 and 2020, revenue from Comcast was $216 million and $213 million, respectively, representing approximately 21% and 22% of our total revenue. Our agreement with Comcast runs through December 31, 2024 for processing on ACP and other related solutions, and through December 31, 2025 for print and mail services for residential customer accounts, with the option to extend the ACP processing agreement for an additional one-year term.
A copy of the Comcast agreement and related amendments, with confidential information redacted, is included in the exhibits to our periodic filings with the SEC.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense is included in the following (in thousands):
(1)SG&A stock-based compensation in the table above excludes the $5.7 million of executive transition costs in 2020.
See Notes 2 and 13 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion of our stock-based compensation expense.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of our Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to select appropriate accounting policies, and to make judgments and estimates affecting the application of those accounting policies. In applying our accounting policies, different business conditions or the use of different assumptions may result in materially different amounts reported in our Financial Statements.
We have identified the most critical accounting policies that affect our financial position and the results of our operations. These critical accounting policies were determined by considering our accounting policies that involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments. Our most critical accounting policies identified relate to: (i) revenue recognition; (ii) impairment assessments of long-lived assets; (iii) income taxes; and (iv) loss contingencies. These critical accounting policies, as well as our other significant accounting policies, are disclosed in the notes to our Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized upon conclusion that a contract with a customer exists. Such conclusion is made by us when the contract is legally enforceable and certain criteria, including collectability, are met. In making our determination of collectability, we consider a number of factors depending upon the specific aspects of an arrangement, which may include, but is not limited to, the following items: (i) an assessment of the customer’s specific credit worthiness, evidenced by its current financial position and/or recent operating results, credit ratings, and/or a bankruptcy filing status (as applicable); (ii) the customer’s current accounts receivable status and/or its historical payment patterns with us (as applicable); (iii) the economic condition of the industry in which the customer conducts the majority of its business; and/or (iv) the economic conditions and/or political stability of the country or region in which the customer is domiciled and/or conducts the majority of its business. The evaluation of these factors, and the ultimate determination of collectability, requires significant judgments to be made by us. Our judgments could have a significant effect to the amount and timing of revenue recognized in any period.
Our contracts with customers include SaaS based revenue management platform arrangements, managed services arrangements, SaaS payments platform arrangements, software license and service arrangements, professional services arrangements, and bundled service arrangements. The revenue recognition policies that involve the most complex and subjective decisions or assessments that may have a material impact on our operations relate to the accounting for revenue management platform arrangements, software license and service arrangements, and bundled service arrangements.
Our SaaS based revenue management platform arrangements are complex agreements that typically include multiple performance obligations. Key factors considered in accounting for SaaS based revenue management platform arrangements include the following criteria: (i) identification of performance obligations within the contract; (ii) determination of the transaction price given the variable nature of the consideration and significance of the consideration; (iii) determination of stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation and the allocation of value between the performance obligations; and (iv) calculation of revenue recognized in each period. The evaluation of these factors and ultimate revenue recognition decision requires significant judgements to be made by us. Depending on the significance of variable consideration, number of solutions/services, complex pricing structures and long-term nature of these types of contracts, our judgements and estimates made in this area could have a significant effect on the amount and timing of revenue recognized in any period. In addition, certain solutions and arrangements require us to assess whether we are a principal to the transaction (gross revenue) or an agent to the transaction (net revenue). Such assessments can have a significant effect on the amount of total revenue recognized.
Our software license and related services arrangements include multiple performance obligations which may be complex and require considerable judgement. Key factors considered in accounting for our software license and related service arrangements include the following criteria: (i) identification of performance obligations within the contract; (ii) assessment of whether services included in the arrangement represent significant production, modification or customization of the software (as applicable), such that the delivery of the software license and related services required to implement the software represent one combined performance obligation; (iii) determination of the transaction price for the contract as these types of arrangements may include both fixed and variable consideration; (iv) determination of stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation including the allocation of value between performance obligations; and (v) estimates to measure progress for delivery. The evaluation of these factors and ultimate revenue recognition decision requires significant judgements to be made by us. We generally determine stand-alone selling prices using pricing calculations (which include regional market factors) for our software license fees and maintenance, and cost-plus margins for services. The pricing calculations can be complex and require estimates based on volumes. Additionally, our use of an hours-based method of accounting for software license and other professional services performance obligations that are satisfied over time requires estimates of total project revenue and costs, along with the expected hours necessary to complete a project. Changes in estimates as a result of additional information as work progresses on a project are inherent characteristics of this method of revenue recognition as we are exposed to business risks in completing these types of performance obligations. The estimation process to support our hours-based recognition method is more difficult for projects of greater length and/or complexity. Our judgments and estimates could: (i) have a significant effect on revenue recognized in any period by changing the amount and/or the timing of the revenue recognized; and/or (ii) impact the expected profitability of a project, including whether an overall loss on an arrangement has occurred.
Our contracts are subject to modification via amendment, change requests, and/or statement of works. Such modifications may occur frequently. The accounting for contract modifications is complex and requires significant judgements to be made by us as to whether the contract modification is treated as either a separate contract or part of the existing contract. Our judgements could have a significant effect on the revenue recognized in any period by changing the amount and/or timing of the revenue recognized.
Our contracts typically include service level agreements or other incentives which may result in refunds or credits to our customers. Failure to meet service level standards under the terms of the contract represent adjustments to the overall consideration (reductions in revenue) and may need to be estimated at the outset of the arrangement as part of the overall variable consideration. Such estimates require significant judgement by us and may impact the amount and/or timing of the revenue recognized.
Impairment Assessments of Long-Lived Assets. Long-lived assets relate primarily to property and equipment, software, acquired customer contracts, and customer contract costs. These assets are required to be evaluated for possible impairment as events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. A long-lived asset (or group of long-lived assets) is impaired if estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with that asset, without consideration of interest, are insufficient to recover the carrying amount of the long-lived asset. Once deemed impaired, even if by $1, the long-lived asset is written down to its fair value which could be considerably less than the carrying amount or future undiscounted cash flows. The determination of estimated future cash flows and, if required, the determination of the fair value of a long-lived asset, are by their nature, highly subjective judgments. Changes to one or more of the assumptions utilized in such an analysis could materially affect our impairment conclusions for long-lived assets.
Income Taxes. We are required to estimate our income tax liability in each jurisdiction in which we operate, including U.S. federal, state, and foreign income taxes.
Various judgments are required in evaluating our income tax positions and determining our provisions for income taxes. We regularly assess the likelihood of the future realization of our deferred income tax assets. To the extent we believe that it is not more likely than not that a deferred income tax asset will be realized, a valuation allowance is established. During the ordinary course of our business, there are certain transactions and calculations for which the ultimate income tax determination may be uncertain. In addition, we may be subject to examination of our income tax returns by various tax authorities which could result in adverse outcomes. For these reasons, we establish a liability associated with unrecognized tax benefits based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest may be due. We adjust this liability based upon changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit, the closing of a tax year upon the expiration of a statute of limitations, or the refinement of an estimate. Should any of the factors considered in determining the adequacy of this liability change significantly, an adjustment to the liability may be necessary. Due to the potential significance of these issues, such an adjustment could be material.
One of the more complex items within our income tax expense is the determination of our annual research and experimentation income tax credit (“R&D tax credit”). We have incurred approximately $120 - $135 million annually in R&D expense over the last three years. The calculation of the R&D tax credit involves the identification of qualifying projects, as well as an estimation of the qualifying costs for such projects. Due to the size, nature, and the number of projects worked on in any given year, the calculation can become complex and certain judgments are necessary in determining the amount of the R&D tax credits claimed.
Loss Contingencies. In the ordinary course of business, we are subject to potential claims related to various items including but not limited to the following: (i) legal and regulatory matters; (ii) vendor contracts; (iii) solution and service delivery matters; and (iv) labor matters. Accounting and disclosure requirements for loss contingencies requires us to assess the likelihood of any adverse judgments in or range of potential outcomes for these matters. A determination of the amount of reserves for such contingencies, if any, is based on an analysis of the issues, often with the assistance of legal counsel. The evaluation of such issues, and our ultimate accounting and disclosure decisions, are by their nature, subject to various estimates and highly subjective judgments. Should any of the factors considered in determining the adequacy of any required reserves change significantly, an adjustment to the reserves may be necessary. Due to the potential significance of these issues, such an adjustment could be material.
Detailed Discussion of Results of Operations
The following discussion includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity for 2021 compared to 2020. For a discussion of the 2020 compared to 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021.
Total Revenue. Total revenue for 2021 was $1,046.5 million, a 5.6% increase when compared to $990.5 million for 2020. The increase in total revenue can be mainly attributed to continued growth of our revenue management solutions and to a lesser degree, the revenue generated from customer experiences solutions and the acquired businesses (discussed above), and favorable foreign currency movements.
We use the location of the customer as the basis of attributing revenue to individual countries and corresponding geographic regions. Revenue by geographic regions for 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Total Operating Expenses. Our operating expenses for 2021 increased 4.2% to $922.3 million, from $885.0 million for 2020. The increase in operating expenses is reflective of our increase in revenue and can be primarily attributed to increased employee related costs and the additional costs of the acquired businesses, as we continue to invest in our people and our future-ready platforms to position ourselves for accelerated growth, and to a lesser degree, unfavorable foreign currency movements. These costs were offset to a certain degree by the $13.0 million of executive transition costs, discussed above; and an approximately $10 million impairment charge for the write-off of capitalized customer contract costs related to a discontinued project implementation, both recorded in 2020.
Cost of Revenue (Exclusive of Depreciation). Our cost of revenue consist principally of the following: (i) computing capacity and network communications costs; (ii) statement production costs (e.g., labor, paper, envelopes, equipment, equipment maintenance, etc.); (iii) transaction fees-interchange and other payment-related fees to third-party payment processors and financial institutions; (iv) customer support organizations (e.g., our customer support call center, account management, etc.); (v) professional services organization; (vi) various product delivery and support organizations (e.g., managed services delivery, product management, product maintenance, etc.); (vii) third-party software costs and/or royalties related to certain software products; (viii) facilities and infrastructure costs related to the statement production and support organizations; and (ix) amortization of acquired intangibles. The costs related to new solution development (including significant enhancements to existing products and services) are included in R&D expense.
The cost of revenue for 2021 increased 1.4% to $543.2 million, from $535.6 million for 2020, reflective of the increase in revenue, driven mainly by employee-related costs, to include the acquired businesses. Additionally, in 2020 we recorded an approximately $10 million impairment charge, mentioned above. Total cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue for 2021 and 2020 was 51.9% and 54.1%, respectively.
R&D Expense (Exclusive of Depreciation). R&D expense for 2021 was $134.7 million, a 9.6% increase when compared to $122.8 million for 2020, with the increase mainly attributed to higher employee related costs, to include the R&D activities of the acquired businesses.
Our R&D efforts are focused on the continued evolution of our solutions that enable our customers worldwide to provide a more personalized customer experience while introducing new digital solutions. This includes the continued investment in our products and integration of the recently acquired assets into our solutions.
As a percentage of total revenue, R&D expense for 2021 and 2020 was 12.9% and 12.4%, respectively. We anticipate the level of R&D investment in the near-term to be relatively consistent with 2021.
SG&A Expense (Exclusive of Depreciation). SG&A expense for 2021 increased 8.3% to $214.7 million, from $198.3 million for 2020. The increase in SG&A expense between 2021 and 2020 is reflective of our growth strategy and is primarily due to higher employee related costs and the SG&A activities of the acquired businesses. This was offset to a certain degree by the $13.0 million of executive transition costs in 2020, discussed above. As a percentage of total revenue, SG&A expense for 2021 and 2020 was 20.5% and 20.0%, respectively.
Depreciation Expense. Depreciation expense for all property and equipment is reflected separately from cost of revenue or the other components of operating expenses. Depreciation expense for 2021 was $24.8 million, an 8.3% increase from $22.9 million for 2020. The increase can be primarily attributed to expenditures on software, technology, and security infrastructure, which generally have shorter depreciable lives.
Restructuring and Reorganization Charges. In 2021 and 2020, we implemented cost reduction and efficiency initiatives that resulted in restructuring and reorganization charges of $4.9 million and $5.3 million, respectively. These initiatives were primarily made up of organizational changes made to pursue global opportunities and efficiencies.
See Note 8 to our Financial Statements for additional information regarding these initiatives.
Operating Income. Operating income and operating income margin for 2021 was $124.2 million, or 11.9% of total revenue, compared to $105.6 million, or 10.7% of total revenue for 2020. The increase in operating income in 2021 is reflective of the higher revenue generated. Additionally, operating income in 2020 was negatively impacted by the $13.0 million of executive transition costs, and an approximately $10 million impairment charge, discussed above.
Interest Expense and Amortization of Original Issue Discount (“OID”). Our interest expense relates primarily to our 2016 Convertible Notes and our 2018 and 2021 Credit Agreements. See Note 5 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion of our long-term debt, to include the non-cash interest expense related to the amortization of the convertible debt OID.
Other, net. During 2021, we made an additional investment in MobileCard (see Note 7 to our Financial Statements), resulting in a controlling interest of the company. Upon obtaining control of MobileCard, the fair value of our pre-existing equity investment was remeasured resulting in a $6.2 million non-cash loss as of the acquisition date.
Income Tax Provision. Our effective income tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
The 2020 effective income tax rate reflects the income tax impact related to the executive transition costs, discussed above (see Note 9 to our Financial Statements).
Liquidity
Cash and Liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity included cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $233.7 million, compared to $240.3 million as of December 31, 2020. We generally invest our excess cash balances in low-risk, short-term investments to limit our exposure to market and credit risks.
During 2021, we refinanced our 2018 Credit Agreement which extended the term of the loan from March 2023 to September 2026. The 2021 Credit Agreement increased our liquidity and capital resources position by approximately $30 million. Additionally, as part of our 2021 Credit Agreement, we expanded our revolving loan facility, the 2021 Revolver, from $200 million to $450 million. As of December 31, 2021, there were no borrowings outstanding on the 2021 Revolver. The 2021 Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative, negative, and financial covenants. As of December 31, 2021, and the date of this filing, we believe we are in compliance with the provisions of the 2021 Credit Agreement.
Our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investment balances as of the end of the indicated periods were located in the following geographical regions (in thousands):
We generally have ready access to substantially all of our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investment balances, but may face limitations on moving cash out of certain foreign jurisdictions due to currency controls and potential negative economic consequences. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1.4 million of cash restricted as to use primarily to collateralize guarantees and outstanding letters of credit included in our total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments balance.
Cash Flows From Operating Activities. We calculate our cash flows from operating activities beginning with net income, adding back the impact of non-cash items or non-operating activity (e.g., depreciation, amortization, amortization of OID, impairments, gain/loss from debt extinguishments, deferred income taxes, stock-based compensation, etc.), and then factoring in the impact of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Our primary source of cash is from our operating activities. Our current business model consists of a significant amount of recurring revenue sources related to our long-term revenue management platforms and other related solutions and managed services arrangements (primarily billed monthly), payments transaction services (primarily billed monthly), and software maintenance agreements (which may be billed monthly, quarterly, or annually). This recurring revenue base provides us with a reliable and predictable source of cash. In addition, software license fees and professional services revenue are sources of cash, but the payment streams for these items are less predictable.
The primary use of our cash is to fund our operating activities. Over half of our total operating costs relate to labor costs (both employees and contracted labor) for the following: (i) compensation; (ii) related fringe benefits; (iii) incentive compensation; and (iv) reimbursements for travel and entertainment expenses. Other operating expenses consist of: (i) computing capacity and related services and communication lines for our outsourced cloud-based business; (ii) paper, envelopes, and related supplies for our statement processing solutions; (iii) transaction fees paid in conjunction with the delivery of services under our payment services contracts; (iv) hardware and software maintenance; and (v) rent and related facility costs. These items are purchased under a variety of both short-term and long-term contractual commitments. A discussion of our material contractual obligations is provided below.
Our 2021 and 2020 net cash flows from operating activities, broken out between operations and changes in operating assets and liabilities, for the indicated quarterly periods are as follows (in thousands):
(1)Cash flows from operating activities for the first quarter of 2021 and 2020 reflect the negative impacts of the payment of the 2020 and 2019 year-end accrued employee incentive compensation in the first quarter subsequent to the year-end accrual for those items.
(2)Cash flows from operating activities for the first quarter of 2021 and the first and second quarters 2020 were negatively impacted by the timing of certain recurring key customer payments that were delayed and received subsequent to quarter-end, of approximately $26 million for the first quarter of 2021, and $33 million and $26 million for the first and second quarters of 2020. As of the end of the second quarter of 2021 and the third quarter of 2020, these recurring key customer payments were current, resulting in the second quarter of 2021 and the third quarter of 2020 cash flows from operating activities having the benefit of an additional payment due to the timing delays in previous quarters.
We believe the above table illustrates our ability to generate recurring quarterly cash flows from our operations, and the importance of managing our working capital items. The quarterly and annual variations in our net cash provided by operating activities are generally related to the changes in our operating assets and liabilities (related mostly to fluctuations in timing at quarter-end of customer payments and changes in accrued expenses), and generally over longer periods of time, do not significantly impact our cash flows from operations.
Significant fluctuations in key operating assets and liabilities between 2021 and 2020 that impacted our cash flows from operating activities are as follows:
Billed Trade Accounts Receivable
Management of our billed accounts receivable is one of the primary factors in maintaining strong cash flows from operating activities. Our billed trade accounts receivable balance includes significant billings for several non-revenue items (primarily postage, sales tax, and deferred revenue items). As a result, we evaluate our performance in collecting our accounts receivable through our calculation of Days Billings Outstanding (“DBO”) rather than a typical Days Sales Outstanding (“DSO”) calculation.
Our gross and net billed trade accounts receivable and related allowance for doubtful accounts receivable (“Allowance”) as of the end of the indicated quarterly periods, and the related DBOs for the quarters then ended, are as follows (in thousands, except DBOs):
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, over 95% of our billed accounts receivable balances were less than 60 days past due.
The DBO metric for the first quarter of 2021 and the first and second quarters of 2020 were negatively impacted by the delays of certain recurring key customer payments, as noted above. We may experience future adverse impacts to our DBOs if and when these payment delays occur. However, these recurring monthly payments that cross a reporting period-end do not raise any collectability concerns, as payment is generally received subsequent to quarter-end. All other changes in our gross and net billed accounts receivable reflect the normal fluctuations in the timing of customer payments at quarter-end, as evidenced by our relatively consistent DBO metric.
As a global provider of solutions and services, a portion of our accounts receivable balance relates to international customers. This diversity in the geographic composition of our customer base may adversely impact our DBOs as longer billing cycles (i.e., billing terms and cash collection cycles) are an inherent characteristic of international software and professional services transactions. For example, our ability to invoice and collect arrangement fees may be dependent upon, among other things: (i) the completion of various customer administrative matters, local country billing protocols and processes (including local cultural differences), and non-customer administrative matters; (ii) meeting certain contractual invoicing milestones; or (iii) the overall project status in certain situations in which we act as a subcontractor to another vendor on a project.
Income Taxes Payable/Receivable
Net income taxes payable/receivable (current and non-current) at December 31, 2021 was a net income taxes receivable balance of $2.0 million, compared to a net income taxes payable balance of $6.9 million at December 31, 2020. This net $8.9 million change is primarily due to the timing of our estimated Federal and state income tax payments.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities. Our typical investing activities consist of purchases and sales of short-term investments and purchases of software, property and equipment, which are discussed below. During 2021, we made the following cash payments for the acquisitions of (all shown net of cash acquired, if applicable): (i) Tango for $11.4 million; (ii) Kitewheel for $33.8 million; (iii) Keydok for $1.0 million; and (iv) DGIT for $12.5 million. We also made an investment in MobileCard of $6.1 million. During 2020, we acquired Tekzenit Inc. (“Tekzenit”) for $10.0 million and made an investment in MobileCard of $1.5 million. All of these activities are included in our cash flows from investing activities.
Purchases/Sales of Short-term Investments
During 2021 and 2020 we purchased $67.0 million and $81.8 million, respectively, and sold or had mature $90.5 million and $56.5 million, respectively, of short-term investments. We continually evaluate the possible uses of our excess cash balances and will likely purchase and sell additional short-term investments in the future.
Software, Property and Equipment
Our annual capital expenditures for software, property and equipment for 2021 and 2020 were $26.6 million and $29.4 million, respectively. Our capital expenditures for these periods consisted principally of investments in computer hardware, software, and related equipment, statement production equipment, and infrastructure.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities. Our financing activities typically consist of various debt-related transactions and activities with our common stock, which are discussed below.
Issuance of Common Stock
Proceeds from the issuance of common stock for 2021 and 2020 were $2.6 million and $2.5 million, respectively, and relate primarily to our employee stock purchase plan.
Repurchase of Common Stock
During 2021 and 2020 we repurchased approximately 733,000 shares and 624,000 shares of our common stock under the guidelines of our Stock Repurchase Program for $36.0 million and $26.3 million, respectively.
Additionally, outside of our Stock Repurchase Program, during 2021 and 2020, we repurchased from our employees and then canceled approximately 130,000 shares and 254,000 shares, of our common stock for $6.3 million and $11.9 million, respectively, in connection with minimum tax withholding requirements resulting from the vesting of restricted stock under our stock incentive plans.
Through December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have paid $42.3 million and $38.1 million, respectively, for our total repurchases of common stock, with the differences when compared to the amounts accrued attributed to the timing of the settlement.
Cash Dividends Paid on Common Stock
During 2021 and 2020, the Board approved dividend payments totaling $32.7 million and $30.9 million, respectively. During 2021 and 2020, we paid dividends of $32.6 million and $31.1 million, respectively, with the differences between the amount approved and paid attributed to dividends accrued on unvested incentive shares that are paid upon vesting.
Long-term Debt
In 2021, we refinanced our 2018 Credit Agreement and as a result, we repaid the outstanding principal balance of $120.0 million and borrowed $150.0 million under the 2021 Credit Agreement, resulting in a net increase of available cash of $30.0 million. As part of the refinancing, we paid $3.0 million of deferred financing costs.
Additionally, during 2021 and 2020 we made principal repayments of $8.4 million and $10.3 million, respectively, on our long-term debt balance.
See Note 5 to our Financial Statements for additional discussion of our long-term debt.
Settlement and Merchant Reserve Activity
During 2021 and 2020, we had net settlement and merchant reserve activity of $20.3 million and ($15.1) million, respectively, related to the cash collected, held on behalf, and paid to our merchants related to our payments services and the net change in deposits held on behalf of our merchants.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments and Contingencies
We have various contractual obligations that are recorded as liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Other items, such as certain purchase commitments and other executory contracts, are not recognized as liabilities in our Balance Sheets but are required to be disclosed.
We have elected to redeem all of our outstanding 2016 Convertible Notes on March 15, 2022 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of our 2016 Convertible Notes was $230.0 million and the remaining interest payments are approximately $5 million. Additionally, the conversion obligation in excess of par value, if any, will be settled in cash.
Our 2021 Credit Agreement includes the mandatory quarterly amortization payments on the term loan, interest payments throughout the life of the term loan, and a commitment fee on the unused balance of the revolver. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance on our 2021 Credit Agreement was $148.1 million, our estimated interest over the remaining life of the loan was approximately $10 million, and our estimated commitment fee was approximately $3 million, based on the current leverage ratio, LIBOR rates, and unused revolver balance.
Our long-term debt obligations are discussed in more detail in Note 5 to our Financial Statements.
Our operating leases are discussed in Note 6 to our Financial Statements. As of December 31, 2021, the value of our obligations under our real estate and equipment leases was approximately $87 million.
Our purchase obligations consist primarily of our expected minimum base fees under our outsourced computing service agreement with Ensono, Inc., which includes embedded lease components (discussed in Notes 6 and 11 to our Financial Statements). As of December 31, 2021, the total value of our purchase obligations was approximately $274 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Our off-balance sheet arrangements are mainly limited to money transmitter bonds, bid bonds, and performance bonds. These arrangements do not have a material impact and are not reasonably likely to have a material future impact to our financial condition, results of operation, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources. See Note 11 to our Financial Statements for additional information on these guarantees.
Capital Resources
The following are the key items to consider in assessing our sources and uses of capital resources:
Current Sources of Capital Resources.
•Cash, Cash Equivalents and Short-term Investments. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $233.7 million, of which approximately 66% is in U.S. dollars and held in the U.S. We have $1.4 million of restricted cash included in cash and cash equivalents, used primarily to collateralize guarantees and outstanding letters of credit. For the remainder of the monies denominated in foreign currencies or located outside the U.S., we do not anticipate any material amounts being unavailable for use in running our business.
•Operating Cash Flows. As described in the Liquidity section above, we believe we have the ability to generate strong cash flows to fund our operating activities and act as a source of funds to meet our capital resource needs.
•Revolving Loan Facility. In 2021, we refinanced our 2018 Credit Agreement, which includes a $450 million revolving loan facility, our 2021 Revolver. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowing outstanding on our 2021 Revolver and had the entire $450 million available to us. Our long-term debt obligations are discussed in more detail in Note 5 to our Financial Statements.
Uses/Potential Uses of Capital Resources. Below are the key items to consider in assessing our uses/potential uses of capital resources:
•Common Stock Repurchases. We have made repurchases of our common stock in the past under our Stock Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2021, we had 3.6 million shares authorized for repurchase remaining under our Stock Repurchase Program. Our 2021 Credit Agreement places certain limitations on our ability to repurchase our common stock.
Under our Stock Repurchase Program, we may repurchase shares in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, including through an accelerated stock repurchase plan or under a SEC Rule 10b5-1 plan. The actual timing and amount of share repurchases are dependent on the current market conditions and other business-related factors. Our common stock repurchases are discussed in more detail in Note 12 to our Financial Statements.
During 2021, we repurchased 733,000 shares of our common stock for $36.0 million (weighted-average price of $49.13 per share) under our Stock Repurchase Program.
Outside of our Stock Repurchase Program, during 2021, we repurchased from our employees and then cancelled 130,000 shares of our common stock for $6.3 million in connection with minimum tax withholding requirements resulting from the vesting of restricted stock under our stock incentive plans.
•Executive Transition. In 2020, we entered into a Separation Agreement and subsequent amendment with our former President and CEO, which included a commitment to pay additional compensation of approximately $7 million, for which approximately $5 million was paid in 2021 and approximately $2 million will be paid in 2022.
•Cash Dividends. During 2021, the Board declared dividends totaling $32.7 million. Going forward, we expect to pay cash dividends each year in March, June, September, and December, with the amount and timing subject to the Board’s approval.
•Acquisitions. During 2021, we completed the following acquisitions, and as a result, have the following potential future obligations:
oIn May we acquired Tango for a purchase price of approximately $13 million, or approximately $11 million, net of cash acquired.
oIn July we acquired Kitewheel for a purchase price of $40.0 million, of which $34.0 million was paid upon close and the remaining $6.0 million will be paid in annual payments over the next three years.
oIn July, we made an additional investment of $6.1 million in MobileCard. After this investment, we now hold a 64% controlling interest in the company.
oIn September we acquired Keydok for a purchase price of $1.0 million, which includes provisions for up to $18.0 million of potential future earn-out payments. The earn-out period is through September 30, 2025. As of December 31, 2021, we have not accrued any amounts related to the potential earn-out payments.
oIn October we acquired DGIT for a purchase price of approximately $16 million, which includes escrowed funds of approximately $2 million to be paid over the next four years subject to certain reductions, as applicable, and provisions for up to approximately $13 million of potential future earn-out payments. The earn-out period is through September 30, 2025. As of December 31, 2021 we have accrued $0.3 million related to the potential earn-out payments.
Additionally, the 2020 Tekzenit acquisition includes provisions for additional purchase price payments in the form of earn-out and qualified sales payments for up to $10 million over a measurement period through March 31, 2023. As of December 31, 2021, we have made no earn-out or qualified sales payments for this acquisition.
These acquisitions were funded from currently available cash. Our acquisitions are discussed in more detail in Note 7 to our Financial Statements. As part of our growth strategy, we are continually evaluating potential business and/or asset acquisitions and investments in market share expansion with our existing and potential new customers and expansion into verticals outside the global communications market.
•Capital Expenditures. During 2021, we spent $26.6 million on capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2021, we had committed to purchase $10.5 million of equipment.
•Stock Warrants. We have issued Stock Warrants with an exercise price of $26.68 per warrant to Comcast as an incentive for Comcast to convert new customer accounts to ACP. Once vested, Comcast may exercise the Stock Warrants and elect either physical delivery of common shares or net share settlement (cashless exercise). Alternatively, the exercise of the Stock Warrants may be settled with cash based solely on our approval, or if Comcast were to beneficially own or control in excess of 19.99% of the common stock or voting of the Company. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 1.0 million Stock Warrants were outstanding, none of which were vested.
The Stock Warrants are discussed in more detail in Note 12 to our Financial Statements.
•Long-Term Debt. As of December 31, 2021, our long-term debt consisted of the following: (i) 2016 Convertible Notes with a par value of $230.0 million; and (ii) 2021 Credit Agreement term loan borrowings of $148.1 million.
2016 Convertible Notes
Our 2016 Convertible Notes will be convertible at the option of the note holders during the period from December 15, 2021 to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding March 15, 2022. For notes presented during this time frame, the settlement amount will be equal to the sum of the daily settlement amounts for each of the following 40 consecutive trading days during the related observation period (January 12, 2022 - March 10, 2022). We have elected to redeem all of the outstanding notes on March 15, 2022 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount. We will settle the par amount in cash using our available cash and our 2021 Revolver. As a result, we expect our required debt service outlay during the next twelve months for the 2016 Convertible Notes to be the $230.0 million par value, the conversion obligation in excess of par value, if any, and interest payments of $4.9 million.
2021 Credit Agreement
Our 2021 Credit Agreement mandatory repayments and the cash interest expense (based upon current interest rates and leverage ratio) for the next twelve months is $7.5 million, and $2.4 million, respectively. We have the ability to make prepayments on our 2021 Credit Agreement without penalty.
Our long-term debt obligations are discussed in more detail in Note 5 to our Financial Statements.
In summary, we expect to continue to have material needs for capital resources going forward, as noted above. We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments balances and our 2021 Revolver, together with cash expected to be generated in the future from our current operating activities, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated capital resource requirements for at least the next twelve months. We believe we could obtain additional capital through other debt sources which may be available to us if deemed appropriate.