Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Liquidity and Going Concern Consideration
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $223,378 in its operating bank account, and a negative working capital of approximately $81,275.
The Company is within 12 months of its mandatory liquidation as of the time of filing this 10K. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, January 29, 2023.
These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
If the Company’s estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to an Initial Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete an Initial Business Combination or because it becomes obligated to redeem a significant number of its public shares upon completion of an Initial Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Initial Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income and dividends on investments held in Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $15.73 million, which included by a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $20.97 million, offset by a loss from operations of $1.54 million, interest earned on investments held in Trust Account of $0.04 million, excess fair value over cash received for private warrants of $2.60 million and offering cost expense allocated to warrants of $1.15 million
For the period from November 20, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we did not have any operations.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Registration Rights
The initial shareholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial shareholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We paid an underwriting discount of 2% of the per Unit offering price, or approximately $6,200,000 million in the aggregate at the closing of the Initial Public Offering, and agreed to pay an additional fee (the “Deferred Underwriting Fees”) of 3.5% of the gross offering proceeds, or approximately $10,850,000 in the aggregate upon the Company’s completion of an Initial Business Combination. The Deferred Underwriting Fees will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event the Company completes its initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Except as set forth below, there have been no significant changes in our critical accounting policies as discussed in the final prospectus filed by us with the SEC on January 29, 2021.
Warrant Liability
We evaluated the Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers as well as provisions that provided for potential changes to the settlement amounts dependent upon the characteristics of the holder of the warrant, precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815 and are not eligible for an exception from derivative accounting, the Warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the IPO) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 31,000,000 Class A Ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require Ordinary shares subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, all shares of Class A Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheets, respectively.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period, excluding ordinary shares subject to forfeiture. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,800,000 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per ordinary share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted income per share is the same as basic income per share for the period presented.
Basic and diluted net income per ordinary share for Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing net income attributable to the Company by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares outstanding, allocated proportionally to each class of ordinary shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404,
(ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.