ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of our financial condition and our results of operations as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The purpose of this discussion is to focus on information about our financial condition and results of operations which is not otherwise apparent from the Consolidated Financial Statements appearing under the caption “Part II., Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Report. The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements, the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, estimates and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from our current expectations. Factors that could cause such differences are discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Report. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements except to the extent required by applicable law.
The following discussion and analysis pertains to our historical results on a consolidated basis. However, because we conduct all of our material business operations through our wholly-owned subsidiary, CapStar Bank, the following discussion and analysis relates to activities primarily conducted at the subsidiary level.
All dollar amounts in the tables in this section are in thousands of dollars, except per share data or when otherwise specifically noted. Unless specifically noted in this Report, all references in this section to the fiscal years 2019, 2020 and 2021 mean our fiscal years ended December 31, 2019, 2020, and 2021, respectively.
Overview
We completed 2021 with net income of $48.7 million, or $2.19 diluted net income per share, compared to net income of $24.7 million and $22.4 million, or $1.22 and $1.20 diluted net income per share, for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Average loans held for investment for 2021 were $1.91 billion, a 13.0% increase over 2020, and average deposits for 2021 were $2.70 billion, a 19.2% increase over 2020. We acquired FCB and BOW on July 1, 2020, which has impacted the comparability of our financial performance. Specifically, the Company's net interest income and non-interest income generally benefited from an additional six months of FCB and BOW income for the year ended December 31, 2021. Conversely, non-interest expense increased for the same period due to the acquisitions. The 2020 FCB and BOW acquisitions, as well as the Company's 2021 organic entrance into the Chattanooga market continue to demonstrate our growth opportunities.
The Company continues its proactive approach to protect our team members and their families. The Company's Pandemic Committee continues to meet and discuss the health and safety of employees as well as to discuss updates provided by the Centers for Disease Control ("CDC"), state and local authorities. At this time, all financial centers and support operations centers are operating in a non-remote environment. Although the economic and public health outlooks improved in the United States during 2021, the future impact of the pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial condition remains uncertain. Should current economic conditions deteriorate or if the pandemic continues to intensify through the spread of more contagious or severe strains of COVID-19, the pandemic could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations and financial condition.
Although infection rates in the communities we serve vary, the positive impact that vaccinations have had on curbing the spread of the virus allowed us to begin bringing departments back together and to loosen travel restrictions for colleagues who are fully vaccinated. Given the COVID-19 variants currently spreading, we are strongly advising our colleagues who are fully vaccinated to get vaccination boosters. We will continue to make prudent decisions for the safety of our colleagues and our clients following recommended CDC and local health department guidance. We are hopeful that infection rates will decline in the communities we serve as the percentage of fully vaccinated and boosted individuals continues to increase.
In an effort to serve as a source of liquidity in our community at the onset of the pandemic, CapStar Bank proactively offered a 90-day full deferment of all loan payments to CapStar borrowers that were less than 30 days past due. As of December 31, 2021 the remaining loans still under deferment has been reduced to four loans (representing approximately $32.2 million in outstanding loan balances). As of December 31, 2021, the remaining outstanding balance of loans originated under the PPP totaled approximately $26.5 million and was included in commercial and industrial loans.
As the pandemic continues, we will continue to assess the impact on our market. While it is uncertain losses will materialize in the future, we will continue to proactively work with our clients and evaluate the potential impact of the pandemic on them and us. Furthermore, we currently do not anticipate a significant adverse liquidity impact related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In fact, since the start of the pandemic, deposit inflows have increased sharply, significantly strengthening liquidity. Nonetheless, the Company has a comprehensive contingency funding plan that addresses potential adverse liquidity events and emergency cash flow requirements that may arise from the COVID-19 pandemic. See further discussion regarding the Company’s management of liquidity risk in the subsequent section titled ‘Liquidity’.
Despite the uncertainty the Company is well positioned to continue delivering on its strategic initiatives in a responsible manner by prioritizing things such as business continuity, liquidity management and maintaining an adequate allowance for loan losses.
Our primary revenue source is net interest income and fees from various financial services provided to customers. Net interest income is the difference between interest income earned on loans, investment securities and other interest earning assets less interest expense on deposit accounts and other interest bearing liabilities. Loan volume and interest rates earned on those loans are critical to our overall profitability. Similarly, deposit volume is crucial to funding loans and the rates paid on deposits directly impact our profitability. Business volumes are influenced by competition, new business acquisition efforts and economic factors including market interest rates, business spending and consumer confidence.
Net interest income increased $14.8 million, or 19.5%, to $91.2 million for 2021 compared to $76.3 million for 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the acquisitions of FCB and BOW, increased PPP income and lower interest rates across deposit categories when compared to 2020. Net interest margin increased to 3.16% for 2021, compared with 3.10% for 2020.
The year ended December 31, 2021 yielded a ($1.1) million release of loan loss reserves compared to a $11.5 million provision in 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to improved asset quality trends, significant improvement in specific classified loans and other qualitative factors. The provision for loan losses represents a charge to earnings necessary to establish an allowance for loan losses that, in management’s evaluation, is adequate to provide coverage for the estimated probable inherent losses on outstanding loans. Our allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021 was 1.10% of total loans held for investment, compared with 1.23% at December 31, 2020.
While benefitting from the FCB and BOW acquisitions, total noninterest income for 2021 remained relatively unchanged at $42.7 million compared to $43.2 million for 2020, and comprised 31.9% of total revenues.
Despite the impact of the FCB and BOW acquisitions, total noninterest expense for 2021 decreased $3.9 million, or 4.9%, to $73.5 million compared to $77.4 million for 2020. Improving productivity and operating efficiency is a key focus of the Company. The efficiency ratio for 2021 was 54.94% compared to 64.70% for 2020. The improvement in efficiency ratio for 2021 is primarily attributable to greater expense discipline in accordance with the Company's core strategy and a decline in acquisition related expenses.
The Company’s effective tax rate increased to 20.7% for 2021 from 19.6% for 2020. The higher effective tax rate in 2021 compared to 2020 is mainly the result of net operating loss carryback provisions associated with the CARES Act in 2020.
Tangible common equity, a non-GAAP measure, is a measure of a company's capital which is useful in evaluating the quality and adequacy of capital. Our ratio of tangible common equity to total tangible assets was 10.77% as of December 31, 2021, compared with 10.00% at December 31, 2020. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of and reconciliation to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
The following sections provide more details on subjects presented in this overview.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared based on the application of certain accounting policies, the most significant of which are described in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, which are contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain of these policies require numerous estimates and strategic or economic assumptions that may prove inaccurate or subject to variation and may materially and adversely affect our reported results and financial position for the current period or future periods. The use of estimates, assumptions, and judgments are necessary when financial assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at, or
adjusted to reflect, fair value. Assets carried at fair value inherently result in more financial statement volatility. Fair values and information used to record valuation adjustments for certain assets and liabilities are either based on quoted market prices or are provided by other independent third-party sources, when available. When such information is not available, management estimates valuation adjustments based upon historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Management evaluates our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Changes in underlying factors, assumptions or estimates in any of these areas could have a material impact on our future financial condition and results of operations.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates and the potential sensitivity of our financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements are reasonable and appropriate.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We record estimated probable inherent credit losses in the loan portfolio as an allowance for loan losses. The methodologies and assumptions for determining the adequacy of the overall allowance for loan losses involve significant judgments to be made by management. Some of the more critical judgments supporting our allowance for loan losses include judgments about the credit-worthiness of borrowers, estimated value of underlying collateral, assumptions about cash flow, determination of loss factors for estimating credit losses, and the impact of current events, conditions, and other factors impacting the level of inherent losses, particularly the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants. Under different conditions or using different assumptions, the actual credit losses ultimately realized by us may be different from our estimates. On a quarterly basis, we assess the risk inherent in our loan portfolio based on qualitative and quantitative trends in the portfolio, including the internal risk classification of loans, historical loss rates, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, industry or borrower concentrations, delinquency trends, detailed reviews of significant loans with identified weaknesses, and the impacts of local, regional, and national economic factors on the quality of the loan portfolio. Based on this analysis, we may record a provision for loan losses in order to maintain the allowance at appropriate levels. For a more complete discussion of the methodology employed to calculate the allowance for loan losses, see Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is included elsewhere in this Report.
Investment Securities Impairment
We assess on a quarterly basis whether there have been any events or economic circumstances to indicate that a security with respect to which there is an unrealized loss is impaired on an other-than-temporary basis. In any instance, we would consider many factors, including the severity and duration of the impairment, our intent and ability to hold the security for a period of time sufficient for a recovery in value, recent events specific to the issuer or industry, and, for debt securities, external credit ratings and recent downgrades. Securities with respect to which there is an unrealized loss that is deemed to be other-than-temporary are written down to fair value with the write-down recorded in earnings.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed using the asset and liability method, which recognizes a liability or asset representing the tax effects, based on current tax law, of future deductible or taxable amounts attributable to events recognized in the financial statements. A valuation allowance may be established to the extent necessary to reduce the deferred tax asset to a level at which it is “more likely than not” that the tax asset or benefit will be realized. Realization of tax benefits depends on having sufficient taxable income, available tax loss carrybacks or credits, the reversal of taxable temporary differences and/or tax planning strategies within the reversal period, and that current tax law allows for the realization of recorded tax benefits.
Business Combinations
Assets purchased and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recorded at their fair value. The fair value of a loan portfolio acquired in a business combination requires greater levels of management estimates and judgment than the remainder of purchased assets or assumed liabilities. When the loans have evidence of credit deterioration since origination and it is probable at the date of acquisition that the Company will not collect all contractually required principal and interest payments, the loans are considered impaired, and the expected cash flows in excess of the amount paid are recorded as interest income over the remaining life of the loan. The excess of the loan’s contractual principal and interest over expected cash flows is not recorded. We must estimate expected cash flows at each reporting date.
Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses. Subsequent increases in cash flows result in a reversal of the provision for loan losses to the extent of prior charges and adjusted accretable yield which will have a positive impact on interest income. Purchased loans without evidence of credit deterioration are recorded at their initial fair value and adjusted as necessary for subsequent advances, pay downs, amortization or accretion of any premium or discount on purchase, charge-offs and additional provisions that may be required.
Results of Operations
The following is a summary of our results of operations:
The following sections provide a more detailed analysis of significant factors affecting our operating results.
Net Interest Income
The largest component of our net income is net interest income - the difference between the income earned on loans, investment securities and other interest earning assets and interest expense on deposit accounts and other interest bearing liabilities. Net interest income calculated on a tax-equivalent basis divided by total average interest-earning assets represents our net interest margin. The major factors that affect net interest income and net interest margin are changes in volumes, the yield on interest-earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. Our margin can also be affected by economic conditions, the competitive environment, loan demand and deposit flow. Our ability to respond to changes in these factors by using effective asset-liability management techniques is critical to maintaining the stability of the net interest margin and our net interest income.
The following table sets forth the amount of our average balances, interest income or interest expense for each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the average interest rate for interest-earning assets and
interest-bearing liabilities, net interest spread and net interest margin for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans. Interest income on loans includes amortization of deferred loan fees, net of deferred loan costs.
(2)Taxable investment securities include restricted equity securities.
(3)Yields on tax exempt securities are shown on a tax equivalent basis.
(4)Net interest spread is the average yield on total interest-earning assets minus the average rate on total interest-bearing liabilities.
(5)Net interest margin is net interest income calculated on a tax equivalent basis divided by total average interest-earning assets.
The following table reflects, for the periods indicated, the changes in our net interest income due to changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the associated rates earned or paid on these assets and liabilities.
2021 compared to 2020
Our net interest income increased $14.8 million, or 19.5%, from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to a 13.0% increase in average loans held for investment and a 54 basis point or 60.0% decline in the average yield on interest-bearing liabilities as we have worked to lower our cost of deposits across all categories.
The loan increase is primarily attributable to a combination of the FCB and BOW acquisitions, expansions into new markets and fee income associated with PPP loan forgiveness and paydowns. PPP fees recognized as income totaled $7.2 million and $3.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 also benefited from a 67.9% increase in average total securities offset by a 59 basis point or 24.8% decrease in average security yield as yields on investments purchased were depressed by a sharp decline in market interest rates as the Federal Reserve lowered short-term rates to historically low levels in response to the pandemic.
2020 compared to 2019
Net interest income increased $8.6 million, or 12.7%, from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to a 32% increase in average earning assets associated with the FCB and BOW acquisitions, which was offset by a 54 basis point decline in the net interest margin.
Our net interest margin was 3.10% and 3.64% for 2020 and 2019, respectively, with the decline triggered by two factors related to the pandemic - first, the Federal Reserve reducing the Federal Funds target rate by 1.50% in March 2020, one of numerous actions intended to offset the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. economy, and second, the sharp increase in deposits near the start of the pandemic, with deposits increasing $332 million or 19% in the 2nd quarter. Additionally, included in interest expense for savings and money market deposits in 2020 is a loss on previously terminated interest rate swaps of $1.9 million.
For 2020 compared to 2019, loan volumes increased 16.8% while loan yields declined from 5.41% to 4.61% due to the impact of lower market interest rates on yields of new loan originations and yields of existing variable rate loans.
Average loans for 2020 increased 16.8% compared to 2019 as a result of the FCB and BOW acquisitions, the Company’s active participation in the SBA’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), additional bankers in the Nashville and Knoxville MSA, and continued focus on attracting new clients.
Average security yields decreased from 3.14% to 2.38% for 2019 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to decreases in the LIBOR rate on the variable rate portion of our securities portfolio, the impact of lower market interest rates on the yields of securities purchased to replace security maturities and paydowns, and the Company’s purchase of additional conservative lower yield securities to deploy a portion of pandemic-related deposit growth.
We funded our growth in loans through an increase in funding sources of 33.0% from 2019 to 2020. The primary driver of our increased funding sources was growth in our deposits of 35.2% from 2019 to 2020, driven by the FCB and BOW acquisitions and the sharp increase in deposits near the start of the pandemic. Average non-interest bearing deposits increased 77.3% from 2019 to 2020.
The average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities was 0.90% for 2020 compared to 1.69% for 2019. The majority of this decrease was due to decreases in the Federal Funds rate in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Provision for Loan losses
Our policy is to maintain an allowance for loan losses at a level sufficient to absorb estimated probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The allowance is increased by a provision for loan losses, which is a charge to earnings, and is decreased by charge-offs and increased by loan recoveries. While our policies and procedures used to estimate the allowance for loan losses, as well as the resultant provision for loan losses charged to operations, are considered adequate by management, they are necessarily approximate and imprecise. There are factors beyond our control, such as conditions in the local and national economy, local real estate markets, or particular industry or borrower-specific conditions, which may materially and negatively impact our asset quality and the adequacy of our allowance for loan losses and, thus, the resulting provision for loan losses. Provision expense is impacted by macroeconomic factors, the absolute level of loans, loan growth, the credit quality of the loan portfolio and the amount of net charge-offs.
Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans held for investment was 1.10%, 1.23% and 0.89% at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our allowance for loan losses plus fair value purchase accounting marks to non-PPP loans was 1.27%, 1.58%, and 1.13% at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a discussion of and reconciliation to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure.
2021 compared to 2020
The year ended December 31, 2021 yielded a ($1.1) million release of loan loss reserves compared to a $11.5 million provision in 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to improved asset quality trends, significant improvement in specific classified loans and improvement in COVID-19 qualitative factors within our allowance for loan losses methodology. While the pandemic and its variants are still considered within the Company's current allowance for loan losses, the release in 2021 is a reflection of credit quality metrics returning to pre-pandemic levels.
Charge-offs for 2021 were $0.6 million compared to $1.2 million for 2020, while our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans held for investment decreased from 1.23% at December 31, 2020 to 1.10% at December 31, 2021. Similarly, these decreases were attributable to improvements in economic conditions through December 31, 2021, as compared to the economic deterioration that occurred or was anticipated during 2020 as a result of COVID-19 and its variants.
Based upon our evaluation of the loan portfolio, we believe the allowance for loan losses to be adequate to absorb our estimate of probable losses existing in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2021.
2020 compared to 2019
The provision for loan losses amounted to $11.5 million and $0.8 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Provision expense increased for 2020 compared to 2019 due to significantly increased qualitative factors in our allowance for loan losses methodology in anticipation of credit deterioration associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Although losses have not yet materialized as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our overall reserves are deemed to be adequate in light of the economic uncertainty of the pandemic. Charge-offs for 2020 were $1.2 million compared to $0.8 million for 2019.
Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans increased from 0.89% at December 31, 2019 to 1.23% at December 31, 2020. This increase was largely due to our assessment of risk generally related to macro-economic, geo-political conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the related impact on asset quality.
Noninterest Income
In addition to net interest income, we generate recurring noninterest income. Our banking operations generate revenue from service charges on deposit accounts, interchange and debit card transaction fees, originating and selling mortgage, commercial real estate and SBA loans, wealth management and gains (losses) on sales of securities. In addition to these types of recurring noninterest income, we own insurance on several key employees and record income within "Other noninterest income" based upon the increase in the cash surrender value of these policies.
The following table sets forth the principal components of noninterest income for the periods indicated.
2021 compared to 2020
The increase in interchange and debit card transaction fees and other deposit service charges for 2021 were driven by the incremental increase in transaction volume related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW, an emphasis on electronic banking and continued growth in deposits and volume of our commercial and consumer deposit account.
Mortgage banking income consists of mortgage fee income from the origination and sale of mortgage loans. These mortgage fees are for loans originated in our markets that are subsequently sold to third-party investors. Generally, mortgage origination fees increase in lower interest rate environments and more robust housing markets and decrease in rising interest rate environments and more challenging housing markets. Mortgage origination fees will fluctuate from period to period as the rate environment changes. Mortgage banking income decreased 35.9% from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to a decline from the peak of the 2020 residential market. Beginning in 2020, we experienced an increase in mortgage lending transactions as a result of the low mortgage interest rate environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, this began to decline in 2021 and we expect mortgage lending volume to continue to decline into 2022 given the current environment and forecasted rate increases by the Federal Reserve.
Revenue for Tri-Net, a business launched in the fourth quarter of 2016, is derived from the origination and sale of commercial real estate loans to third-party investors. All of these loan sales transfer servicing rights to the buyer. The volume of loan sales has increased through continued growth and development as one the Company's key unique fee businesses.
SBA loan sales revenue also increased when compared to the prior year comparable period due to increased volumes and premiums as we continue to invest in and grow our government guaranteed lending division.
Other noninterest income primarily consists of loan related fees, bank-owned life insurance and other service-related fees.
2020 compared to 2019
The increase in treasury management and other deposit service charges for 2020 was driven primarily by the incremental increase in transaction volume related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW, as well as growth in the volume of our commercial and consumer deposit accounts.
Mortgage banking income increased 164.4% from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to a significantly higher volume of originations from home buyers capitalizing on lower interest rates.
The increase in other noninterest income of $1.2 million from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to organic growth and our acquisition of FCB and BOW.
Noninterest Expense
Our total noninterest expense increase reflects expenses that we have incurred as we build the foundation to support and execute our growth strategy. The following table presents the primary components of noninterest expense for the periods indicated.
2021 compared to 2020
Despite the impact of the FCB and BOW acquisitions, salaries and employee benefits expense decreased primarily due to lower incentive compensation as mortgage banking results declined compared to 2020, as well as a decrease in severance expense. At December 31, 2021, our associate base increased to 397 employees compared to 380 at December 31, 2020.
Data processing and software expense increased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to an increase in the volume of transactions from organic growth, a full year of our FCB and BOW operations and services related to the processing of PPP loans.
Our acquisition-related expenses decreased $5.1 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the absence of the FCB and BOW acquisitions recorded during 2020, and thereby, lower integration-related expenses.
Our efficiency ratio was 54.94% and 67.40% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The efficiency ratio is the ratio of noninterest expense to the sum of net interest income and noninterest income and measures the amount of expense that is incurred to generate a dollar of revenue. The improvement in efficiency ratio for 2021 is primarily attributable to greater expense discipline in accordance with the Company's core strategy.
2020 compared to 2019
The increase in salaries and employee benefits was driven primarily by the incremental increase in compensation costs related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW, as well as increased compensation associated with strong revenue growth in mortgage banking. At December 31, 2020, our associate base increased to 380 compared to 289 at December 31, 2019.
Data processing and software expense increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to an increase in the volume of transactions from organic growth, costs associated with running dual systems related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW and insourcing certain IT related functions. The acquisition related systems conversion was successfully completed during the third quarter of 2020.
The increase in occupancy expense from 2019 to 2020 was largely attributable to increased depreciation and other facilities related expenses associated with our acquisitions of FCB and BOW as well as the increasing cost of managing our IT network.
Amortization of intangibles increased from 2019 to 2020 due to the new core deposit intangible recorded in connection with the FCB and BOW acquisitions.
Our efficiency ratio was 64.70% and 67.41% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The efficiency ratio decreased in 2020 due to operational improvements and synergies achieved through the FCB and BOW acquisitions.
Income Taxes
2021 compared to 2020
We recorded income tax expense of $12.7 million and $6.0 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective income tax rate for 2021 and 2020 was 20.7% and 19.6%, respectively. Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory tax rate by our investments in qualified municipal securities, tax benefits from our real estate investment trust, company owned life insurance, state tax credits, net of the effect of certain non-deductible expenses and the recognition of excess tax benefits related to stock compensation. The higher effective tax rate in 2021 compared to 2020 is mainly the result of net operating loss carryback provisions associated with the CARES Act in 2020.
2020 compared to 2019
We recorded income tax expense of $6.0 million and $6.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our effective income tax rate for 2020 and 2019 was 19.6% and 23.4%, respectively. The lower effective tax rate in 2020 compared to 2019 is mainly the result of net operating loss carryback provisions associated with the CARES Act in 2020.
Financial Condition
2021 compared to 2020
Total assets increased $146.0 million or 4.9%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. Loans held for investment grew from $1.884 billion at December 31, 2020 to $1.966 billion at December 31, 2021, a 4.4% increase. The increase was supported by organic loan growth partially offset by approximately $159.5 million in net paydowns of forgiven PPP loans by the SBA. Loans held for sale decreased $103.3 million or 55.2%, during 2021 which is primarily related to the timing of selling residential and commercial real estate loans. Cash and cash equivalents increased $137.7 million or 49.6% as the Company continued to experience excess liquidity and grow deposits.
Total liabilities increased $109.4 million or 4.1% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. Deposits increased $116.3 million to $2.684 billion at December 31, 2021, a 4.5% increase. While in the short-term the Company is experiencing a period of excess liquidity, a key longer-term strategic initiative is to create a stronger deposit-led culture with an emphasis on lower cost relationship-based deposits. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s lowest cost deposit category, noninterest bearing, increased $62.2 million December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, while higher cost time deposits decreased $96.5 million or 20.5%. Other changes in deposits from 2020 to 2021 included a $100.5 million increase or 11.9% in interest-bearing deposits and a $50.0 million or 8.5% increase in savings and money market accounts.
2020 compared to 2019
Total assets increased $946.9 million or 46.5% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Loans held for investment grew from $1.418 billion at December 31, 2019 to $1.884 billion at December 31, 2020, a 32.9% increase. Loans held for sale increased $16.3 million or 9.6% during 2020 which is primarily related to the timing of selling residential and commercial real estate loans. Available for sale securities increased $278.1 million, or 128%, as the Company deployed excess capital into such investments. Also, included in these changes is growth from our acquisitions of FCB and BOW which included $514.7 million in total assets, primarily made up of $294.7 million in loans and $98.7 million in securities.
Total liabilities increased $876.5 million, or 49.7%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Deposits increased from $1.729 billion at December 31, 2019 to $2.568 billion at December 31, 2020, a 48.5% increase. Included in liabilities is the third quarter issuance of $29.4 million in subordinated debt during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, total liabilities and deposits acquired in our FCB and BOW acquisitions were $447.4 million and $442.7 million, respectively.
Investment Securities
The investment portfolio plays a key role in the management of liquidity and interest rate risk, and provides another source of interest income. In managing the composition of the balance sheet, we seek a balance between earnings sources and credit and liquidity considerations. We manage our investment portfolio according to a written investment policy approved by our board of directors. Balances in our investment portfolio are subject to change over time based on our funding needs and interest rate risk management objectives. Our liquidity levels take into account anticipated future cash flows and all available sources of funds, and are maintained at levels we believe are appropriate to assure future flexibility in meeting our anticipated funding needs.
Our investment portfolio consists primarily of securities issued by U.S. government-sponsored agencies, agency mortgage-backed securities, obligations of states and political subdivisions, asset-backed securities and other debt securities, all with varying contractual maturities. However, these maturities do not necessarily represent the expected life of the securities as some of these securities may be called or paid down without penalty prior to their stated maturities. The investment portfolio is regularly reviewed by the Asset Liability Management committee, or ALCO, of the bank to ensure an appropriate risk and return profile as well as for adherence to the investment policy.
Our investment portfolio totaled $461.2 million, $488.6 million, and $216.4 million at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our investment portfolio increased significantly in 2020 as part of our efforts to improve balance sheet management through investing in high quality securities and deploying excess liquidity resulting from increased deposits. See “Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information on our investment securities.
The following table presents the fair value of our securities as of December 31, 2021 by their stated maturities (this maturity schedule excludes security prepayment and call features), as well as the weighted average yields for each maturity range.
Loans and Leases
Loans and leases are our largest category of earning assets and typically provide higher yields than other types of earning assets. Associated with the higher loan yields are the inherent credit and liquidity risks that we attempt to control and counterbalance.
The composition of gross loans and leases at December 31 for each of the past five years and the percentage of each classification to total loans are summarized as follows:
Over the past five years, we have experienced significant growth in our loan portfolio. During 2017 and continuing through 2021, we recognized growth in the commercial real estate loan classifications reflecting the development of the Target Market in which we operate. The acquisitions of Athens, FCB and BOW have increased various loan
balance classifications and provided further diversity in our loan portfolio through more consumer-oriented loan products.
Our primary focus has been on commercial and industrial and commercial real estate lending, which constituted 67% of our loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021. Although we expect continued growth with respect to our loan portfolio, we do not expect any significant changes over the foreseeable future in the composition of our loan portfolio or in our emphasis on commercial lending. Our loan growth since inception has been reflective of the Target Market in which we serve. The commercial real estate category includes owner-occupied commercial real estate loans which are similar in many ways to our commercial and industrial lending in that these loans are generally made to businesses on the basis of the cash flows of the affiliated business rather than on the valuation and cash flows of the real estate from unaffiliated tenants. Since 2009, our commercial and industrial and commercial real estate portfolios have continued to experience strong growth, primarily due to implementation of our relationship-based banking model and the success of our relationship managers in transitioning commercial banking relationships from other local financial institutions and in competing for new business from attractive small to mid-sized commercial clients. Many of our larger commercial clients have lengthy relationships with members of our senior management team or our relationship managers that date back to their employment by other financial institutions.
The repayment of loans is a source of additional liquidity for us. The following table details maturities and sensitivity to interest rate changes for our loan portfolio at December 31, 2021.
The information presented in the table above is based upon the contractual maturities of the individual loans, which may be subject to renewal at their contractual maturity. Renewal of such loans is subject to review and credit approval, as well as modification of terms at their maturity. Consequently, we believe that this treatment presents fairly the maturity structure of the loan portfolio.
Asset Quality
One of our key objectives is to maintain a high level of asset quality in our loan portfolio. We utilize disciplined and thorough underwriting processes that collaboratively engage our seasoned and experienced business bankers and credit underwriters in the analysis of each loan request. Based upon our aggregate exposure to any given borrower relationship, we employ scaled review of loan originations that may involve senior credit officers, our Chief Credit Officer, our Chief Credit Policy Officer, our bank’s Credit Committee or, ultimately, our full board of directors. In addition, we have adopted underwriting guidelines to be followed by our lending officers that require senior management review of proposed extensions of credit exceeding certain thresholds. When delinquencies exist, we monitor the levels of such delinquencies for any negative or adverse trends. Our loan review procedures include approval of lending policies and underwriting guidelines by the board of directors of our bank, an independent loan review, approval of larger credit relationships by our bank’s Credit Committee and loan quality documentation procedures. Like other financial institutions, we are subject to the risk that our loan portfolio will be subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
We target small and medium sized businesses, the owners and operators of such businesses and other consumers and high net worth individuals as loan clients. Because of their size, these borrowers may be less able to withstand competitive or economic pressures than larger borrowers in periods of economic weakness. If loan losses occur at a level where the allowance for loan losses is not sufficient to cover actual loan losses, our earnings will decrease. We use an independent consulting firm to review our loans for quality in addition to the reviews that may be conducted internally and by bank regulatory agencies as part of their examination process. Our bank has procedures and processes in place intended to assess whether losses exceed the potential amounts documented in our bank’s impairment analyses and to reduce potential losses in the remaining performing loans within our loan portfolio. These procedures and processes include the following:
•we monitor the past due and overdraft reports on a weekly basis to identify deterioration as early as possible and the placement of identified loans on the watch list;
•we perform quarterly credit reviews for all watch list/classified loans, including formulation of action plans. When a workout is not achievable, we move to collection/foreclosure proceedings to obtain control of the underlying collateral as rapidly as possible to minimize the deterioration of collateral and/or the loss of its value;
•we require updated financial information, global inventory aging and interest carry analysis where appropriate for existing borrowers to help identify potential future loan payment problems; and
•we generally limit loans for new construction to established builders and developers that have an established record of turning their inventories, and we restrict our funding of undeveloped lots and land.
Our bank categorizes loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt such as: current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information, and current economic trends, among other factors. Our bank analyzes loans individually by classifying each loan as to credit risk. This analysis includes all commercial loans and consumer relationships with an outstanding balance greater than $500,000, individually. This analysis is performed on a regular basis by the relationship managers and credit department personnel. On at least an annual basis an independent party performs a formal credit risk review of a sample of the loan portfolio. Among other things, this review assesses the appropriateness of the risk rating of each loan in the sample. See “Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements” for a table that provides the risk category of loans by applicable class of loans.
Non-Performing Loans and Assets
Information summarizing non-performing assets, including non-accrual loans follows.
The balance of non-performing assets can fluctuate due to changes in economic conditions. We have established a policy to discontinue accruing interest on loans (that is, place the loans on non-accrual status) after they have become 90 days delinquent as to payment of principal or interest, unless the loans are considered to be well-collateralized and are in the process of collection. Consumer loans and any accrued interest are typically charged off no later than 180 days past due. In addition, a loan will not be placed on non-accrual status before it becomes 90 days delinquent unless management believes that the collection of all principal and interest is not expected in a timely manner. Interest previously accrued but uncollected on such loans is reversed and charged against interest income when the receivable is determined to be uncollectible. If we believe that a loan will not be collected in full, we will increase the allowance for loan losses to reflect management’s estimate of any potential exposure or loss. Generally, payments received on non-accrual loans are applied directly to principal. As of December 31, 2021, there were not any loans, outside of those included in the table above, that cause management to have serious doubts as to the ability of borrowers to comply with present repayment terms.
Due to the weakening credit status of a borrower, we may elect to formally restructure certain loans to facilitate a repayment plan that seeks to minimize the potential losses, if any, that we might incur. The effect of these changes is assessed to determine if the loan should be classified as a Troubled Debt Restructure. Loans that have been restructured that are on non-accruing status as of the date of restructuring, are included in the nonperforming loan balances as discussed above and are classified as impaired loans. Loans that have been restructured that are on accrual status as of the restructure date are not included in nonperforming loans; however, such loans are still considered impaired.
Allowance for Loan Losses (allowance)
Our allowance for loan losses represents our estimate of probable inherent credit losses in the loan portfolio. We determine the allowance based on an ongoing evaluation of risk as it correlates to potential losses within the portfolio. Increases in the allowance are made by charges to the provision for loan losses. Loans deemed to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance. Recoveries of previously charged-off amounts are credited to our allowance. The judgments and estimates associated with our allowance determination are described under “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” above and in Notes 1 and 4 to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.”
While no portion of our allowance is in any way restricted to any individual loan or group of loans and the entire allowance is available to absorb losses from any and all loans, the following tables represent management’s allocation of our allowance to specific loan categories for the periods indicated.
Changes in the allocation of the allowance from year to year in various categories are influenced by the level of net charge-offs in respective categories and other factors including, but not limited to, an evaluation of the impact of current economic conditions and trends, risk allocations tied to specific loans or groups of loans and changes in qualitative allocations. Management believes that allocations for each loan category are reasonable and reflective of risk inherent in the portfolio.
Deposits
Client deposits are the primary funding source for our loan growth. The following table presents the average balance and average rate paid on deposits for each of the following categories for the periods indicated.
Total average deposits increased 19.2% in 2021 compared to 2020 and increased 35.2% in 2020 compared to 2019. Much of the growth in deposits in 2020 is related to our acquisitions of FCB and BOW. However, we have been able to increase average noninterest-bearing demand deposits each year as we focus on building and expanding client relationships and delivering on our core deposit-led strategy. The Target Market is an already competitive market, which has been further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants.
The maturities of time deposits that exceed the FDIC insurance limit of $250 thousand at December 31, 2021 are as follows ($ in thousands):
Capital Adequacy
As of December 31, 2021, CapStar Financial’s capital ratios were as follows.
See Note 16 to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for additional information related to our capital position.
Market and Liquidity Risk Management
Our objective is to manage assets and liabilities to provide a satisfactory, consistent level of profitability within the framework of our established liquidity, loan, investment, borrowing, and capital policies. Our ALCO is charged with the responsibility of monitoring these policies, which are designed to ensure an acceptable composition of asset/liability mix. Two critical areas of focus for ALCO are interest rate sensitivity and liquidity risk management.
Interest Rate Simulation Sensitivity Analysis
Managing interest rate risk is fundamental for the financial services industry. By considering both on and off-balance sheet financial instruments, management evaluates interest rate sensitivity while attempting to optimize net interest income within the constraints of prudent capital adequacy, liquidity needs, market opportunities and customer requirements.
We use earnings at risk, or EAR, simulations to assess the impact of changing rates on earnings under a variety of scenarios and time horizons. The simulation model is designed to reflect the dynamics of interest earning assets, interest bearing liabilities and off-balance sheet financial instruments. These simulations utilize both instantaneous and parallel changes in the level of interest rates, as well as gradual and non-parallel changes such as changing slopes and twists of the yield curve. Static simulation models are based on current exposures and assume a constant balance sheet with no growth. By estimating the effects of interest rate increases and decreases, the model can reveal approximate interest rate risk exposure. The simulation model is used by management to gauge approximate results given a specific change in interest rates at a given point in time. The model is therefore a tool to indicate earnings trends in given interest rate scenarios and does not indicate actual expected results.
At December 31, 2021, our EAR static simulation results indicated that our balance sheet is asset sensitive to parallel shifts in interest rates. This indicates that our assets generally reprice faster than our liabilities, which results in a favorable impact to net interest income when market interest rates increase and an unfavorable impact to net interest income when market interest rates decline. Many assumptions are used to calculate the impact of interest rate fluctuations on our net interest income, such as asset prepayments, non-maturity deposit price sensitivity, and key rate drivers. Because of the inherent use of these estimates and assumptions in the model, our actual results may, and most likely will, differ from our static EAR results. In addition, static EAR results do not include actions that our management may undertake to manage the risks in response to anticipated changes in interest rates or client behavior. For example, as part of our asset/liability management strategy, management has the ability to increase asset duration and/or decrease liability duration in order to reduce asset sensitivity, or to decrease asset duration and/or increase liability duration in order to increase asset sensitivity.
The following table illustrates the results of our EAR analysis to determine the extent to which our net interest income over the next 12 months would change if prevailing interest rates increased or decreased by the specified amounts.
Liquidity Risk Management
Liquidity risk is the risk that we will be unable to meet our obligations as they become due because of an inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding. To manage liquidity risk, management has established a comprehensive management process for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling liquidity risk. Because of its critical importance to the viability of the Bank, liquidity risk management is fully integrated into our risk management processes. Critical elements of our liquidity risk management include: effective corporate governance consisting of oversight by the board of directors and active involvement by management; appropriate strategies, policies, procedures, and limits used to manage and mitigate liquidity risk; comprehensive liquidity risk measurement and monitoring systems (including assessments of the current and prospective cash flows or sources and uses of funds) that are commensurate with the complexity and business activities of the Bank; active management of intraday liquidity and collateral; an appropriately diverse mix of existing and potential future funding sources; adequate levels of highly liquid marketable securities free of legal, regulatory, or operational impediments, that can be used to meet liquidity needs in stressful situations; comprehensive contingency funding plans that sufficiently address potential adverse liquidity events and emergency cash flow requirements; and internal controls and internal audit processes sufficient to determine the adequacy of the institution’s liquidity risk management process.
The role of liquidity management is to ensure funds are available to meet depositors’ withdrawal and borrowers’ credit demands while at the same time optimizing financial results within our corporate guidelines. This is accomplished by balancing changes in demand for funds with changes in the supply of those funds. Liquidity is provided by short-term liquid assets that can be converted to cash, investment securities available-for-sale, various lines of credit available to us, and the ability to attract funds from external sources, principally deposits.
Our most liquid assets are comprised of cash and due from banks, available-for-sale marketable investment securities and federal funds sold. The fair value of the available-for-sale investment portfolio was $459.4 million at December 31, 2021. We pledge portions of our investment securities portfolio to secure public fund deposits, derivative positions and Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances. At December 31, 2021, total investment securities pledged for these purposes comprised 41% of the estimated fair value of the entire investment portfolio, leaving $272.5 million of unpledged securities.
We have a large base of non-maturity customer deposits, defined as demand, savings, and money market deposit accounts. At December 31, 2021, such deposits totaled $2.3 billion and represented 86% of our total deposits.
Other sources of funds available to meet daily needs include FHLB advances. As a member of the FHLB of Cincinnati, the Company has access to credit products offered by the FHLB. At December 31, 2021, available credit from the FHLB totaled $154.4 million. Additionally, we had available credit from the Federal Reserve of $244.8 million and available federal funds purchased lines with correspondent banks totaling $145.0 million at December 31, 2021.
The principal source of cash for CapStar Financial is dividends paid to it as the sole shareholder of the Bank. At December 31, 2021, the Bank was able to pay up to $82.5 million in dividends to CapStar Financial without regulatory approval subject to the ongoing capital requirements of the Bank.
Accordingly, management believes that our funding sources are at sufficient levels to satisfy our short-term and long-term liquidity needs.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents additional information about contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, which by their terms have contractual maturity and termination dates subsequent to December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our clients. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets. Most of these commitments mature within two years and are expected to expire without being drawn upon. Standby letters of credit as well as commitments to extend credit are included in the determination of the amount of risk-based capital that the Company and the Bank are required to hold.
We enter into contractual loan commitments to extend credit, normally with fixed expiration dates or termination clauses, at specified rates and for specific purposes. Substantially all of our commitments to extend credit are contingent upon clients maintaining specific credit standards until the time of loan funding.
Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a client to a third party. In the event that the client does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek recovery from the client. Our policies generally require that standby letter of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants similar to those contained in loan agreements.
We minimize our exposure to loss under loan commitments and standby letters of credit by subjecting them to the same credit approval and monitoring procedures as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. We assess the credit risk associated with certain commitments to extend credit and establish a liability for probable credit losses. The effect on our revenue, expenses, cash flows and liquidity of the unused portions of these commitments cannot be reasonably predicted because there is no guarantee that the lines of credit will be used.
Our off-balance sheet arrangements are summarized in the following table for the periods indicated.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Report includes the following financial measures that have been prepared other than in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“non-GAAP financial measures”): tangible common equity, tangible common equity to total tangible assets, tangible common equity per share and allowance for loan losses plus fair value purchase accounting marks to non-PPP loans. The Company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures (i) provide useful information to management and investors that is supplementary to its financial condition, results of operations and cash flows computed in accordance with GAAP, (ii) enable a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting the Company’s business, and (iii) allow investors to evaluate the Company’s performance in a manner similar to management, the financial services industry, bank stock analysts and bank regulators; however, the Company acknowledges that its non-GAAP financial measures have a number of limitations. As such, you should not view these disclosures as a substitute for results determined in accordance with GAAP, and they are not necessarily comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that other companies use.
The following table presents a reconciliation of tangible common equity, tangible common equity to total tangible assets and tangible book value per share of common stock to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
The following table presents a reconciliation of allowance for loan losses plus fair value purchase accounting marks to non-PPP loans for the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1 to the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in this Report.
Impact of Inflation
The consolidated financial statements and related consolidated financial data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and practices within the banking industry which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on a financial institution's performance than the effects of general levels of inflation.