ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and the “Forward-Looking Statements” included in this Annual Report for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Our Company
We are a diversified industrial growth company with a strategic focus on providing niche, value-added products in the end markets we serve. We operate in three business segments: Contractor Solutions, Engineered Building Solutions and Specialized Reliability Solutions. Our products include mechanical products for heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration ("HVAC/R"), grilles, registers and diffusers ("GRD"), building safety solutions and high-performance specialty lubricants and sealants. End markets that we serve include HVAC/R, architecturally-specified building products, plumbing, energy, rail, mining and general industrial. Our manufacturing operations are concentrated in the United States (“U.S.”), Canada and Vietnam, and we have distribution operations in the U.S., Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom (“U.K.”). Our products are sold directly to end users or through designated channels in over 100 countries around the world, primarily including Australia, Canada, the U.K. and the U.S.
Many of our products are used to protect the capital assets of our customers that are expensive to repair or replace and are critical to their operations. We have a source of recurring revenue from the maintenance, repair and overhaul and consumable nature of many of our products. We also provide some custom engineered products that strengthen and enhance our customer relationships. The reputation of our product portfolio is built on more than 100 well-respected brand names, such as RectorSeal No. 5®, Kopr-Kote®, KATS Coatings®, Safe-T-Switch®, Air Sentry®, Deacon®, Leak Freeze®, Greco® and TRUaire® and Shoemaker ManufacturingTM.
Drawing on our innovative and proven technologies, we seek to deliver solutions primarily to our professional end-use customers that place a premium on superior performance and reliability. We believe our brands are well-known in the specific end markets we serve and have a reputation for high quality. We rely on both organic growth and inorganic growth through acquisitions to provide an increasingly broad portfolio of performance optimizing solutions that meet our customers’ ever-changing needs. We have a successful record of making attractive, synergistic acquisitions in support of this objective, and we remain focused on identifying additional acquisition opportunities in our core end markets.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its resulting impacts had an overall negative impact on our financial results in our prior fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. During our current fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, the direct impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our consolidated operating results was limited, in all material respects, to our operations in Vietnam. In early August 2021, the Vietnamese government mandated numerous restrictions in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including closures of non-essential businesses, limitations on movements of individuals, and the imposition of other highly-restrictive measures for businesses, like ours, that continued operations in compliance with the restrictions. Our Vietnam operations began resuming normal production activities in late November 2021, when the Vietnamese government-mandated restrictions began to ease. Regarding our operations generally, the indirect impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in material and freight cost inflation, supply chain disruptions and freight delays, driven by numerous factors including countermeasures taken by U.S. federal, state and/or local governments and the Federal Reserve, labor supply shortages, and recovering demand. We expect material and freight cost volatility, supply chain challenges and freight delays to continue in the near-term, and we are addressing these impacts through focused inventory management and by continuing and increasing the pricing initiatives that began in the three months ended March 31, 2021.
While the COVID-19 pandemic and its indirect effects have contributed to increased demand in certain parts of our business, including the HVAC/R end market, we expect customer demand levels and our overall results of operations and financial condition to have some level of volatility through the duration of the pandemic when compared to pre-pandemic periods. Despite strong demand in certain of our end markets and clear signs of recovery in others, we cannot reasonably estimate the magnitude or length of the pandemic’s direct and indirect adverse impact, including its ultimate impact on our business or financial condition, due to continued uncertainty regarding (1) the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, including any surges due to variants and (2) the continued potential for short and long-term impacts on our facilities and employees, customer demand and supply chain.
We are closely monitoring the Russian invasion of Ukraine and its global impacts. We have no operations, employees or assets in Russia, Belarus or Ukraine, nor do we source goods or services of any material amount from those countries, whether directly or indirectly. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, we had no sales into Belarus or Ukraine and our sales into Russia were immaterial to both our consolidated sales and the sales for our Specialized Reliability Solutions segment. Additionally, shortly after the Russian invasion of Ukraine began in February 2022, we indefinitely suspended all business activity in Russia. While the conflict continues to evolve and the outcome remains highly uncertain, we do not currently believe the Russia-Ukraine conflict will have a material impact on our business and results of operations. However, if the Russia-Ukraine conflict continues or worsens, leading to greater global economic or political disruptions and uncertainty, our business and results of operations could be materially impacted as a result.
Business Developments
On December 15, 2021, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Shoemaker Manufacturing, LLC (“Shoemaker”), based in Cle Elum, Washington, for an aggregate purchase price of $43.5 million, including preliminary working capital and closing cash adjustments and expected contingent consideration. Shoemaker offers high-quality customizable GRD for commercial and residential markets, and expands CSWI’s HVAC/R product offering and regional exposure in the northwest U.S. The aggregate purchase price was comprised of cash consideration of $38.5 million, 25,483 shares of the Company's common stock valued at $3.0 million at transaction close and additional contingent consideration of up to $2.0 million based on Shoemaker meeting a defined financial target during the quarter ended March 31, 2022, which was achieved. Shoemaker activity has been included in our Contractor Solutions segment since the acquisition date.
On April 1, 2021, Whitmore Manufacturing, LLC (“Whitmore”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of CSWI, completed the formation of a joint venture with Pennzoil-Quaker State Company dba SOPUS products (“Shell”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Shell Oil Company that comprises Shell’s U.S. lubricants business. The formation was consummated through a transaction in which Whitmore sold to Shell a 50% interest in a wholly-owned subsidiary (containing certain existing operating assets) in exchange for consideration of $13.4 million from Shell in the form of cash ($5.3 million) and intangible assets ($8.1 million). The Whitmore JV has been consolidated into the operations of the Company and its activity has been included in our Specialized Reliability Solutions segment since the formation date.
On December 15, 2020, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of T.A. Industries, Inc. (“TRUaire”), a leading manufacturer of grilles, registers, and diffusers for the residential and commercial HVAC/R end market, based in Santa Fe Springs, California. The acquisition also included TRUaire’s wholly-owned manufacturing facility based in Vietnam. The acquisition extended the Company’s product offerings to the HVAC market and provided strategic distribution facilities. The consideration paid for TRUaire included cash of $288.0 million and 849,852 shares of the Company’s common stock. The cash consideration was funded through a combination of cash on hand and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, and 849,852 shares of common stock were reissued from treasury shares. TRUaire activity has been included in our Contractor Solutions segment since the acquisition date.
During the third quarter of the fiscal year ended March 31, 2018, we committed to a plan to divest our Strathmore Products business (the "Coatings business"). As a result, we reclassified the assets comprising that business to assets held-for-sale, and made a corresponding adjustment to our consolidated statements of operations to reflect discontinued operations for all periods presented. During the quarter ended September 30, 2018, we received an aggregate of $6.9 million for the sale of assets that related to our Coatings business in multiple transactions. During the quarter ended March 31, 2020, we received $1.5 million for the sale of the last remaining real property owned by our former Coatings business. The discontinued operation have had no activities since the year ended March 31, 2020.
Segment Realignment
Beginning with the quarter ended June 30, 2021, we revised our segment structure to align with how our chief operating decision maker (who was determined to be our Chief Executive Officer) views our business, assesses performance and allocates resources to our business components. This segment structure revision became effective on April 1, 2021, and followed the completion of various strategic transactions including the acquisition of TRUaire and the formation of the Whitmore JV. Refer to Accounting Policies in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
As a result of the business segment revision, reclassification of certain prior year financial information has been made to conform with the current period's presentation. None of the changes impact the Company's previously reported consolidated net revenue, operating income, net income or net income per share. Refer to Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information on the Company's segment realignment.
Change in Accounting Principle
In connection with the integration of TRUaire and the Whitmore JV, the Company voluntarily changed its method of accounting for certain domestic inventory previously valued by the last-in, first-out ("LIFO") method to the first-in, first-out ("FIFO") method during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022. The FIFO method of accounting for inventory is preferable because it improves the Company's comparability with the industry peers, the majority of which use the FIFO method as the primary inventory valuation method, conforms the Company's entire inventory to a single method of accounting and aligns the inventory cost flow assumption with the physical flow of goods. All prior periods presented have been retrospectively adjusted to apply the new method of accounting. Refer to Note 1 and Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for more information related to the change in inventory accounting method.
Our Markets
HVAC/R
The HVAC/R market is our largest market served and it represented approximately 53% and 42% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We provide an extensive array of products for installation, repair and maintenance of HVAC/R systems that includes condensate switches, pans and pumps, grilles, registers and diffusers ("GRD"), refrigerant caps, line set covers and other chemical and mechanical products. The industry is driven by replacement and repair of existing HVAC/R systems, as well as new construction projects. New HVAC/R systems are heavily influenced by macro trends, while replacement and repair of existing HVAC/R systems are dependent on weather and age of unit. The HVAC/R market tends to be seasonal with the peak sales season beginning in March and continuing through August. Construction and repair is typically performed by contractors, and we utilize our global distribution network to drive sales of our brands to such contractors.
Architecturally-Specified Building Products
Architecturally-specified building products represented approximately 19% and 27% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We manufacture and sell products such as engineered railings, smoke and fire protection systems, expansion joints and stair edge nosings for end use customers including multi-family residential buildings, educational facilities or institutions, warehouses, construction companies, plant maintenance customers, building contractors and repair service companies. Sales of these products are driven by architectural specifications and safety codes. The sales process is typically long as these can be multi-year construction projects. The construction market, both commercial and multi-family, is a key driver for sales of architecturally-specified building products.
Plumbing
The plumbing market represented approximately 9% and 10% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We provide many products to the plumbing industry including thread sealants, solvent cements, fire-stopping products, condensate switches and trap guards, as well as other mechanical products, such as drain traps. Installation is typically performed by contractors, and we utilize our global distribution network to drive sales of our products to contractors.
General Industrial
The general industrial end market represented approximately 7% and 10% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We provide products focused on asset protection and reliability, including lubricants, desiccant breathers and fluid management products. The general industrial market includes the manufacture of chemicals, steel, cement, food and beverage, pulp and paper and a wide variety of other processed materials. We serve this market primarily through a network of distributors. The growth trajectory of the general industrial end market is expected to reflect a blended average of the aforementioned end use markets.
Energy
The energy market represented approximately 6% and 4% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We provide market-leading lubricants and anti-seize compounds, as well as greases, for use in oilfield drilling activity and maintenance of oilfield drilling and valve related equipment. We sell our products primarily through
distributors that are strategically situated near the major oil and gas producing areas across the globe. The outlook for the energy industry is heavily dependent on the global demand expectations from developed and emerging economies, as well as oil price and local government policies relative to oil exploration, drilling, storage and transportation.
Rail
The rail market represented approximately 3% and 4% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We provide an array of products into the rail industry, including lubricants and lubricating devices for rail lines, which increase efficiency, reduce noise and extend the life of rail equipment such as rails and wheels. We leverage our technical expertise to build relationships with key decision-makers to ensure our products meet required specifications. We sell our products primarily through a direct sales force, as well as through distribution partners. End markets for Rail include Class 1 Rail as the primary end market in North America and Transit Rail as the primary end market in all other geographies. Cyclical product classes such as farm products and petrochemical products can impact volumes in Class 1 Rail. While coal transport is diminishing demand for Class 1 Rail in North America, global investment in Transit Rail systems is expected to more than offset this decline.
Mining
The mining market represented approximately 3% and 3% of our net revenues in the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Across the globe, we provide market-leading lubricants to open gears used in large mining excavation equipment, primarily through direct sales agents, as well as a network of strategic distributors. The North American mining industry is heavily weighted toward coal production and has experienced headwinds due to continued decline in domestic coal demand, partially mitigated by the seaborne coal export market. Globally, coal demand has been robust, and focused efforts in coal markets outside of the U.S., coupled with enhanced focus on markets such as iron, gold, diamonds and uranium in Southeast Asia, South America, and Africa have delivered growth that has generally offset the weakness in North American coal demand. Outside of coal, the mining market tends to move with global industrial output as basic industrial metals such as copper, tin, aluminum, and zinc, which are critical inputs to many industrial products.
Our Outlook
We expect to maintain a strong balance sheet in fiscal year 2023, which provides us with access to capital through our cash on hand, internally-generated cash flow and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility. Our capital allocation strategy continues to guide our investing decisions, with a priority to direct capital to the highest risk adjusted return opportunities, within the categories of organic growth, strategic acquisitions and the return of cash to shareholders through our share repurchase and dividend programs. With the strength of our financial position, we will continue to invest in financially and strategically attractive expanded product offerings, key elements of our long-term strategy of targeting long-term profitable growth. We will continue to invest our capital in maintaining our facilities and in continuous improvement initiatives. We recognize the importance of, and remain committed to, continuing to drive organic growth, as well as investing additional capital in opportunities with attractive risk-adjusted returns, driving increased penetration in the end markets we serve.
We remain disciplined in our approach to acquisitions, particularly as it relates to our assessment of valuation, prospective synergies, diligence, cultural fit and ease of integration, especially in light of the economic conditions due to the pandemic.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion provides an analysis of our consolidated results of operations and results for each of our segments.
The operations of Shoemaker have been included in our consolidated results of operations and in the operating results of our Contractor Solutions segment since December 15, 2021, the effective date of the acquisition. The operations of TRUaire have been included in our consolidated results of operations and in the operating results of our Contractor Solutions segment since December 15, 2020, the effective date of the acquisition. The operations of Petersen Metals, Inc. ("Petersen") have been included in our consolidated results of operations and in the operating results of our Engineered Building Solutions segment since April 2, 2019, the effective date of the acquisition. All acquisitions are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Net Revenues
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $207.2 million, or 49.4%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the acquisitions of TRUaire and Shoemaker ($103.2 million or 24.6%). Excluding the impact of acquisitions, organic sales increased $104.0 million or 24.8% from the prior year due to implemented pricing initiatives and increased sales volumes. Pricing initiatives, which began in the three months ended March 31, 2021 to mitigate rising costs, continued and increased during the current year. Sales volumes increased in all end markets including HVAC/R, energy, plumbing, mining, rail, architecturally-specified building products and general industrial.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $33.3 million, or 8.6%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the December 15, 2020 acquisition of TRUaire ($33.8 million or 8.8%). Excluding the acquisition impact, the organic sales remained relatively flat from the prior year with a slight sales decrease ($0.5 million or 0.1%) primarily due to decreased sales into general industrial, energy, rail and mining end markets, mostly offset by increased sales volumes into the HVAC/R and architecturally-specified building products end markets. Although the energy and mining end markets decreased over the prior fiscal year, those decreases occurred during the first nine months of the fiscal year, while the fourth fiscal quarter showed improvements as compared with the same period in the prior year. The plumbing end market experienced growth in the fourth fiscal quarter as compared with the same period in the prior year, offsetting the slight decreases in the first nine months of the fiscal year.
Net revenues into the Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa ("EMEA") and the Asia Pacific regions for the year ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 are presented below. The presentation of net revenues by geographic region is based on the location of the customer. For additional information regarding net revenues by geographic region, see Note 20 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin
*Years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 amounts have been adjusted to reflect the change in inventory accounting method, as described in Notes 1 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Gross profit for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $71.4 million, or 38.7%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the acquisitions of TRUaire and Shoemaker, pricing initiatives and increased
organic sales. Gross profit margin for the year ended March 31, 2022 of 40.9% decreased from 44.0% for the year ended March 31, 2021, primarily due to the inclusions of the TRUaire and Shoemaker acquisitions, material and freight costs increases outpacing implemented pricing initiatives and $1.7 million of under-absorption costs resulting from reduced production levels and incremental compensation expenses incurred at the TRUaire Vietnam facility during the year to maintain TRUaire Vietnam's operations in accordance with COVID-19 restrictions ("TRUaire Vietnam COVID COGS Impact").
Gross profit for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $7.7 million, or 4.4%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the TRUaire acquisition, partially offset by decreased gross margin and an $0.8 million gain on sales of property, plant and equipment in the prior year that did not recur. Gross profit margin for the year ended March 31, 2021 of 44.0% decreased from 45.8% for the year ended March 31, 2020, primarily due to the TRUaire acquisition, including a $3.5 million purchase accounting impact and increased freight and transportation costs in the fourth fiscal quarter.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $33.3 million, or 26.5%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the added expenses related to the inclusion of TRUaire, Shoemaker and the Whitmore JV in the current period, increased equity compensation expenses and increased spending on sales commissions driven by increased revenues, increased depreciation expenses related to enterprise resource planning systems, increased headcount, increased travel and $0.7 million of transaction expenses related to the Shoemaker acquisition. The increases were partially offset by transactions expenses related to the TRUaire acquisition ($7.8 million) and JV formation ($2.6 million) incurred in the prior year period that did not recur. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of sales was primarily attributable to sales increasing by a greater percentage than the increase in operating expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $14.3 million, or 12.9%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to transaction expenses related to the TRUaire acquisition ($7.8 million) and the formation of Whitmore JV ($2.6 million), the inclusion of TRUaire's operations and employee severance costs ($0.7 million), partially offset by reduced spend on travel and entertainment expenses and a trademark impairment ($1.0 million) in the prior year that did not recur. The increase in operating expense as a percentage of sales was primarily attributable to transaction expenses discussed above.
Operating Income
*Years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 amounts have been adjusted to reflect the change in inventory accounting method, as described in Notes 1 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased by $38.2 million, or 64.4%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was a result of the $71.4 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by the $33.3 million increase in selling, general and administrative expense as discussed above.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased by $6.6 million, or 10.1%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was a result of $14.3 million increase in selling, general and administrative expense as discussed above, partially offset by the $7.7 million increase in gross profit.
Other income and expense
Interest expense, net for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $3.1 million to $5.4 million as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021, due to increased borrowing under our Revolving Credit Facility (described in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report) in connection with the TRUaire and Shoemaker acquisitions.
Interest expense, net for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $1.1 million to $2.4 million as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020, primarily due to increased borrowing under our Revolving Credit Facility (described in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report) in connection with the TRUaire acquisition.
Other expense, net decreased by $5.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2022 to expense of $0.5 million as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to a prior year indemnification expense of $5.0 million arising from the partial release of a tax indemnification asset related to the TRUaire acquisition that did not recur.
Other expense, net decreased by $1.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 to expense of $6.0 million as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an indemnification expense of $5.0 million due to the partial release of a tax indemnification asset related to the TRUaire acquisition and loss arising from transactions in currencies other than our sites' functional currencies, entirely offset by a charge of $6.5 million resulting from the termination of our U.S. defined benefit pension plan and a lease termination cost of $0.5 million in the prior year that did not recur.
Provision for Income Taxes and Effective Tax Rate
The provision for income taxes for the year ended March 31, 2022 was $24.1 million, representing an effective tax rate of 26.4%, as compared with the provision of $10.8 million, representing an effective tax rate of 21.2%, for the year ended March 31, 2021 and the provision of $12.7 million, representing an effective tax rate of 22.2%, for the year ended March 31, 2020. As compared with the statutory rate for the year ended March 31, 2022, the provision for income taxes was primarily impacted by the state tax expense (net of federal benefits), which increased the provision by $4.8 million and the effective rate by 5.2%; executive compensation limitation, which increased the provision by $1.0 million and effective tax rate by 1.1% and a net increase in the reserve for uncertain tax positions, which increased the provision by $0.8 million and the effective tax rate by 0.8%. This was offset by tax benefits related to the restricted stock vesting which decreased the provision by $1.9 million and the effective tax rate by 2.1%.
As compared with the statutory rate for the year ended March 31, 2021, the provision for income taxes was primarily impacted by the state tax expense, which increased the provision by $2.4 million and the effective rate by 4.8%, the additional non-deductible expenses, which increased the provision by $1.9 million and the effective rate by 2.1%, and the release of uncertain tax positions, which decreased the provision by $4.7 million and the effective rate by 9.3%.
During the year ended March 31, 2022, we released a $0.3 million reserve related to positions taken on tax returns for which the statute has expired, and accrued interest and penalties of $0.6 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded total tax contingency reserves of $17.3 million, including unrecognized tax benefit of $13.6 million, accrued interest and penalty of $1.4 million and $2.3 million, respectively, through purchase accounting as a result of the TRUaire acquisition discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, a tax benefit of $5.3 million, including release of accrued interest ($0.6 million) and penalty ($0.6 million), was recognized through the income statement as a result of receiving the audit closing letter from Internal Revenue Service related to calendar 2017. For the year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded an additional net tax contingency reserve of $0.2 million, accrued interest of $0.1 million and accrued penalty of $0.2 million.
Our federal income tax returns for the years ended March 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 remain subject to examination. Our income tax returns for TRUaire's pre-acquisition periods including calendar years 2018, 2019 and 2020 remain subject to examinations. Our income tax returns in certain state income tax jurisdictions remain subject to examination for various periods for the period ended September 30, 2015 and subsequent years.
As of both March 31, 2022 and 2021, we had no tax effected net operating loss carryforwards, net of valuation allowances. Net operating loss carryforwards will expire in periods beyond the next 5 years.
Business Segments
We conduct our operations through three business segments based on type of product and how we manage the business. We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on each segment’s operating income. The key operating results for our three business segments are discussed below.
Contractor Solutions Segment Results
The Contractor Solutions segment manufactures efficiency and performance enhancing products predominantly for residential and commercial HVAC/R, plumbing, architecturally-specified building and general industrial applications, which are designed primarily for professional end-use customers.
*Years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 amounts have been adjusted to reflect the change in inventory accounting method, as described in Notes 1 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $171.0 million, or 69.6%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the TRUaire and Shoemaker acquisitions ($103.2 million or 42.0%). Excluding the impact of acquisitions, organic sales increased by $67.8 million, or 27.6%, due to implemented pricing initiatives and increased sales volumes. Pricing initiatives to mitigate rising costs, which began in the three months ended March 31, 2021, continued and increased during the year ended March 31, 2022. Sales volumes increased in HVAC/R, plumbing and architecturally-specified building products end markets and decreased in general industrial end market.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $54.8 million, or 28.8%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the TRUaire acquisition ($33.8 million or 17.7%) and organic sales increases ($21.0 million or 11.1%) driven by increased sales volumes into the HVAC/R, general industrial, architecturally-specified building products and plumbing end markets.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $37.1 million, or 62.9%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the inclusion of TRUaire and the transactions expenses ($7.8 million) related to the TRUaire acquisition incurred in prior year that did not recur, partially offset by the transaction expenses ($0.7 million) in the current year related to the Shoemaker acquisition. The organic sales growth contributed to the increased operating income, which was partially offset by increased material and freight costs, the $1.7 million TRUaire Vietnam COVID COGS Impact discussed above and increased spending on sales commissions, depreciation and optimization expenses related to enterprise resource planning systems, headcount and travel.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $0.8 million, or 1.3%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to transaction expenses related to the TRUaire acquisition ($7.8 million), partially offset by increased revenues.
Engineered Building Solutions Segment Results
The Engineered Building Solutions segment provides primarily code-driven products focused on life safety that are engineered to provide aesthetically-pleasing solutions for the construction, refurbishment and modernization of commercial, institutional, and multi-family residential buildings.
*Years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 amounts have been adjusted to reflect the change in inventory accounting method, as described in Notes 1 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $1.6 million, or 1.7%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to enhanced marketing efforts and market share gains.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 increased $4.8 million, or 5.3%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the successful execution of a large-scale project and project wins due to competitive lead times.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2022 decreased $3.0 million, or 21.1%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease was due to a shift in sales to lower margin projects and added salespeople to achieve long-term revenue growth objectives.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased $0.2 million, or 1.5%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was due to a shift in sales to lower margin projects.
Specialized Reliability Solutions Segment Results
Specialized Reliability Solutions segment provides long-established products for increasing the reliability, performance and lifespan of industrial assets and solving equipment maintenance challenges.
*Years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 amounts have been adjusted to reflect the change in inventory accounting method, as described in Notes 1 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $37.7 million, or 48.1%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to demand recovery in the energy, mining and rail and general industrial end markets, pricing initiatives to mitigate rising costs that began in the three months ended June 30, 2021 and continued throughout the current year, as well as the inclusion of the newly formed Whitmore JV.
Net revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased $26.3 million, or 25.1%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales volumes into the general industrial, energy, rail and mining end markets.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2022 increased $8.4 million, or 1,451.5%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to increased organic sales and the Whitmore JV, partially offset by increased material expenses outpacing implemented price increases, increased spending on sales commissions driven by increased sales and increased travel expense.
Operating income for the year ended March 31, 2021 decreased $7.1 million, or 92.5%, as compared with the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales and $2.6 million of transaction expenses related to the formation of Whitmore JV, partially offset by decreases in travel and personnel-related expenses and sales commissions.
For additional information on segments, see Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
Existing cash on hand, cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Facility ("Revolver Borrowings") are our primary sources of short-term liquidity. Our ability to consistently generate strong cash flow from our operations is one of our most significant financial strengths; it enables us to invest in our people and our brands, make capital investments and strategic acquisitions, provide a cash dividend program, and from time-to-time, repurchase shares of our common stock. Our largest use of cash in our operations is for purchasing and carrying inventories and carrying seasonal accounts receivable. Additionally, we use our Revolver Borrowings to support our working capital requirements, capital expenditures and strategic acquisitions. We seek to maintain adequate liquidity to meet working capital requirements, fund capital expenditures, and repay scheduled principal and interest payments on debt. Absent deterioration of market conditions, we believe that cash flows from operating and financing activities, primarily Revolver Borrowings, will provide adequate resources to satisfy our working capital, scheduled principal and interest payments on debt, anticipated dividend payments, periodic share repurchases, and anticipated capital expenditure requirements for both our short-term and long-term capital needs.
Cash Flow Analysis
*Years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 amounts have been adjusted to reflect the change in inventory accounting method, as described in Notes 1 and 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our cash balance at March 31, 2022 was $16.6 million, as compared with $10.1 million at March 31, 2021.
For the year ended March 31, 2022, our cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations was $69.1 million, as compared with $66.3 million and $71.4 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Working capital used cash for the year ended March 31, 2022 due to higher inventories ($49.4 million) and higher accounts receivable ($26.7 million), partially offset by higher accounts payable and other current liabilities ($28.0 million) and lower prepaid expenses and other current assets ($3.5 million).
•Working capital used cash for the year ended March 31, 2021 due to higher accounts receivable ($7.2 million), higher prepaid expenses and other current assets ($4.2 million), and higher inventories ($3.4 million), partially offset by higher accounts payable and other current liabilities ($13.9 million).
•Working capital provided cash for the year ended March 31, 2020 due to higher accounts payable and other current liabilities ($5.9 million) and lower prepaid expenses and other assets ($4.0 million), mostly offset by higher accounts receivable ($8.0 million) and higher inventory ($1.7 million).
Cash flows used in investing activities from continuing operations during the year ended March 31, 2022 were $51.5 million as compared with $289.9 million and $22.0 million for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Capital expenditures during the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $15.7 million, $8.8 million and $11.4 million, respectively. Our capital expenditures have been focused on enterprise resource planning systems, capacity expansion, continuous improvement and automation and new product introductions
•During the year ended March 31, 2022 we acquired Shoemaker for an aggregate purchase price of $43.5 million, including $38.5 million in cash consideration. Additionally, we received proceeds of $1.4 million as a result of the final working capital true-up adjustment related to the TRUaire acquisition. During the year ended March 31, 2021 we acquired TRUaire for $286.9 million (after working capital adjustment) in cash consideration and stock consideration valued at $97.7 million. During the year ended March 31, 2020 we acquired Petersen for $11.8 million as discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities during the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $(13.0) million, $214.0 million and $(57.2) million, respectively. Cash outflows resulted from:
•Net borrowing (repayments) on our lines of credit (as discussed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report) of $10.4 million, $231.4 million and $(20.6) million during the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Payments of $2.3 million of underwriting discounts and fees in connection with amending and extending our Revolving Credit Facility during the year ended March 31, 2022, as discussed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
•Proceeds from the redeemable noncontrolling interest shareholder for its investment in the consolidated Whitmore JV of $6.3 million during the year ended March 31, 2022, as discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
•Repurchases of shares under our share repurchase programs (as discussed in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report) of $14.4 million, $7.3 million and $26.9 million during the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•Dividend payments of $9.5 million, $8.1 million and $8.1 million were paid during the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We believe that available cash and cash equivalents, cash flows generated through operations and cash available under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs, including capital expenditures, for at least the next 12 months.
Acquisitions
We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities of various sizes. The cost and terms of any financing to be raised in conjunction with any acquisition, including our ability to raise capital, is a critical consideration in any such evaluation. During the year ended March 31, 2022, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Shoemaker Manufacturing, LLC (“Shoemaker”). The aggregate cash paid for the Shoemaker acquisition, net of cash acquired, totaled $37.3 million and was funded through a combination of cash on hand and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of our acquisitions.
Debt
Out short-term debt obligation consists of the current maturity of our Whitmore Term Loan in the amount of $0.6 million. Our long-term debt obligations consist of the final maturity of our Whitmore Term Loan with maturity dates between fiscal 2024 and 2030 and Revolver Borrowings with maturity date in fiscal 2027. As of March 31, 2022, we had $243.0 million in outstanding Revolver Borrowings, which resulted in a borrowing capacity of $157.0 million. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of our indebtedness.
Dividends
Total dividends of $9.5 million were paid during the year ended March 31, 2022. On April 14, 2022, we announced a 13% quarterly dividend increase to $0.170 per share which was paid on May 13, 2022 to shareholders of record as of April 29, 2022. We currently expect to continue to pay a regular quarterly dividend to shareholders in the future, but such payments are subject to approval of our Board of Directors and are dependent upon our financial conditions, results of operations, capital requirements, and other factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. "Risk Factors" of this Annual Report. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of dividends.
Share Repurchase Program
On October 30, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase up to $100.0 million of our common stock, which replaced the previously announced $75.0 million program. During the year ended March 31, 2022, we repurchased 126,115 shares for an aggregate amount of $14.4 million. We primarily used cash on hand to pay for the repurchased shares. Our Board of Directors has established an expiration of December 31, 2022 for the $100.0 million repurchase program and we currently expect to continue to repurchase shares in the near future, but such repurchases are dependent upon our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, and other factors, including those set forth under Item 1A. "Risk Factors" of this Annual Report. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of our share repurchase program.
Capital Expenditures
During the year ended March 31, 2022, we invested $15.7 million in capital expenditures related to enterprise resource planning systems, capacity expansion, continuous improvement and automation and new product introductions. We plan to continue investing in capital expenditures in the future to improve manufacturing productivity, upgrade information technology infrastructure and security and implement advanced technologies for our existing facilities.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of March 31, 2022 primarily included purchase obligations and operating lease commitments. Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, legally binding and specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancellable without penalty. We expect to incur $67.4 million in purchase obligations over the next 12 months. For operating lease commitments, see Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions to determine reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of related contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions are based upon information available at the time of the estimates or assumptions, including our historical experience, where relevant. The most significant estimates made by management include: timing and amount of revenue recognition; deferred taxes and tax reserves; and valuation of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, both at the time of initial acquisition, as well as part of recurring impairment analyses, as applicable. The significant estimates are reviewed at least annually, if not quarterly, by management. Because of the uncertainty of factors surrounding the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements, actual results may differ from the estimates, and the difference may be material.
Our critical accounting policies are those policies that are both most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe that the following represent our critical accounting policies. For a summary of all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. Management and our external auditors have discussed our critical accounting estimates and policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenues to depict the transfer of control of promised goods or services to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Refer to Note 20 for further discussion. We recognize revenue when all of the following criteria have been met: (i) a contract with a customer exists, (ii) performance obligations have been identified, (iii) the price to the customer has been determined, (iv) the price to the customer has been allocated to the performance obligations, and (v) performance obligations are satisfied, which are more fully described below.
(i) We identify a contract with a customer when a sales agreement indicates approval and commitment of the parties; identifies the rights of the parties; identifies the payment terms; has commercial substance; and it is probable that we
will collect the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. In most instances, our contract with a customer is the customer's purchase order. For certain customers, we may also enter into a sales agreement that outlines a framework of terms and conditions that apply to all future purchase orders for that customer. In these situations, our contract with the customer is both the sales agreement and the specific customer purchase order. Because our contract with a customer is typically for a single transaction or customer purchase order, the duration of the contract is one year or less. As a result, we have elected to apply certain practical expedients and, as permitted by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, omit certain disclosures of remaining performance obligations for contracts that have an initial term of one year or less.
(ii) We identify performance obligations in a contract for each promised good or service that is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract and for which the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer. Goods and services provided to our customers that are deemed immaterial are included with other performance obligations.
(iii) We determine the transaction price as the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for fulfilling the performance obligations, including the effects of any variable consideration.
(iv) For any contracts that have more than one performance obligation, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount that depicts the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for satisfying each performance obligation. We have excluded disclosure of the transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations if the performance obligation is part of a contract that has an original expected duration of one year or less as the majority of our contracts are short-term in nature with a term of one year or less.
(v) We recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy the performance obligation in a contract by transferring control of a promised good or service to the customer.
We exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and collected from a customer. As such, we present revenue net of sales and other similar taxes. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight after control over a product has transferred to a customer are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of revenues. Costs to obtain a contract, which include sales commissions recorded in selling, general and administrative expense, are expensed when incurred as the amortization period is one year or less. We do not have customer contracts that include significant financing components.
Deferred Taxes and Tax Reserves
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities, applying enacted tax rates expected to be in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Based on the evaluation of available evidence, both positive and negative, we recognize future tax benefits, such as net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards, to the extent that these benefits are more likely than not to be realized. We base our judgment of the recoverability of our deferred tax assets primarily on historical earnings, our estimate of current and expected future earnings using historical and projected future operating results, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which may result in proposed assessments. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We establish reserves for open tax years for uncertain tax positions that may be subject to challenge by various taxing authorities. The consolidated tax provision and related accruals include the impact of such reasonably estimable losses and related interest and penalties as deemed appropriate. Tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from uncertain tax positions are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. During the year ended March 31, 2022, we released a $0.3 million reserve related to positions taken on tax returns for which the statute has expired, and accrued interest and penalties of $0.6 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
During the year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded total tax contingency reserves of $17.3 million, including unrecognized tax benefit of $13.6 million, accrued interest and penalty of $1.4 million and $2.3 million, respectively, through purchase accounting as a result of the TRUaire acquisition discussed in Note 2. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, a tax benefit of $5.3 million, including release of accrued interest ($0.6 million) and penalty ($0.6 million), was recognized through the income statement as a result of receiving the audit closing letter from Internal Revenue Service related to calendar 2017. For the year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded an additional net tax contingency reserve of $0.2 million, accrued interest of $0.1 million and accrued penalty of $0.2 million. For the year ended March 31, 2020, we released a net $1.4 million reserve, which included settlements of $0.2 million, increases of $0.1 million and a release of $1.3 million in federal uncertain tax positions. The interest and penalties related to the uncertain tax position resulted in a reduction of $0.4 million in income tax expense for the year ended March 31, 2020. Our liability for uncertain tax positions contains uncertainties as management is required to make assumptions and apply judgments to estimate exposures associated with our tax positions.
Our federal income tax returns for the years ended March 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 remain subject to examination. Our income tax returns for TRUaire's pre-acquisition periods including calendar years 2018, 2019 and 2020 remain subject to examinations. Our income tax returns in certain state income tax jurisdictions remain subject to examination for various periods for the period ended September 30, 2015 and subsequent years.
While we believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities. To the extent that the expected tax outcome of these matters changes, such changes in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period in which such determination is made.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
The initial recording of goodwill and intangible assets requires subjective judgements concerning estimates of the fair value of the acquired assets. We test the value of goodwill for impairment as of January 31 each year or whenever events or circumstances indicate such asset may be impaired.
The test for goodwill impairment involves significant judgement in estimating projections of fair value generated through future performance of each of the reporting units. The identification of our reporting units began at the operating segment level and considered whether components one level below the operating segment levels should be identified as reporting units for purpose of testing goodwill for impairment based on certain conditions. These conditions included, among other factors, (i) the extent to which a component represents a business and (ii) the aggregation of economically similar components within the operating segments. Other factors that were considered in determining whether the aggregation of components was appropriate included the similarity of the nature of the products and services, the nature of the production processes, the methods of distribution and the types of industries served.
Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 350 allows an optional qualitative assessment, prior to a quantitative assessment test, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount. We bypassed the qualitative assessment and proceeded directly to the quantitative test. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the goodwill of that reporting unit is impaired and an impairment loss is recorded equal to the excess of the carrying value over its fair value. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units based on an income approach, whereby we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various judgmental assumptions about future sales, operating margins, growth rates and discount rates, which are based on our budgets, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and market participants. Our quantitative test performed as of January 31, 2022 indicated that no goodwill impairment loss should be recognized for the year ended March 31, 2022. There were no impairment loss recognized for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We have indefinite-lived intangible assets in the form of trademarks and license agreements. We test these intangible assets for impairment at least annually as of January 31 or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Significant assumptions used in the impairment test include the discount rate, royalty rate, future sales projections and terminal value growth rate. These inputs are considered non-recurring level three inputs within the fair value hierarchy. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated future cash flows are less than their carrying amount. We recorded impairment losses on intangible assets (excluding those related to discontinued operations) of $0, $0 and $1.0 million for the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS
We have presented the information about accounting pronouncements not yet implemented in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.