Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Carney Technology Acquisition Corp. II. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on August 31, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Placement Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $7,116,098, which included interest earned on cash and marketable securities held in trust account of $103,464, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $8,367,167 and interest income of $3, offset by operating and formation costs of $1,354,536.
For the period from August 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $845,189, which consists of formation and operating costs of $133,396 and transaction costs incurred in connection with our initial public offering of $993,257, offset by interest earned on cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $7,131 and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $274,333.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 14, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 40,250,000 units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 5,250,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $402,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 900,000 placement units at a price of $10.00 per placement unit in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $9,000,000.
Following our initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the placement units, a total of $402,500,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $22,583,792 in transaction costs, including $7,000,000 of underwriting fees, net of reimbursement, $15,137,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $446,292 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $802,930. Net income of $7,116,098 was affected by interest earned on cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $103,464, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $8,367,167 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $551,603 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from August 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $743,500. Net loss of $845,189 was affected by interest earned on cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $7,131, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $274,333, transaction costs incurred in connection with our initial public offering of $993,257, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $610,104 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $402,563,210. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we withdrew $41,674 to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $73,952 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the placement units.
On January 24, 2022, we issued a promissory note in the principal amount of up to $300,000 to our sponsor. This promissory note was issued in connection with advances our sponsor has made, and may make in the future, to us for working capital expenses. If we complete a business combination, we would repay this promissory note out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, this promissory note would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay this promissory note but no proceeds from the trust account would be used to repay this promissory note. At the election of our sponsor, all or a portion of the unpaid principal amount of this promissory note may be converted into our units at a price of $10.00 per unit (the “Conversion Units”). The Conversion Units and their underlying securities are entitled to the registration rights set forth in this promissory note.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until December 14, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after December 14, 2022.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on December 9, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) $0.35 per unit of the gross proceeds of the initial 35,000,000 units sold in our initial public offering, or $12,250,000, and (ii) $0.55 per unit of the gross proceeds from the units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $2,887,500. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40
under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject tore-measurement at each balance sheets date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.