Item 7. Management's Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Strategy
Cintas helps more than one million businesses of all types and sizes, primarily in the U.S., as well as Canada and Latin America, get READY™ to open their doors with confidence every day by providing a wide range of products and services that enhance our customers’ image and help keep their facilities and employees clean, safe and looking their best. With products and services including uniforms, mats, mops, restroom supplies, first aid and safety products, fire extinguishers and testing, and safety training, Cintas helps customers get Ready for the Workday®.
We are North America's leading provider of corporate identity uniforms through rental and sales programs, as well as a significant provider of related business services, including entrance mats, restroom cleaning services and supplies, first aid and safety services and fire protection products and services.
Cintas' principal objective is "to exceed customers' expectations in order to maximize the long-term value of Cintas for shareholders and working partners," and it provides the framework and focus for Cintas' business strategy. This strategy is to achieve revenue growth for all our products and services by increasing our penetration at existing customers and by broadening our customer base to include market segments to which we have not historically served. We will also continue to identify additional product and service opportunities for our current and future customers.
To pursue the strategy of increasing penetration, we have a highly talented and diverse team of service professionals visiting our customers on a regular basis. This frequent contact with our customers enables us to develop close personal relationships. The combination of our distribution system and these strong customer relationships provides a platform from which we launch additional products and services.
We pursue the strategy of broadening our customer base in several ways. Cintas has a national sales organization introducing all its products and services to prospects in all market segments. Our broad range of products and services allows our sales organization to consider any type of business a prospect. We also broaden our customer base through geographic expansion. Finally, we evaluate strategic acquisitions as opportunities arise.
Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations focuses on discussion of fiscal 2022 results compared to fiscal 2021 results. For discussion of fiscal 2021 results compared to fiscal 2020 results, see the "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” within our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, filed with the SEC on July 28, 2021.
Cintas classifies its business into two reportable operating segments and places the remainder of its operating segments in an All Other category. Cintas’ two reportable operating segments are Uniform Rental and Facility Services and First Aid and Safety Services. The Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment consists of the rental and servicing of uniforms and other garments including flame resistant clothing, mats, mops and shop towels and other ancillary items. In addition to these rental items, restroom cleaning services and supplies and the sale of items from our catalogs to our customers on route are included within this reportable operating segment. The First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment consists of first aid and safety products and services. The remainder of Cintas’ business, which consists of the Fire Protection Services operating segment and the Uniform Direct Sale operating segment, is included in All Other. These operating segments consist of fire protection products and services and the direct sale of uniforms and related items. Cintas evaluates operating segment performance based on revenue and income before income taxes. Revenue and income before income taxes for the reportable operating segments for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 are presented in Note 15 entitled Operating Segment Information of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements." The Company regularly reviews its operating segments for reporting purposes based on the information its chief operating decision maker regularly reviews for purposes of allocating resources and assessing performance and makes changes when appropriate.
We have operations throughout the U.S. and Canada and participate in a global supply chain. Since fiscal 2020, the existence of the COVID-19 pandemic, the fear associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the reactions of governments around the world in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to regulate the flow of labor and products and impede the business of our customers, impacted our ability to conduct normal business operations, which had an adverse effect on our business. Many of Cintas' customers were also impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we saw an impact on some customer's ability to pay timely. While there was minimal disruption to our supply chain, Cintas did increase inventory, primarily personal protective equipment and facility services inventory, in response to the customer needs and demand associated with the safety and cleanliness requirements of COVID-19. The increase in inventory resulted in additional inventory reserves during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021. See Note 1 entitled Significant Accounting Policies of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for additional detail on the incremental reserves placed on inventory. The on-going roll out of the COVID-19 vaccines and gradual lifting of COVID-19 restrictions had a positive impact on our business during fiscal 2022. The impact of the on-going COVID-19 pandemic is fluid and continues to evolve, and therefore, we cannot predict the extent to which our business, consolidated results of operations, consolidated financial condition or liquidity will ultimately be impacted.
The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of income data as a percent of revenue by reportable operating segment, All Other and in total for the fiscal years ended May 31:
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Fiscal 2022 total revenue was $7.9 billion, an increase of 10.4% over the prior fiscal year. Revenue increased organically by 10.2% as a result of increased sales volume. Organic growth adjusts for the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Total revenue was positively impacted by 0.1% due primarily to acquisitions and by 0.1% due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
As previously discussed, government enactments of temporary and indefinite closures of certain businesses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact our ability to access and service some of our customers impacted by these mandates during fiscal 2021. The roll out of the COVID-19 vaccines and general lifting of COVID-19 restrictions had a positive impact on our business during fiscal 2022. Due to the constantly changing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, uncertainty remains about the pace of the economic recovery and about its impact on future Cintas consolidated financial results.
Organic revenue growth by quarter for fiscal 2022 is as follows:
Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment revenue consists predominantly of revenue derived from the rental of corporate identity uniforms and other garments, including flame resistant clothing and the rental and/or sale of mats, mops, shop towels, restroom supplies and other rental services. Revenue from the Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment increased 9.4% compared to fiscal 2021 due to an organic growth increase of 9.0%. Revenue growth was positively impacted by 0.2% due primarily to acquisitions and by 0.2% due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Organic revenue growth was a result of new business, the penetration of additional products and services into existing customers, the positive impact from the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions and price increases, partially offset by lost business. New business growth resulted from an increase in the number and productivity of sales representatives. Generally, sales productivity improvements are due to increased tenure and improved training, which produce a higher number of products and services sold.
Other revenue, consisting of revenue from the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment and All Other, increased 14.1% compared to fiscal 2021. Revenue improved from increases in sales representative productivity and from the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions. Revenue increased organically by 14.9%. Revenue growth was negatively impacted by 0.8% due to divestitures.
Cost of uniform rental and facility services increased 11.2% compared to fiscal 2021. Cost of uniform rental and facility services consists primarily of production expenses, delivery expenses and the amortization of in service inventory, including uniforms, mats, shop towels and other ancillary items. The cost of uniform rental and facility services as a percent of revenue increased compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased energy costs and investments in labor to support the increased revenue growth.
Cost of other consists primarily of cost of goods sold (predominantly first aid and safety products, personal protective equipment, uniforms and fire protection products), delivery expenses and distribution expenses in the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment and All Other. Cost of other increased 10.7% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, but decreased as a percent of revenue to 55.7%, compared to 57.3% in fiscal 2021. The improvement in cost of sales as a percent to revenue was primarily due to favorable changes in the sales mix for each of the underlying operating segments, including a decrease in the proportion of sales related to personal protective equipment, which typically have lower gross margins compared to the first aid cabinet sales in the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment.
Selling and administrative expenses increased $115.7 million, to 26.0% as a percent of revenue, compared to 27.1% in fiscal 2021. The improvement as a percent of revenue was primarily due to lower labor expense as a percent of revenue as well as a $12.1 million gain on the sale of certain operating assets and a $30.2 million gain on an equity method investment transaction recorded in fiscal 2022. The impacts from the gains recorded in fiscal 2022 were partially offset by the $22.0 million gain on the sale of certain operating assets recorded in fiscal 2021.
Net interest expense (interest expense less interest income) was $88.6 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $97.7 million in fiscal 2021. The change was primarily due to the replacement of the $250.0 million of senior notes with an interest rate of 4.30% that matured on June 1, 2021, with lower interest rate bearing commercial paper.
Income before income taxes was $1,498.8 million, an increase of $211.0 million, or 16.4%, compared to fiscal 2021. The increase in income before income taxes was primarily due to revenue growth and the decrease in selling and administrative expenses as a percent of revenue in fiscal 2022. Income before income taxes also benefited from the previously mentioned one-time gains recorded in fiscal 2022.
Cintas' effective tax rate on continuing operations was 17.5% for fiscal 2022 compared to 13.7% in fiscal 2021. The effective tax rate in both periods was impacted by certain discrete items, primarily the tax accounting impact for stock-based compensation. In addition, the effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 and 2021 included tax benefits from a gain on an equity method investment transaction in fiscal 2022 and the sale of certain operating assets in both fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Net income from continuing operations for fiscal 2022 of $1,235.8 million was a 11.2% increase compared to fiscal 2021. Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $11.65 was a 13.8% increase compared to fiscal 2021 diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $10.24. Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations increased primarily due to the increase in net income combined with the decrease in diluted weighted average common shares outstanding. The decrease in diluted weighted average common shares outstanding resulted from purchasing an aggregate of approximately 3.7 million shares of common stock under the Board approved share buyback programs during fiscal 2022.
Uniform Rental and Facility Services Reportable Operating Segment
Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment revenue increased $537.3 million, or 9.4%, and the cost of uniform rental and facility services increased $332.9 million, or 11.2%, due to the reasons previously discussed. The reportable operating segment's fiscal 2022 gross margin was 46.7% of revenue compared to 47.6% in fiscal 2021. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to a 50 basis point increase in energy costs and investments in labor to support the increased revenue growth.
Selling and administrative expenses for the Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment increased $76.8 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. Selling and administrative expense as a percent of revenue for fiscal 2022 was 25.0% compared to 26.0% in fiscal 2021. The improvement in selling and administrative expenses as a percent of revenue was primarily due to efficiencies in labor and the previously mentioned one-time gain of $30.2 million on an equity method investment transaction.
Income before income taxes increased $127.7 million to $1,353.5 million for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. Income before income taxes as a percent of revenue at 21.7% increased 20 basis points from 21.5% in fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to the previously discussed improvement in selling and administrative expenses, partially offset by decreases in gross margin as a percent of revenue.
First Aid and Safety Services Reportable Operating Segment
First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment revenue increased $48.2 million in fiscal 2022, a 6.1% increase compared to fiscal 2021. Revenue increased organically by 5.1% as a result of new business and sales productivity increases, penetration of additional products and services into existing customers and sales of personal protective equipment in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue growth was positively impacted by 0.9% due to acquisitions and by 0.1% due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Cost of sales for the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment increased $8.3 million, or 1.8%, in fiscal 2022, primarily due to higher sales volume. Gross margin for the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment is defined as revenue less cost of goods, warehouse expenses and service expenses. Gross margin as a percent of revenue was 44.7% for fiscal 2022 compared to 42.4% in fiscal 2021. The improvement in gross margin as a percentage of revenue in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to a decrease in the proportion of sales related to personal protective equipment, which typically have lower gross margins compared to the first aid cabinet sales.
Selling and administrative expenses for the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment increased by $14.3 million, or 5.7%, in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, and improved as a percent of revenue to 31.9% in fiscal 2022 compared to 32.0% in fiscal 2021. The improvement as a percent of revenue was primarily due to revenue growing at a faster pace than labor and employee-partner related expenses.
Income before income taxes for the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment was $106.8 million in fiscal 2022, an increase of $25.6 million, or 31.5%, compared to fiscal 2021. Income before income taxes as a percent of revenue at 12.8%, increased from 10.4% in fiscal 2021 due to the previously discussed increases, primarily in gross margin.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our cash flows and cash and cash equivalents as of and for the fiscal years ended May 31:
Cash and cash equivalents as of May 31, 2022 and 2021 include $43.1 million and $37.9 million, respectively, that is located outside of the U.S.
Cash flows provided by operating activities have historically supplied us with a significant source of liquidity. We generally use these cash flows to fund most, if not all, of our operations and expansion activities and dividends on our common stock. We may also use cash flows provided by operating activities, as well as proceeds from long-term debt and short-term borrowings, to fund growth and expansion opportunities, as well as other cash requirements such as the repurchase of our common stock and payment of long-term debt.
We expect our cash flows from operating activities to remain sufficient to provide us with adequate levels of liquidity.
In addition, we have access to $2.0 billion of debt capacity from our amended and restated revolving credit facility, the maturity of which was extended on March 23, 2022 until March 23, 2027. We believe the Company has sufficient liquidity to operate in the current business environment. Acquisitions, repurchases of our common stock and dividends remain strategic objectives, but they will be dependent on the economic outlook and liquidity of the Company.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.54 billion for fiscal 2022, which was an increase of $176.9 million, or 13.0%, compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily the result of increased net income which was partially offset by unfavorable changes in working capital, specifically, accounts receivable and uniforms and other rental items in service, which resulted from the growth in revenue. In addition, we had a favorable change in inventories, net, which was the result of a large amount of inventory purchases in the prior fiscal year period related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including sanitizer, sanitizer stands, masks and gloves.
Net cash used in investing activities was $402.6 million in fiscal 2022, compared to $137.2 million in fiscal 2021. Net cash used in investing activities includes capital expenditures, purchases of investments, proceeds from the sale of operating assets and cash paid for acquisitions of businesses. Capital expenditures were $240.7 million and $143.5 million for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. Capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 included $166.6 million for the Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment and $59.7 million for the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment. The increase in capital expenditures from fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2022 was due to an investment in the operating segments to support continued market penetration and revenue growth. Cash paid for acquisitions of businesses, net of cash acquired, was $164.2 million and $10.0 million for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. The acquisitions in both fiscal 2022 and 2021 occurred in our Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment, our First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segment and our Fire Protection operating segment, which is included in All Other. The fiscal 2022 acquisitions also includes the acquisition of the remaining interest of an equity method investment. In fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, investing activities included proceeds of $15.3 million and $31.7 million, respectively, from the sale of certain operating assets, net of cash disposed. Net cash used in investing activities also included $6.1 million and $4.3 million of purchases of investments during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
Net cash used in financing activities was $1,537.9 million for fiscal 2022, compared to $879.9 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in cash used from financing activities from fiscal 2021 is primarily due to the increase in repurchases of common stock in fiscal 2022, offset by the $261.2 million net issuance of commercial paper and the $76.2 million higher dividends paid in fiscal 2021 due to the transition from an annual dividend payment in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 to quarterly dividend payments thereafter. On October 30, 2018, we announced that the Board of Directors authorized a $1.0 billion share buyback program, which was completed during fiscal 2021. On October 29, 2019, we announced the Board of Directors authorized a $1.0 billion share buyback program, which was completed during fiscal 2022. On July 27, 2021, we announced the Board of Directors authorized a new $1.5 billion share buyback program, which does not have an expiration date.
The following table summarizes the buyback activity by program and fiscal year ended May 31:
(1) Shares of Cintas stock acquired for employee payroll taxes due on options exercised and vested restricted stock awards.
In the period subsequent to May 31, 2022 through July 27, 2022, we purchased 0.5 million shares of Cintas common stock at an average price of $396.39 for a total purchase price of $210.8 million. From the inception of the July 27, 2021 share buyback program through July 27, 2022, Cintas has purchased 2.7 million shares of Cintas common stock in the aggregate, at an average price of $385.66, for a total purchase price of $1.0 billion.
Our Board of Directors declared the following dividends during the fiscal years ended May 31:
(1) Beginning October 27, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a change in dividend policy from an annual dividend to quarterly dividends.
(2) The dividends declared on April 12, 2022 and April 13, 2021 were included in current accrued liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet at May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Any future dividend declarations, including the amount of any dividends, are at the discretion of the Board of Directors and dependent upon then-existing conditions, including the Company's consolidated operating results and consolidated financial condition, capital requirements, contractual restrictions, business prospects and other factors that the Board of Directors may deem relevant.
During the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, Cintas issued a net total of $261.2 million of commercial paper. There was no commercial paper outstanding during fiscal 2021. On June 1, 2021, in accordance with the terms of the notes, Cintas paid the $250.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of its 4.30%, 10-year senior notes that matured on that date with cash on hand. On April 1, 2022, in accordance with the terms of the notes, Cintas paid the $650.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of its 2.90%, 5-year senior notes that matured on that date with proceeds from short-term borrowings. On May 1, 2022, Cintas redeemed at par value the $300.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of its 3.25%, 10-year senior notes 30 days in advance of the maturation date with proceeds from short-term borrowings. On May 3, 2022, Cintas issued $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes that bear an interest rate of 3.45% and mature on May 1, 2025. On May 3, 2022, Cintas also issued $800.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes that bear an interest rate of 4.00% and mature on May 1, 2032. The net proceeds from these issuances were utilized for general business purposes, including reducing Cintas’ short-term borrowings.
The following table summarizes Cintas' outstanding debt at May 31:
(1) Variable rate debt instrument. The rate presented is the variable borrowing rate at May 31, 2022.
(2) Cintas assumed these senior notes with the acquisition of G&K Services, Inc. (G&K) in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2017, and they were recorded at fair value. The interest rate shown above is the effective interest rate. The principal amount of these notes is $50.0 million with a stated interest rate of 3.73%.
(3) Cintas assumed these senior notes with the acquisition of G&K in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2017, and they were recorded at fair value. The interest rate shown above is the effective interest rate. The principal amount of these notes is $50.0 million with a stated interest rate of 3.88%.
The credit agreement that supports our commercial paper program was amended and restated on March 23, 2022. The amendment increased the capacity of the revolving credit facility from $1.0 billion to $2.0 billion. The credit agreement has an accordion feature that provides Cintas the ability to request increases to the borrowing commitments under the revolving credit facility of up to $500.0 million in the aggregate, subject to customary conditions. The maturity date of the revolving credit facility is March 23, 2027. As of May 31, 2022, there was $261.2
million of commercial paper outstanding with a weighted average interest rate of 1.20% and maturity dates less than 120 days and no borrowings on our revolving credit facility. As of May 31, 2021, there was no commercial paper outstanding and no borrowings on our revolving credit facility. Subsequent to May 31, 2022, in June 2022, Cintas borrowed $125.0 million under the revolving credit facility to fund short-term operating needs and repaid the amount later in June 2022.
Cintas has certain covenants related to debt agreements. These covenants limit Cintas' ability to incur certain liens, to engage in sale-leaseback transactions and to merge, consolidate or sell all or substantially all of Cintas' assets. These covenants also require Cintas to maintain certain debt to consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) and interest coverage ratios. Cross-default provisions exist between certain debt instruments. If a default of a significant covenant were to occur, the default could result in an acceleration of the maturity of the indebtedness, impair liquidity and limit the ability to raise future capital. Cintas was in compliance with all of the debt covenants for all periods presented.
Our access to the commercial paper and long-term debt markets has historically provided us with sources of both short-term and long-term liquidity to meet material cash obligations. We do not anticipate having difficulty in obtaining financing from those markets in the future in view of our favorable experiences in the debt markets in the recent past. Additionally, our ability to continue to access the commercial paper and long-term debt markets on favorable interest rate and other terms will depend, to a significant degree, on the ratings assigned by the credit rating agencies to our indebtedness. As of May 31, 2022, our ratings were as follows:
In the event that the ratings of our commercial paper or our outstanding long-term debt issues were substantially lowered or withdrawn for any reason, or if the ratings assigned to any new issue of long-term debt securities were significantly lower than those noted above, particularly if we no longer had investment grade ratings, our ability to access the debt markets may be adversely affected. In addition, in such a case, our cost of funds for new issues of commercial paper and long-term debt would be higher than our cost of funds would have been had the ratings of those new issues been at or above the level of the ratings noted above. The rating agency ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold our commercial paper or debt securities. Each rating may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization and should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Moreover, each credit rating is specific to the security to which it applies.
To monitor our credit rating and our capacity for long-term financing, we consider various qualitative and quantitative factors. One such factor is the ratio of our total debt to EBITDA. For the purpose of this calculation, debt is defined as the sum of short-term borrowings, long-term debt due within one year, long-term debt and standby letters of credit.
Financial and Nonfinancial Disclosure About Issuers and Guarantors of Cintas’ Senior Notes
Cintas Corporation No. 2 (Corp. 2) is the indirectly, wholly owned principal operating subsidiary of Cintas. Corp. 2 is the issuer of the $2,550.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes outstanding as of May 31, 2022, which are unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally, by Cintas Corporation and its wholly owned, direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries. See Note 7 entitled Debt and Derivatives of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information on Cintas' outstanding debt.
Basis of Preparation of the Summarized Financial Information
The following tables include summarized financial information of Cintas Corporation (Issuer), Corp. 2 and subsidiary guarantors (together, the Obligor Group). Investments in and equity in the earnings of non-guarantors, which are not members of the Obligor Group, have been excluded. Non-guarantor subsidiaries are located outside the U.S., and therefore, excluded from the Obligor Group.
The summarized financial information of the Obligor Group is presented on a combined basis with intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Obligor Group eliminated. The Obligor Group’s amounts due from, amounts due to and transactions with non-guarantors have been presented in separate line items, if they are material. Summarized financial information of the Obligor Group is as follows for the fiscal years ended May 31:
Contractual and Other Material Cash Obligations
(1)See Note 7 entitled Debt and Derivatives of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a detailed presentation of Cintas' debt.
(2)See Note 8 entitled Leases of "Notes to Consolidated financial Statements" for a detailed presentation of Cintas' operating leases.
Cintas also makes payments to defined contribution plans and may make payments to defined benefit plans to satisfy minimum funding requirements. The amount of contributions made to the defined contribution plans are at the discretion of the Board of Directors of Cintas. Future contributions to the defined contribution plans are expected to be $92.8 million in the next year, $199.8 million in the next two to three years and $220.3 million in the next four to five years. Future contributions to the defined benefit plans are expected to be $0.0 million in the next year, $2.5 million in the next two to three years and $3.0 million in the next four to five years.
Other Commitments
(1)Back-up facility for the commercial paper program (reference Note 7 entitled Debt and Derivatives of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for further discussion).
(2)These standby letters of credit and surety bonds support certain outstanding debt (reference Note 7 entitled Debt and Derivatives of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements"), self-insured workers' compensation and general liability insurance programs.
Inflation and Changing Prices
Changes in wages, benefits and energy costs have the potential to materially impact Cintas' consolidated results of operations. In fiscal 2022, we experienced significant impacts from inflation, including, but not limited to, higher labor, fuel and transportation costs. Management has been able to mitigate these inflationary pressures through pricing and various efficiency initiatives. Management has mitigated these impacts such that net of the mitigation strategy and initiatives, inflation and changing prices has not had a material impact on Cintas' consolidated financial condition or a negative impact on the consolidated results of operations.
Litigation and Other Contingencies
Cintas is subject to legal proceedings, insurance receipts, legal settlements and claims arising from the ordinary course of its business, including personal injury, customer contract, environmental and employment claims. In the opinion of management, the aggregate liability, if any, with respect to such ordinary course of business actions will not have a material adverse effect on the consolidated financial position, consolidated results of operations or consolidated cash flows of Cintas.
The Company, the Board of Directors, Scott Farmer (Executive Chairman) and the Investment Policy Committee are defendants in a purported class action, filed on December 13, 2019, pending in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio alleging violations of ERISA. The lawsuit asserts that the defendants improperly managed the costs of the employee retirement plan, breached their fiduciary duties in failing to investigate and select lower cost alternative funds and failed to monitor and control the employee retirement plan’s recordkeeping costs. The defendants deny liability.
New Accounting Standards
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. ASU 2019-12 is part of the FASB’s overall simplification initiative to reduce costs and complexity of applying accounting standards while maintaining or improving the usefulness of the information provided to users of financial statements. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles of Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740), in order to reduce the cost and complexity of its application in the areas of intraperiod tax allocation, deferred tax liabilities related to outside basis differences, year-to-date losses in interim periods and other areas within ASC 740. The Company adopted ASU 2019-12 on June 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated condensed financial statements currently but may in future periods.
No other new accounting pronouncement recently issued or newly effective had or is expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of Cintas' consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and judgments that have a significant effect on the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. These critical accounting policies should be read in conjunction with Note 1 entitled Significant Accounting Policies of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements." Significant changes, estimates or assumptions related to any of the following critical accounting policies, including those impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, could possibly have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Rental revenue, which is recorded in the Uniform Rental and Facility Services reportable operating segment, is recognized when services are performed or the obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied. Other revenue, which is recorded in the First Aid and Safety Services reportable operating segments and All Other, is recognized when either services are performed or the obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied. See Note 2 entitled Revenue Recognition of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information on Cintas' revenue.
Uniforms and other rental items in service
Uniforms and other rental items in service are valued at cost less amortization, calculated using the straight-line method. Uniforms in service (other than cleanroom and flame resistant clothing) are amortized over their useful life of 18 months. Other rental items, including shop towels, mats, mops, cleanroom garments, flame resistant clothing, linens and restroom dispensers, are amortized over their useful lives, which range from 8 to 60 months. The amortization rates used are based on industry experience, Cintas' specific experience and wear tests performed by Cintas. These factors are critical to determining the amount of in service inventory and related cost of uniforms and ancillary products that are presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
Goodwill, obtained through acquisitions of businesses, is valued at cost less any impairment. Cintas completes an annual impairment test, that includes an assessment of qualitative factors including, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions and entity specific factors such as strategies and financial performance. We test for goodwill impairment at the reporting unit level. Cintas has identified four reporting units for purposes of evaluating goodwill impairment: Uniform Rental and Facility Services, First Aid and Safety Services and two reporting units within All Other. Based on the results of the annual impairment tests, Cintas was not required to recognize an impairment of goodwill for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 or 2020. Cintas will continue to perform impairment tests as of March 1 in future years and when indicators of impairment exist.
Insurance reserve
The insurance reserve represents the estimated ultimate cost of all asserted and unasserted claims, primarily related to workers' compensation, auto liability and other general liability exposure through the consolidated balance sheet dates. Our incurred but not reported reserves are estimated through actuarial procedures, with the assistance of third-party actuarial specialists, of the insurance industry and by using industry assumptions, adjusted for specific expectations based on our claims history. Cintas records an increase or decrease in selling and administrative expenses related to development of prior claims, higher claims activity and other environmental factors in the period in which it becomes known. These changes in estimates may be material to the consolidated financial statements.
Stock-based compensation
Compensation expense is recognized for all share-based payments to employees, including stock options and restricted stock awards, in the consolidated statements of income based on the fair value of the awards that are granted. The fair value of stock options is estimated at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Generally, measured compensation cost, net of actual forfeitures, is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the related share-based compensation award. See Note 13 entitled Stock-Based Compensation of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for further information.
Litigation and other contingencies
Cintas is subject to legal proceedings and claims arising from the ordinary course of its business, including personal injury, customer contract, environmental and employment claims. U.S. GAAP requires that a liability for contingencies be recorded when it is probable that a liability has occurred and the amount of the liability can be
reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine the existence of a liability, as well as the amount to be recorded. While a significant change in assumptions and judgments could have a material impact on the amounts recorded for contingent liabilities, Cintas does not believe that they will result in a material adverse effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Income taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined by the differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. See Note 9 entitled Income Taxes of "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for the types of items that give rise to significant deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Deferred income taxes are classified as assets or liabilities based on the classification of the related asset or liability for financial reporting purposes. Cintas regularly reviews deferred tax assets for recoverability based upon projected future taxable income and the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences. Although realization is not assured, management believes it is more likely than not that the recorded deferred tax assets, as adjusted for valuation allowances, will be realized.
Accounting for uncertain tax positions requires the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the consolidated financial statements. Companies may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Cintas is periodically reviewed by domestic and foreign tax authorities regarding the amount of taxes due. These reviews include questions regarding the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. In evaluating the exposure associated with various filing positions, Cintas records reserves as deemed appropriate. Based on Cintas' evaluation of current tax positions, Cintas believes its tax related accruals are appropriate.