Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand Community Trust Bancorp, Inc., our operations, and our present business environment. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to-and should be read in conjunction with-our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained in Item 8 of this annual report. The MD&A includes the following sections:
❖
Our Business
❖
Financial Goals and Performance
❖
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
❖
Liquidity and Market Risk
❖
Interest Rate Risk
❖
Capital Resources
❖
Impact of Inflation, Changing Prices, and Economic Conditions
❖
Stock Repurchase Program
❖
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Business
Community Trust Bancorp, Inc. (“CTBI”) is a bank holding company headquartered in Pikeville, Kentucky. Currently, we own one commercial bank, Community Trust Bank, Inc. (“CTB”) and one trust company, Community Trust and Investment Company. Through our subsidiaries, we have seventy-nine banking locations in eastern, northeastern, central, and south central Kentucky, southern West Virginia, and northeastern Tennessee, four trust offices across Kentucky, and one trust office in northeastern Tennessee. At December 31, 2021, we had total consolidated assets of $5.4 billion and total consolidated deposits, including repurchase agreements, of $4.6 billion. Total shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021 was $698.2 million. Trust assets under management at December 31, 2021 were $3.6 billion, including CTB’s investment portfolio totaling $1.5 billion.
Through our subsidiaries, CTBI engages in a wide range of commercial and personal banking and trust and wealth management activities, which include accepting time and demand deposits; making secured and unsecured loans to corporations, individuals, and others; providing cash management services to corporate and individual customers; issuing letters of credit; renting safe deposit boxes; and providing funds transfer services. The lending activities of CTB include making commercial, construction, mortgage, and personal loans. Lease-financing, lines of credit, revolving lines of credit, term loans, and other specialized loans, including asset-based financing, are also available. Our corporate subsidiaries act as trustees of personal trusts, as executors of estates, as trustees for employee benefit trusts, as paying agents for bond and stock issues, as investment agent, as depositories for securities, and as providers of full service brokerage, and insurance services. For further information, see Item 1 of this annual report.
Financial Goals and Performance
The following table shows the primary measurements used by management to assess annual performance. The goals in the table below should not be viewed as a forecast of our performance for 2022. Rather, the goals represent a range of target performance for 2022. There is no assurance that any or all of these goals will be achieved. See “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Statements.”
Results of Operations and Financial Condition
We reported earnings of $87.9 million, or $4.94 per basic share, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $59.5 million, or $3.35 per basic share, for the year ended December 31, 2020. We experienced a $12.1 million increase in net interest income, a $5.9 million increase in noninterest income, and a $22.4 million decrease in provision for credit losses during the year. Our effective income tax rate increased for the year as a result of the Kentucky enacted legislation requiring financial institutions to transition from a bank franchise tax to the Kentucky corporate income tax beginning in 2021. Our effective income tax rate for the year 2021 was 21% compared to 15% for the year 2020.
2021 Highlights
❖
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $12.1 million, or 8.0%, from December 31, 2020 with a 12 basis point decrease in our net interest margin and a $553.8 million increase in average earning assets.
❖
CTBI experienced a recovery of provision for credit losses of $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a provision for credit losses of $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
❖
Our loan portfolio decreased $145.4 million, or 4.1%, from December 31, 2020. Loans excluding PPP loans increased $59.9 million during the year.
❖
CTBI experienced a net recovery of loan losses of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net charge-offs of $6.2 million, or 0.18% of average loans annualized, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
❖
Asset quality remained strong during the year 2021, as nonperforming loans at $16.6 million decreased $10.0 million, or 37.4%, from December 31, 2020. Nonperforming assets at $20.1 million decreased $14.2 million, or 41.3%, from December 31, 2020.
❖
Deposits, including repurchase agreements, increased $243.4 million, or 5.6%, from December 31, 2020.
❖
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 at $60.5 million increased $5.9 million, or 10.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
❖
Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 remained relatively flat to the year ended December 31, 2020.
COVID-19
We have worked diligently with our customers as we all continue to battle COVID-19. At December 31, 2021, there was one customer with a CARES Act deferral outstanding in the amount of $1.4 million. The CARES Act loan deferrals and modifications have been executed consistent with the guidelines of the CARES Act. Pursuant to the CARES Act, these loan deferrals are not included in our nonperforming loans.
At December 31, 2021, we had closed 6,312 Paycheck Protection Program loans totaling $401.3 million, including 3,352 loans totaling $124.3 million stemming from the Consolidated Appropriations Act 2021 (second round). Through December 31, 2021, we have had 5,543 of our PPP loans totaling $351.8 million forgiven by the SBA, including 2,608 loans totaling $76.1 million from the second round.
Income Statement Review
*Yield on average earning assets and net interest margin are computed on a taxable equivalent basis using a 24.95% tax rate.
Consolidated Average Balance Sheets and Taxable Equivalent Income/Expense and Yields/Rates
(1) Interest includes fees on loans of $1,763 and $1,725 in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2) Loan balances include deferred loan origination costs and principal balances on nonaccrual loans.
(3) Tax exempt income on securities and loans is reported on a fully taxable equivalent basis using a 24.95% rate.
Net Interest Differential
The following table illustrates the approximate effect of volume and rate changes on net interest differentials between 2021 and 2020.
For purposes of the above table, changes which are due to both rate and volume are allocated based on a percentage basis, using the absolute values of rate and volume variance as a basis for percentages. Income is stated at a fully taxable equivalent basis, using a 24.95% tax rate.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $163.1 million increased $12.1 million, or 8.0%, from prior year. Average earning assets for the year 2021 increased $553.8 million over prior year. Our yield on average earning assets for the year 2021 decreased 38 basis points from prior year, as we continue to find limited high yield investment opportunities for our excess liquidity, while our cost of interest bearing funds decreased 37 basis points during the same time period. Our net interest margin for the year 2021 declined 12 basis points from 2020 to 3.21%. We experienced pressure on our net interest margin throughout the year driven by reductions in rates by the Federal Reserve during the first half of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Average loans to deposits, including repurchase agreements, for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 75.3% compared to 84.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The PPP loan portfolio had an annualized yield for the year ended December 31, 2021 of 8.04% compared to 3.05% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income recognized on PPP loans of $14.3 million increased $8.7 million year over year. Interest income on the portfolio was $1.8 million during the year, down $0.1 million from prior year, while the amortization of net loan origination fees from current outstanding loans and recognition of net fee income from paid and forgiven loans was $12.5 million, up $8.8 million from prior year. These fees are amortized over the life of the loan with any unamortized balance fully recognized at the time of loan forgiveness. The impact of the PPP loan portfolio to the net interest margin was 18 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021 while the margin was negatively impacted by one basis point for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Provision for Credit Losses
We experienced a recovery of provision for credit losses for the year 2021 of $6.4 million compared to provision for credit losses of $16.0 million for the year 2020.
The reduction to our allowance for credit losses during the year was the result of positive credit metrics, the lack of pandemic related losses provided for in 2020, and an improvement in the industry outlook for certain industries included in our concentrations of credit.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $60.5 million was a $5.9 million, or 10.8% increase from the year ended December 31, 2020. The year over year increase in noninterest income was driven by increases in deposit service charges ($3.1 million), trust revenue ($1.7 million), loan related fees ($1.5 million), brokerage revenue ($0.5 million), bank owned life insurance revenue ($0.5 million), and net gains on other real estate owned ($0.4 million), partially offset by decreases in securities gains ($1.9 million), net gains on loans ($0.4 million), and other real estate owned rental income ($0.2 million). Deposit service charges were primarily impacted year over year by an increase in debit card income. Loan related fees were primarily impacted by the change in the fair market value of mortgage servicing rights. Gains on sales of loans were impacted year over year by the slowdown in the industry-wide refinancing boom.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $119.3 million remained relatively flat to prior year, as a $7.7 million increase in personnel expense was offset by decreases in taxes other than property and payroll ($5.6 million), net other real estate owned expense ($1.3 million), and legal and professional fees ($0.5 million). The increase in personnel expense year over year was primarily due to incentive accruals. We experienced a $5.8 million decline in franchise taxes included in taxes other than property and payroll year over year and a corresponding increase in income taxes, as a result of the Kentucky enacted legislation requiring financial institutions to transition from a bank franchise tax to the Kentucky corporate income tax beginning in 2021.
* Please refer to our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for more detailed income discussion related to the year 2019.
Balance Sheet Review
CTBI’s total assets at $5.4 billion increased $279.1 million, or 5.4%, from December 31, 2020. Loans outstanding at December 31, 2021 were $3.4 billion, decreasing $145.4 million, or 4.1%, year over year. Loans excluding PPP loans increased $59.9 million, with a $69.2 million increase in the commercial loan portfolio, a $4.4 million increase in the consumer direct loan portfolio, and a $0.8 million increase in the indirect loan portfolio, offset partially by a $14.5 million in the residential loan portfolio. Loans held for sale at $2.6 million at December 31, 2021 decreased $20.6 million over prior year. CTBI’s investment portfolio increased $457.9 million, or 45.8%, from December 31, 2020. Deposits in other banks decreased $18.8 million from December 31, 2020. Deposits, including repurchase agreements, at $4.6 billion increased $243.4 million, or 5.6%, from December 31, 2020.
Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2021 was $698.2 million, a 6.6% increase from the $654.9 million at December 31, 2020. CTBI’s annualized dividend yield to shareholders as of December 31, 2021 was 3.67%.
Loans
Total Deposits and Repurchase Agreements
Average Deposits and Other Borrowed Funds
The maximum balance for federal funds purchased and repurchase agreements at any month-end during 2021 occurred at May 31, 2021, with a month-end balance of $373.8 million. The maximum balance for federal funds purchased and repurchase agreements at any month-end during 2020 occurred at November 30, 2020, with a month-end balance of $374.8 million.
Asset Quality
CTBI’s total nonperforming loans, not including troubled debt restructurings, were $16.6 million, or 0.49% of total loans, at December 31, 2021 compared to $26.6 million, or 0.75% of total loans, at December 31, 2020. Accruing loans 90+ days past due decreased $11.2 million from December 31, 2020. Nonaccrual loans increased $1.2 million from December 31, 2020. Accruing loans 30-89 days past due at $10.9 million was a decrease of $1.6 million from December 31, 2020. Our loan portfolio management processes focus on the immediate identification, management, and resolution of problem loans to maximize recovery and minimize loss. Our loan portfolio risk management processes include weekly delinquent loan review meetings at the market levels and monthly delinquent loan review meetings involving senior corporate management to review all nonaccrual loans and loans 30 days or more past due. Any activity regarding a criticized/classified loan (i.e. problem loan) must be approved by CTB’s Watch List Asset Committee (i.e. Problem Loan Committee). CTB’s Watch List Asset Committee also meets on a quarterly basis and reviews every criticized/classified loan of $100,000 or greater. CTB’s Loan Portfolio Risk Management Committee also meets quarterly focusing on the overall asset quality and risk metrics of the loan portfolio. We also have a Loan Review Department that reviews every market within CTB annually and performs extensive testing of the loan portfolio to assure the accuracy of loan grades and classifications for delinquency, troubled debt restructuring, nonaccrual status, and adequate loan loss reserves. The Loan Review Department has annually reviewed on average 96% of the outstanding commercial loan portfolio for the past three years. The average annual review percentage of the consumer and residential loan portfolio for the past three years was 86% based on the loan production during the number of months included in the review scope. The review scope is generally four to six months of production. CTBI generally does not offer high risk loans such as option ARM products, high loan to value ratio mortgages, interest-only loans, loans with initial teaser rates, or loans with negative amortizations, and therefore, CTBI would have no significant exposure to these products.
For further information regarding nonperforming loans, see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein.
Our reserve coverage (allowance for credit losses to nonperforming loans) at December 31, 2021 was 251.2% compared to 180.7% at December 31, 2020. Nonaccrual loans to total loans at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were 0.3%. Our allowance for credit losses to nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 was 391.3% compared to 508.5% at December 31, 2020. Our credit loss reserve as a percentage of total loans outstanding at December 31, 2021 was 1.22%, a decrease from the 1.35% at December 31, 2020.
Our level of foreclosed properties at $3.5 million at December 31, 2021 was a decrease of $4.2 million from the $7.7 million at December 31, 2020. Sales of foreclosed properties for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $4.5 million while new foreclosed properties totaled $1.2 million. At December 31, 2021, the book value of properties under contracts to sell was $0.3 million; however, the closings had not occurred at year-end. Nonperforming assets to loans and foreclosed properties at December 31, 2021 were 0.6% compared to 1.0% at December 31, 2020.
When foreclosed properties are acquired, appraisals are obtained and the properties are booked at the current market value less expected sales costs. Additionally, periodic updated appraisals are obtained on unsold foreclosed properties. When an updated appraisal reflects a fair market value below the current book value, a charge is booked to current earnings to reduce the property to its new market value less expected sales costs. Charges to earnings in 2021 to reflect the decrease in current market values of foreclosed properties totaled $0.9 million, compared to $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our policy for determining the frequency of periodic reviews is based upon consideration of the specific properties and the known or perceived market fluctuations in a particular market and is typically between 12 and 18 months but generally not more than 24 months. Approximately 92% of our other real estate owned (“OREO”) properties and approximately 99% of the book value of our OREO properties have appraisals dated within the past 18 months.
The appraisal aging analysis of foreclosed properties, as well as the holding period, at December 31, 2021 is shown below:
Regulatory approval is required and has been obtained to hold foreclosed properties beyond the initial period of 5 years. Additionally, CTBI is required to dispose of any foreclosed property that has not been sold within 10 years. As of December 31, 2021, one foreclosed property with a total book value of $27 thousand had been held by us for at least nine years.
We experienced a net recovery of loan losses of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net charge-offs of $6.2 million, or 0.18% of average loans annualized, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Market Risk
The objective of CTBI’s Asset/Liability management function is to maintain consistent growth in net interest income within our policy limits. This objective is accomplished through management of our consolidated balance sheet composition, liquidity, and interest rate risk exposures arising from changing economic conditions, interest rates, and customer preferences. The goal of liquidity management is to provide adequate funds to meet changes in loan and lease demand or deposit withdrawals. This is accomplished by maintaining liquid assets in the form of cash and cash equivalents and investment securities, sufficient unused borrowing capacity, and growth in core deposits. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $311.8 million in cash and cash equivalents and approximately $1.5 billion in securities valued at estimated fair value designated as available-for-sale and available to meet liquidity needs on a continuing basis compared to $338.2 million and $997.3 million at December 31, 2020. Additional asset-driven liquidity is provided by the remainder of the securities portfolio and the repayment of loans. In addition to core deposit funding, we also have a variety of other short-term and long-term funding sources available. We also rely on Federal Home Loan Bank advances for both liquidity and management of our asset/liability position. Federal Home Loan Bank advances were $0.4 million at December 31, 2021 and at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had a $484.4 million available borrowing position with the Federal Home Loan Bank compared to $477.2 million at December 31, 2020. We generally rely upon net inflows of cash from financing activities, supplemented by net inflows of cash from operating activities, to provide cash for our investing activities. As is typical of many financial institutions, significant financing activities include deposit gathering, use of short-term borrowing facilities such as repurchase agreements and federal funds purchased, and issuance of long-term debt. At December 31, 2021 and at December 31, 2020, we had $75 million in lines of credit with various correspondent banks available to meet any future cash needs. Our primary investing activities include purchases of securities and loan originations. We do not rely on any one source of liquidity and manage availability in response to changing consolidated balance sheet needs. Included in our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 were deposits with the Federal Reserve of $262.4 million compared to $280.7 million at December 31, 2020. Additionally, we project cash flows from our investment portfolio to generate additional liquidity over the next 90 days.
The investment portfolio consists of investment grade short-term issues suitable for bank investments. The majority of the investment portfolio is in U.S. government and government sponsored agency issuances. At December 31, 2021, available-for-sale (“AFS”) securities comprised all of the total investment portfolio, and the AFS portfolio was approximately 208% of equity capital. Sixty-five percent of the pledge eligible portfolio was pledged.
Contractual Commitments
Our significant contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 include debt, lease, and purchase obligations. As disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements, we have certain obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts.
As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding balance on long-term debt was $57.8 million. The interest payments on long-term debt due in 1 year or less is $1.2 million and interest payments on long-term debt due in more than 1 year is $31.2 million. The interest on $57.8 million in long-term debt is calculated based on the three-month LIBOR plus 1.59% until its maturity of June 1, 2037. The three-month LIBOR rate is projected using the most likely rate forecast from assumptions incorporated in the interest rate risk model and is determined two business days prior to the interest payment date. Interest on long-term debt assume the liability will not be prepaid and interest is calculated to maturity. These assumptions are uncertain, and as a result, the actual payments will differ from the projection due to changes in economic conditions. Refer to note 10 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein for additional information regarding long-term debt.
On March 5, 2021, LIBOR’s administrator, ICE Benchmarks Administration, announced that LIBOR will no longer be provided (i) for the one-week and two-month U.S. dollar settings after December 31, 2021 and (ii) for the remaining U.S. dollar settings after June 30, 2023. The U.S. federal banking agencies issued supervisory guidance encouraging banks to stop entering into new contracts that use LIBOR as a reference rate after December 31, 2021. We have analyzed our financial exposure related to the discontinuation of LIBOR and consider our exposure to be insignificant.
As of December 31, 2021, our remaining contractual commitment for operating leases due in one year or less is $1.8 million and operating leases due in more than one year is $14.7 million. Refer to note 15 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein for additional information regarding leases.
Commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit do not necessarily represent future cash requirements in that these commitments often expire without being drawn upon. As of December 31, 2021, the commitments due in 1 year or less for other commitments is $616.7 million and commitments due in more than one year is $126.2 million. Refer to note 17 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein for additional information regarding other commitments.
Our purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods and services entered into in the ordinary course of business. As of December 31, 2021, the value of our non-cancellable unconditional purchase obligations was $6.9 million.
These contractual obligations impact our liquidity and capital resource needs. We believe our liquidity sources as mentioned in the liquidity discussion are adequate to meet our future cash requirements.
Investment Maturities
The calculations of the weighted average yields for each maturity category are based upon yield weighted by the respective costs of the securities. The weighted average rates on state and political subdivisions are computed on a taxable equivalent basis using a 24.95% tax rate.
Loan Maturities
The following table shows the amounts of loans (excluding residential mortgages of 1-4 family residences, consumer loans, and lease financing) which, based on the remaining scheduled repayments of principal are due in the periods indicated. Also, the amounts are classified according to sensitivity to changes in interest rates (fixed, variable).
Deposit Maturities
Maturities and/or repricing of time deposits of $100,000 or more outstanding at December 31, 2021 are summarized as follows:
Interest Rate Risk
We consider interest rate risk one of our most significant market risks. Interest rate risk is the exposure to adverse changes in net interest income due to changes in interest rates. Consistency of our net interest revenue is largely dependent upon the effective management of interest rate risk. We employ a variety of measurement techniques to identify and manage our interest rate risk, including the use of an earnings simulation model to analyze net interest income sensitivity to changing interest rates. The model is based on actual cash flows and repricing characteristics for on and off-balance sheet instruments and incorporates market-based assumptions regarding the effect of changing interest rates on the prepayment rates of certain assets and liabilities. Assumptions based on the historical behavior of deposit rates and balances in relation to changes in interest rates are also incorporated into the model. These assumptions are inherently uncertain, and as a result, the model cannot precisely measure net interest income or precisely predict the impact of fluctuations in interest rates on net interest income. Actual results will differ from simulated results due to timing, magnitude, and frequency of interest rate changes as well as changes in market conditions and management strategies.
CTBI’s Asset/Liability Management Committee (ALCO), which includes executive and senior management representatives and reports to the Board of Directors, monitors and manages interest rate risk within Board-approved policy limits. Our current exposure to interest rate risks is determined by measuring the anticipated change in net interest income spread evenly over the twelve-month period.
The following table shows our estimated earnings sensitivity profile as of December 31, 2021:
The following table shows our estimated earnings sensitivity profile as of December 31, 2020:
The simulation model used the yield curve spread evenly over a twelve-month period. The measurement at December 31, 2021 estimates that our net interest income in an up-rate environment would increase by 11.23% at a 400 basis point change, increase by 7.61% at a 300 basis point change, increase by 4.56% at a 200 basis point change, and increase by 2.01% at a 100 basis point change. In a down-rate environment, net interest income would decrease 0.66% at a 25 basis point change over one year. We actively manage our balance sheet and limit our exposure to long-term fixed rate financial instruments, including loans. In order to reduce the exposure to interest rate fluctuations and to manage liquidity, we have developed sale procedures for several types of interest-sensitive assets. Primarily all long-term, fixed rate single family residential mortgage loans underwritten according to Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation guidelines are sold for cash upon origination or originated under terms where they could be sold. Periodically, additional assets such as commercial loans are also sold. In 2021 and 2020, proceeds of $307.8 million and $347.0 million, respectively, were realized on the sale of fixed rate residential mortgages. We focus our efforts on consistent net interest revenue and net interest margin growth through each of the retail and wholesale business lines. We do not currently engage in trading activities.
The preceding analysis was prepared using a rate ramp analysis which attempts to spread changes evenly over a specified time period as opposed to a rate shock which measures the impact of an immediate change. Had these measurements been prepared using the rate shock method, the results would vary.
Our static repricing gap as of December 31, 2021 is presented below. In the 12 month cumulative repricing gap, rate sensitive liabilities (“RSL”) exceeded rate sensitive assets (“RSA”) by $732.1 million.
Capital Resources
We continue to grow our shareholders’ equity while also providing an annual dividend yield for the year 2021 of 3.67% to shareholders. Shareholders’ equity increased 6.6% from December 31, 2020 to $698.2 million at December 31, 2021. Our primary source of capital growth is the retention of earnings. Cash dividends were $1.57 per share for 2021 compared to $1.53 per share for 2020. We retained 68.2% of our earnings in 2021 compared to 54.3% in 2020.
Insured depository institutions are required to meet certain capital level requirements. On October 29, 2019, federal banking regulators adopted a final rule to simplify the regulatory capital requirements for eligible community banks and holding companies that opt-in to the community bank leverage ratio framework (the “CBLR framework”), as required by Section 201 of the Economic Growth, Relief and Consumer Protection Act of 2018. Under the final rule, which became effective as of January 1, 2020, community banks and holding companies (which includes CTB and CTBI) that satisfy certain qualifying criteria, including having less than $10 billion in average total consolidated assets and a leverage ratio (referred to as the “community bank leverage ratio”) of greater than 9%, were eligible to opt-in to the CBLR framework. The community bank leverage ratio is the ratio of a banking organization’s Tier 1 capital to its average total consolidated assets, both as reported on the banking organization’s applicable regulatory filings. Accordingly, a qualifying community banking organization that has a community bank leverage ratio greater than 9% will be considered to have met: (i) the risk-based and leverage capital requirements of the generally applicable capital rules; (ii) the capital ratio requirements in order to be considered well-capitalized under the prompt corrective action framework; and (iii) any other applicable capital or leverage requirements.
In April 2020, as directed by Section 4012 of the CARES Act, the regulatory agencies introduced temporary changes to the CBLR. These changes, which subsequently were adopted as a final rule, temporarily reduced the CBLR requirement to 8% through the end of calendar year 2020. Beginning in calendar year 2021, the CBLR requirement increased to 8.5% for the calendar year before returning to 9% in calendar year 2022. The final rule also provides for a two-quarter grace period for qualifying community banking organizations whose leverage ratios fall no more than 100 basis points below the applicable CBLR requirement. Management elected to use the CBLR framework for CTBI and CTB. CTBI’s CBLR ratio as of December 31, 2021 was 13.00%. CTB’s CBLR ratio as of December 31, 2021 was 12.42%. Under either framework, CTBI and CTB would be considered well-capitalized under the applicable guidelines.
As of December 31, 2021, we are not aware of any current recommendations by banking regulatory authorities which, if they were to be implemented, would have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material adverse impact on our liquidity, capital resources, or operations.
Impact of Inflation, Changing Prices, and Economic Conditions
The majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. Therefore, CTBI differs greatly from most commercial and industrial companies that have significant investment in nonmonetary assets, such as fixed assets and inventories. However, inflation does have an important impact on the growth of assets in the banking industry and on the resulting need to increase equity capital at higher than normal rates in order to maintain an appropriate equity to assets ratio. Inflation also affects other expenses, which tend to rise during periods of general inflation.
We believe one of the most significant impacts on financial and operating results is our ability to react to changes in interest rates. We seek to maintain an essentially balanced position between interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities in order to protect against the effects of wide interest rate fluctuations.
We are all finding ourselves living and operating in unprecedented times as the COVID-19 pandemic is causing personal and financial hardship to our customers, employees, and communities. During these challenging times, we have instituted programs to support our customers with loan modifications, forbearance, and fee waivers and participated in programs created by the government stimulus programs like the Paycheck Protection Program, focused on helping small businesses keep their employees and meet their expenses as they were unable to operate due to mandated closures. We instituted programs supporting our employees focused on healthcare, childcare, and remote and split schedule work, as well as work space changes that allow for proper social distancing to keep our employees safe as we continue to operate as a critical part of the economy. We continue to support our communities through donations to non-profit organizations as they strive to continue their commitments of serving those in need. We also continue to manage our company for the long term and our strong capital position and culture of building communities built on trust will facilitate our ability to manage through these challenging times. We will continue to serve our constituents while we all meet the challenges of living with COVID-19.
Stock Repurchase Program
CTBI’s stock repurchase program began in December 1998 with the authorization to acquire up to 500,000 shares and was increased by an additional 1,000,000 shares in each of July 2000, May 2003, and March 2020. As of December 31, 2021, a total of 2,465,294 shares have been repurchased through this program, leaving 1,034,706 shares remaining under our current repurchase authorization. The following table shows Board authorizations and repurchases made through the stock repurchase program for the years 1998 through 2021:
*Repurchased shares and average prices have been restated to reflect stock dividends that have occurred; however, board authorized shares have not been adjusted.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the appropriate application of certain accounting policies, many of which require us to make estimates and assumptions about future events and their impact on amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Since future events and their impact cannot be determined with certainty, the actual results will inevitably differ from our estimates. Such differences could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
We believe the application of accounting policies and the estimates required therein are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are constantly reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change. Historically, we have found our application of accounting policies to be appropriate, and actual results have not differed materially from those determined using necessary estimates.
Our accounting policies are described in note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Allowance for Credit Losses - CTBI accounts for the allowance for credit losses (“ACL”) and the reserve for unfunded commitments in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, and its related subsequent amendments, commonly known as CECL.
We disaggregate our portfolio loans into portfolio segments for purposes of determining the ACL. Our loan portfolio segments include commercial, residential mortgage, and consumer. We further disaggregate our portfolio segments into classes for purposes of monitoring and assessing credit quality based on certain risk characteristics. For an analysis of CTBI’s ACL by portfolio segment and credit quality information by class, refer to note 4 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein.
CTBI maintains the ACL to absorb the amount of credit losses that are expected to be incurred over the remaining contractual terms of the related loans. Contractual terms are adjusted for expected prepayments but are not extended for expected extensions, renewals or modifications except in circumstances where CTBI reasonably expects to execute a troubled debt restructuring (“TDR”) with the borrower or where certain extension or renewal options are embedded in the original contract and not unconditionally cancellable by CTBI. Accrued interest receivable on loans is presented in the consolidated financial statements as a component of other assets. When accrued interest is deemed to be uncollectible (typically when a loan is placed on nonaccrual status), interest income is reversed. In the event that collection of principal becomes uncertain, CTBI has policies in place to reverse accrued interest in a timely manner. Therefore, CTBI elected ASU 2019-04 which allows that accrued interest would continue to be presented separately and not part of the amortized cost of the loan. For additional information on CTBI’s accounting policies related to nonaccrual loans, refer to note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein.
Credit losses are charged and recoveries are credited to the ACL. The ACL is maintained at a level CTBI considers to be adequate and is based on ongoing quarterly assessments and evaluations of the collectability of loans, including historical credit loss experience, current and forecasted market and economic conditions, and consideration of various qualitative factors that, in management’s judgment, deserve consideration in estimating expected credit losses. Provisions for credit losses are recorded for the amounts necessary to adjust the ACL to CTBI’s current estimate of expected credit losses on portfolio loans. CTBI’s strategy for credit risk management includes a combination of conservative exposure limits significantly below legal lending limits and conservative underwriting, documentation, and collection standards. The strategy also emphasizes diversification on a geographic, industry, and customer level, regular credit examinations, and quarterly management reviews of large credit exposures and loans experiencing deterioration of credit quality.
CTBI’s methodology for determining the ACL requires significant management judgment and includes an estimate of expected credit losses on a collective basis for groups of loans with similar risk characteristics and specific allowances for loans which are individually evaluated.
Larger commercial loans with balances exceeding $1 million that exhibit probable or observed credit weaknesses, (i) have a criticized risk rating, (ii) are on nonaccrual status, (iii) are classified as TDRs, or (iv) are 90 days or more past due, are individually evaluated for an ACL. CTBI considers the current value of collateral, credit quality of any guarantees, the guarantor’s liquidity and willingness to cooperate, the loan structure and other factors when determining the amount of the ACL. Other factors may include the borrower’s susceptibility to risks presented by the forecasted macroeconomic environment, the industry and geographic region of the borrower, size and financial condition of the borrower, cash flow and leverage of the borrower, and our evaluation of the borrower’s management. Significant management judgment is required when evaluating which of these factors are most relevant in individual circumstances, and when estimating the amount of expected credit losses based on those factors. When loans are individually evaluated, allowances are determined based on management’s estimate of the borrower’s ability to repay the loan given the availability of collateral and other sources of cash flow, as well as an evaluation of legal options available to CTBI. Allowances for individually evaluated loans that are collateral-dependent are typically measured based on the fair value of the underlying collateral, less expected costs to sell where applicable. For collateral-dependent financial assets, the credit loss expected may be zero if the fair value less costs to sell exceeds the amortized cost of the loan. Loans shall not be included in both collective assessments and individual assessments. Individually evaluated loans that are not collateral-dependent are measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate. Specific allowances on individually evaluated commercial loans, including TDRs, are reviewed quarterly and adjusted as necessary based on changing borrower and/or collateral conditions and actual collection and charge-off experience. Regardless of an initial measurement method, once it is determined that foreclosure is probable, the allowance for credit losses is measured based on the fair value of the collateral as of the measurement date. As a practical expedient, the fair value of the collateral may be used for a loan when determining the allowance for credit losses for which the repayment is expected to be provided substantially through the operation or sale of the collateral when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty. The fair value shall be adjusted for selling costs when foreclosure is probable.
Expected credit losses are estimated on a collective basis for loans that are not individually evaluated. These include commercial loans that do not meet the criteria for individual evaluation as well as homogeneous loans in the residential mortgage and consumer portfolio segments. For collectively evaluated commercial loans, CTBI uses a static pool methodology based on our risk rating system. See note 4 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein for information on CTBI’s risk rating system. Other homogenous loans such as the residential mortgage and consumer portfolio segments derive their ACL from vintage modeling. Vintage modeling was chosen primarily because these loans have fixed amortization schedules, and it allows CTBI to track loans from origination to completion, including repayments and prepayments, and captures net charge-offs by the different vintages providing historical loss rates. These are the two primary models utilized for ACL determination although there are additional models for specific processes in addition. CTBI’s expected credit loss models were developed based on historical credit loss experience and observations of migration patterns for various credit risk characteristics (such as internal credit risk grades, external credit ratings or scores, delinquency status, etc.) over time, with those observations evaluated in the context of concurrent macroeconomic conditions. CTBI developed our models from historical observations capturing a full economic cycle when possible.
CTBI’s expected credit loss models consider historical credit loss experience, current market and economic conditions, and forecasted changes in market and economic conditions if such forecasts are considered reasonable and supportable. Generally, CTBI considers our forecasts to be reasonable and supportable for a period of up to one year from the estimation date. For periods beyond the reasonable and supportable forecast period, expected credit losses are estimated by reverting to historical loss information. CTBI evaluates the length of our reasonable and supportable forecast period, our reversion period, and reversion methodology at least annually, or more often if warranted by economic conditions or other circumstances.
Other qualitative factors are used by CTBI in determining the ACL. These considerations inherently require significant management judgment to determine the appropriate factors to be considered and the extent of their impact on the ACL estimate. Qualitative factors are used to capture characteristics in the portfolio that impact expected credit losses but that are not fully captured within CTBI’s expected credit loss models. These include adjustments for changes in policies or procedures in underwriting, monitoring or collections, lending and risk management personnel, and results of internal audit and quality control reviews. These may also include adjustments, when deemed necessary, for specific idiosyncratic risks such as geopolitical events, natural disasters and their effects on regional borrowers, and changes in product structures. Qualitative factors may also be used to address the impacts of unforeseen events on key inputs and assumptions within CTBI’s expected credit loss models, such as the reasonable and supportable forecast period, changes to historical loss information, or changes to the reversion period or methodology. When evaluating the adequacy of allowances, consideration is also given to regional geographic concentrations and the closely associated effect that changing economic conditions may have on CTBI’s customers.
Overall, the collective evaluation process requires significant management judgment when determining the estimation methodology and inputs into the models, as well as in evaluating the reasonableness of the modeled results and the appropriateness of qualitative adjustments. CTBI’s forecasts of market and economic conditions and the internal risk grades assigned to loans in the commercial portfolio segment are examples of inputs to the expected credit loss models that require significant management judgment. These inputs have the potential to drive significant variability in the resulting ACL.
The reserve for unfunded commitments is maintained at a level believed by management to be sufficient to absorb estimated expected credit losses related to unfunded credit facilities and is included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. The determination of the adequacy of the reserve is based upon expected credit losses over the remaining contractual life of the commitments, taking into consideration the current funded balance and estimated exposure over the reasonable and supportable forecast period. This process takes into consideration the same risk elements that are analyzed in the determination of the adequacy of CTBI’s ACL, as previously discussed. Net adjustments to the reserve for unfunded commitments are included in other noninterest expense in the consolidated statements of income.
Goodwill - Business combinations entered into by CTBI typically include the recognition of goodwill. U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) require goodwill to be tested for impairment on an annual basis, which for CTBI is October 1, and more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that there may be impairment. Refer to note 1 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein for a discussion on the methodology used by CTBI to assess goodwill for impairment.
Impairment exists when a reporting unit’s carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. In testing goodwill for impairment, U.S. GAAP permits CTBI to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount. In this qualitative assessment, CTBI evaluates events and circumstances which may include, but are not limited to, the general economic environment, banking industry and market conditions, the overall financial performance of CTBI, and the performance of CTBI’s common stock, to determine if it is not more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. If the quantitative impairment test is required or the decision to bypass the qualitative assessment is elected, CTBI performs the goodwill impairment test by comparing its fair value with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill recorded. A recognized impairment loss cannot be reversed in future periods even if the fair value of the reporting unit subsequently recovers.
The fair value of CTBI is the price that would be received to sell the company as a whole in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The determination of the fair value is a subjective process that involves the use of estimates and judgments, particularly related to cash flows, the appropriate discount rates and an applicable control premium. CTBI employs an income-based approach, utilizing forecasted cash flows and the estimated cost of equity as the discount rate. Significant management judgment is necessary in the preparation of the forecasted cash flows surrounding expectations for earnings projections, growth and credit loss expectations, and actual results may differ from forecasted results.
Income Taxes - Income tax liabilities or assets are established for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. Deferred tax liabilities (“DTLs”) and assets (“DTAs”) are also established for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in CTBI’s financial statements or tax returns. A DTL or DTA is recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and deductions that can be carried forward (used) in future years. The valuation of current and deferred income tax liabilities and assets is considered critical, as it requires management to make estimates based on provisions of the enacted tax laws. The assessment of tax liabilities and assets involves the use of estimates, assumptions, interpretations, and judgments concerning certain accounting pronouncements and federal and state tax codes.
Fair Value Measurements - As a financial services company, the carrying value of certain financial assets and liabilities is impacted by the application of fair value measurements, either directly or indirectly. In certain cases, an asset or liability is measured and reported at fair value on a recurring basis, such as available-for-sale investment securities. In other cases, management must rely on estimates or judgments to determine if an asset or liability not measured at fair value warrants an impairment write-down or whether a valuation reserve should be established. Given the inherent volatility, the use of fair value measurements may have a significant impact on the carrying value of assets or liabilities or result in material changes to the consolidated financial statements from period to period. Detailed information regarding fair value measurements can be found in note 16 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein.