Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes and other information included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
The Company was formed on September 1, 2010 as a Delaware corporation. The Company engages in exploration for gold, silver, and copper ores in Alaska. The Company’s largest asset is a 30.0% membership interest in Peak Gold, LLC, which leases approximately 675,000 acres from the Tetlin Tribal Council and owns approximately 13,000 State of Alaska mining claims for exploration and development through its wholly-owned subsidiary, CORE Alaska, LLC. The Company’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Contango Minerals Alaska, LLC, owns 100% interest in the mineral rights to approximately 200,000 acres of State of Alaska mining claims located north and northwest of the Manh Choh Project. As of June 30, 2022 the Company had approximately $23.1 million in cash and is actively working to acquire additional properties in Alaska for exploration. The acquisitions may include leases or similar rights from Alaska Native corporations or may include filing Federal or State of Alaska mining claims by staking claims for exploration.
Neither the Company nor the Peak Gold JV has commenced mining or producing commercially marketable minerals. To date, neither the Company nor the Peak Gold JV has generated any revenue from mineral sales or operations. Neither the Company nor the Peak Gold JV has any recurring source of revenue. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise capital to fund future exploration and working capital requirements. In the future, the Company and the Peak Gold JV may generate revenue from a combination of mineral sales and other payments resulting from any commercially recoverable minerals from the Manh Choh Project. The Company does not expect the Peak Gold JV to generate revenue from mineral sales in the foreseeable future. If the Company’s properties or the Manh Choh Project fails to contain any proven reserves, the Company’s ability to generate future revenue, and the Company’s results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected. Other potential sources of cash, or relief of demand for cash, include external debt, the sale of shares of the Company’s stock, joint ventures, or alternative methods such as mergers or sale of our assets. No assurances can be given, however, that the Company will be able to obtain any of these potential sources of cash. The Company will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability and the Company may never do so
Claim Rentals Expense. Claim rental expense primarily consists of State of Alaska rental payments and annual labor payments. We recognized claim rental expense of $621,298 for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to $210,080 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Claim rental expense increased due to the Company owning a larger number of claims as of June 2022 compared to June 2021. The Company staked the Shamrock and Willow claims during 2021. The Lucky Shot state claims were acquired as a part of the acquisition of AGT in August 2021.
Exploration Expense. Exploration expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $8,517,938 compared to $89,817 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Current year exploration expense relates to spending on our 100% owned state claims on the Eagle/Hona and Shamrock Property, as well as exploration activity on our Lucky Shot Property. Exploration related work began on the Eagle/Hona and Shamrock prospects in July 2021. The Lucky Shot Property was acquired in August 2021. There was no exploration program during the year ended June 30, 2021.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $10,336,378 and $10,362,281, respectively. The Company’s general and administrative expense primarily relates to legal fees, payroll and benefit related fees, and stock-based compensation expense. The current year decrease is due to higher legal fees during the year ended June 30, 2021 associated with the Kinross Transaction, and capital raising activities, offset by increased salaries, wages, and other general administrative costs associated with the Lucky Shot Acquisition in August 2021.
Loss from Equity Investment in the Peak Gold JV. The loss from the Company’s equity investment in the Peak Gold JV for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $3,706,000 and $3,861,252, respectively. Pursuant to the terms of the A&R JV LLCA, the Company and KG Mining are required to jointly fund the joint venture operations in proportion to their membership interests in the Peak Gold JV to avoid dilution. The Company invested $3,706,000 in the Peak Gold JV during the year ended June 30, 2022, and $3,861,252 during the year ended June 30, 2021. The portion of the cumulative loss that exceeds the Company’s cumulative investment will be suspended and recognized against earnings, if any, from the Company’s investment in the Peak Gold JV in future periods. The suspended losses for the period from inception to June 30, 2022 are $22.6 million.
Gain on Sale of a Portion of the Investment in the Peak Gold JV. The Company recorded the $32,400,000 cash proceeds and the 809,744 shares of Common Stock, received from the CORE Transactions, at fair value and recognized a gain on sale of $39,692,857 during the year ended June 30, 2021. The Company valued the Common Stock consideration from the CORE Transactions consistent with the accounting guidance for non-monetary exchanges. The stock consideration was valued based on the implied fair value of the CORE Transactions in total less the cash proceeds. The total value of the CORE Transactions was equated to the value of the Company's 30.0% ownership in the Peak Gold JV, post the 30.0% membership interest transferred to KG Mining. As of the date of the CORE Transaction, the Company's investment in the Peak Gold JV had a zero balance, therefore the $39,692,857 gain approximates the full fair value of the CORE JV Interest surrendered in the CORE Transactions.
Interest Expense. On April 26, 2022, the Company closed on a $20,000,000 unsecured convertible debenture to QRC. The debenture bears interest at 8% per annum, payable quarterly, with 6% paid in cash and 2% paid in shares of Common Stock (See Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements). The Company acquired AGT in August 2021 for an initial payment at closing of $5 million (plus a working capital adjustment of $0.1 million) in cash and a Promissory Note (see Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements). Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 of $330,047 includes the accrued interest related to the convertible debenture and the interest paid on the Promissory Note. The Company incurred zero interest expense during the year ended June 30, 2021. The Promissory Note was paid in full with cash on February 25, 2022.
Income Tax Benefit/(Expense). The Company recognized an income tax benefit of $119,731 for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to $1,301,874 income tax expense for the year ended June 30, 2021. The Company had book and taxable income for the year ended June 30, 2021, as a result of the income driven by the gain on the sale of the CORE JV Interest in connection with the Kinross Transactions in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. All subsequent quarters of fiscal year 2021 and 2022 had a net loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the formation of the Peak Gold JV, the Company’s primary cash requirements were for exploration-related expenses. Since the formation of the Peak Gold JV, the Company’s primary cash requirements have been for general and administrative expenses and capital calls from the Peak Gold JV for the Manh Choh Property. Prior to the Kinross Transactions, the Company’s sources of cash have been from Common Stock offerings. In conjunction with the Kinross Transactions, the Company received $32.4 million and 809,744 shares of the Company’s Common Stock. The 809,744 shares of Common Stock were acquired by KG Mining from Royal Gold, as part of the Royal Gold Transactions and were subsequently canceled by the Company. Of the $32.4 million cash consideration, $1.2 million constituted a reimbursement prepayment to the Company of its proportionate share of certain silver royalty payments that the Peak Gold JV may be obligated to pay to Royal Gold, with the understanding that KG Mining will bear the entire impact of those royalty payments due from the Peak Gold JV.
As of June 30, 2022, the Company had approximately $23.3 million of cash. On August 4, 2022 the Management Committee voted to increase the 2022 budget to $39.6 million, of which our total share is $11.9 million. To date, the Company has funded $1.5 million of its share of the 2022 budget. The 2022 budget covers the following areas of work: feasibility study, permitting, on-going environmental monitoring, community engagement, engineering, early construction, and exploration. The Company has not formally approved a budget for exploration activities on its 100% owned state of Alaska mining claims or its Lucky Shot Property. On April 26, 2022, the Company closed on a $20,000,000 unsecured convertible debenture to Queen’s Road Capital Investment, Ltd. (“QRC”). The debenture was purchased at par. Due to cash received from the unsecured debenture, the cash received in the Kinross Transaction and the private placements completed in September 2020 and June 2021, the Company believes that it has sufficient liquidity to meet its working capital requirements for the next twelve months. The Company’s cash needs going forward will primarily relate to capital calls from the Peak Gold JV, exploration of the Contango Properties (including the $10.0 million capital commitment for expenditures on the Lucky Shot Property over the 36-month period following August 2021), and general and administrative expenses of the Company. If a large budget is undertaken, and no additional financing is obtained, the Company can elect not to fund its portion of the approved budget, in which case the Company would maintain sufficient liquidity to meet its working capital requirements for the next twelve months.
The Company entered into Stock Purchase Agreements dated as of June 14, and June 17, 2021 (the “Purchase Agreements”) for the sale of an aggregate of 523,809 shares of Common Stock at a purchase price of $21.00 per share of Common Stock, in a private placement (the “2021 Private Placement”) to certain accredited investors. The 2021 Private Placement closed on June 17 and 18, 2021. The 2021 Private Placement resulted in approximately $11.0 million of gross proceeds and approximately $10.9 million of net proceeds to the Company. The Company will use the net proceeds from the 2021 Private Placement to fund its exploration and development program and for general corporate purposes. The shares sold in the 2021 Private Placement were issued in reliance on an exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) thereof. The bases for the availability of this exemption include the facts that the issuance was a private transaction which did not involve a public offering and the shares were offered and sold to a limited number of purchasers. Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, purchased 47,619 shares of Common Stock, for a purchase price of approximately $1,000,000, in the 2021 Private Placement pursuant to a Purchase Agreement dated June 17, 2021, on the same terms and conditions as all other purchasers, except that Mr. Nieuwenhuyse did not receive any of the rights under the Registration Rights Agreement. The 2021 Private Placement to Mr. Nieuwenhuyse closed on June 18, 2021. The Audit Committee of the Company has reviewed and approved all agreements and arrangements relating to Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse’s participation in the 2021 Private Placement.
On September 23, 2020, the Company completed the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 247,172 shares of the Company’s Common Stock in a private placement (the “2020 Private Placement”) to certain purchasers who are accredited investors. The shares of the Common Stock were sold at a price of $13.25 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $3.3 million and net proceeds to the Company of approximately $3.2 million. The Company will use the net proceeds from the 2020 Private Placement for working capital purposes and for funding future obligations to the Peak Gold JV and Contango Minerals. Petrie Partners Securities, LLC (“Petrie”) acted as the sole placement agent in connection with the 2020 Private Placement and received a placement agent fee equal to 3.25% of the gross proceeds raised from the subscribers whom they solicited, or a total of approximately $50,000 in placement agent fees. Petrie has provided to the Company in the past and may provide from time to time in the future certain securities offering, financial advisory, investment banking and other services for which it has received and may continue to receive customary fees and commissions. The shares sold in the 2020 Private Placement were issued in reliance on an exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, pursuant to Section 4(a)(2) thereof. The bases for the availability of this exemption include the facts that the issuance was a private transaction, which did not involve a public offering and the shares were offered and sold to a limited number of purchasers. The Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, purchased 75,472 of shares of Common Stock in the 2020 Private Placement, for total consideration of $1.0 million, on the same terms and conditions as all other Purchasers. The Audit Committee of the Company has reviewed and approved all agreements and arrangements relating to Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse’s participation in the 2020 Private Placement.
KG Mining became the Manager of the Peak Gold JV in conjunction with the Kinross Transactions and the signing of the A&R JV LLCA. Pursuant to the terms of the A&R JV LLCA, the Company and KG Mining are required to jointly fund the joint venture operations in proportion to their membership interests in the Peak Gold JV. If a member elects not to contribute to an approved program and budget or contributes less than its proportionate membership interest, its percentage membership interest will be reduced. The Company’s ability to contribute funds sufficient to retain its membership interests in the Peak Gold JV may be limited. To date, neither the Company nor the Peak Gold JV has generated any revenue from mineral sales or operations. In the future, the Peak Gold JV may generate revenue from a combination of mineral sales and other payments resulting from any commercially recoverable minerals from the Manh Choh Project. The Company currently does not have any recurring source of revenue. The Peak Gold JV currently does not have any recurring source of revenue, and its only source of cash inflows are contributions received from KG Mining and the Company. As a result, the Company’s ability to contribute funds to the Peak Gold JV and retain its membership interest will depend on its ability to raise capital. The Company has limited financial resources and the ability of the Company to arrange additional financing in the future will depend, in part, on the prevailing capital market conditions, the exploration results achieved at the Manh Choh Project, as well as the market price of metals. The Company cannot be certain that financing will be available to the Company on acceptable terms, if at all. If the Company were unable to fund its contributions to the approved programs and budgets for the Peak Gold JV, its membership interest in the Peak Gold JV would be diluted.
Further financing by the Company may include issuances of equity, instruments convertible into equity (such as warrants) or various forms of debt. The Company believes that it is likely that it will raise capital through the issuance of additional equity securities in the next six months for purposes of funding its proportionate share of future Peak Gold JV exploration and for the Company’s operating costs. The Company has issued Common Stock and other instruments convertible into equity in the past and cannot predict the size or price of any future issuances of Common Stock or other instruments convertible into equity, and the effect, if any, that such future issuances and sales will have on the market price of the Company’s securities. Any additional issuances of Common Stock or securities convertible into, or exercisable or exchangeable for, Common Stock may ultimately result in dilution to the holders of Common Stock, dilution in any future earnings per share of the Company and may have a material adverse effect upon the market price of the Common Stock of the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None
Contractual Obligations
The Tetlin Lease had an initial ten year term beginning July 2008 which was extended for an additional ten years to July 15, 2028, or so long as the Peak Gold JV initiates and continues to conduct mining operations on the Tetlin Lease. The Peak Gold JV was required to spend $350,000 per year until July 15, 2018 in exploration costs pursuant to the Tetlin Lease. Exploration expenditures to date under the Tetlin Lease have satisfied this work commitment requirement for the full lease term, through 2028, because exploration funds spent in any year in excess of $350,000 are credited toward future years’ exploration cost requirements. The Tetlin Lease also provides that the Peak Gold JV will pay the Tetlin Tribal Council a production royalty ranging from 3.0% to 5.0% should the Peak Gold JV deliver to a purchaser on a commercial basis precious or non-precious metals derived from the properties under the Tetlin Lease. The Company had previously paid the Tetlin Tribal Council $225,000 in exchange for reducing the production royalty payable to them by 0.75%. These payments lowered the production royalty to a range of 2.25% to 4.25%. The Tetlin Tribal Council had the option to increase its production royalty by (i) 0.25% by payment to the Peak Gold JV of $150,000, (ii) 0.50% by payment to the Peak Gold JV of $300,000, or (iii) 0.75% by payment to the Peak Gold JV of $450,000. The Tetlin Tribal Council exercised the option to increase its production royalty by 0.75% by payment to the Peak Gold JV of $450,000 on December 30, 2020. In lieu of a cash payment, the $450,000 will be credited against future production royalty and advance minimum royalty payments due by the Peak Gold JV to the Tetlin Tribal Council under the lease once production begins.
On January 8, 2015, the Company assigned the Tetlin Lease to the Peak Gold JV in connection with the formation of the Peak Gold JV.
Until such time as production royalties begin, the Peak Gold JV will pay the Tetlin Tribal Council an advance minimum royalty of approximately $75,000 per year, plus an inflation adjustment. Additionally, the Peak Gold JV will pay Royal Gold an overriding royalty of 3.0% should it deliver to a purchaser on a commercial basis gold or associated minerals derived from the Tetlin Lease, and a 28.0% net smelter returns silver royalty on all silver produced from a defined area within the Tetlin Lease. The Company will pay Royal Gold an overriding royalty of 3.0% on certain State of Alaska mining claims should it deliver to a purchaser on a commercial basis precious metals, non-precious metals or hydrocarbons. The Company pays claim rentals on State of Alaska mining claims which vary based on the ages of the claims. For the 2021-2022 assessment year, claims rentals totaled $478,650 (assessment years run from August 31st - September 1st of the following year). Also, if the minimum work requirement is not performed on the property, additional minimum labor payments are due on certain state of Alaska acreage.
In February 2019, the Company entered into Retention Agreements with its then-Chief Executive Officer, Brad Juneau, its Chief Financial Officer, Leah Gaines, and one other employee providing for payments in an aggregate amount of $1,500,000 upon the occurrence of certain conditions. The Retention Agreements, as amended, are triggered upon a change of control (as defined in the applicable Retention Agreement), that takes place prior to August 6, 2025, provided that the recipient is employed by the Company when the change of control occurs. Mr. Juneau and Ms. Gaines will receive a payment of $1,000,000 and $250,000, respectively, upon a change of control.
On June 10, 2020, the Company entered into a Retention Payment Agreement with Rick Van Nieuwenhuyse, the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer, providing for a payment in an amount of $350,000 upon the occurrence of certain conditions. The Retention Payment Agreement is triggered upon a change of control (as defined in the Retention Payment Agreement) which occurs on or prior to August 6, 2025, provided that Mr. Van Nieuwenhuyse is employed by the Company when the change of control occurs.
The Company received $32.4 million in cash consideration in conjunction with the Kinross Transactions. Of the $32.4 million, $1.2 million constituted a reimbursement prepayment to the Company relating to its proportionate share of certain silver royalty payments that the Peak Gold JV may be obligated to pay to Royal Gold, with the understanding that KG Mining will bear the entire economic impact of those royalty payments due from the Peak Gold JV. Pursuant to Article IV of the A&R JV LLCA, if the Peak Gold JV is dissolved, or the Company’s membership interest in the Peak Gold JV falls below 5% prior to when the prepaid royalty is paid out, the $1.2 million (less any portion already paid out) is refundable to KG Mining.
In connection with the Lucky Shot Acquisition, in addition to the cash at closing and the Promissory Note, the Company is obligated to pay CRH additional consideration if production on the Lucky Shot Property meets two separate milestone payment thresholds. If the first threshold of (1) an aggregate “mineral resource” equal to 500,000 ounces of gold or (2) production and receipt by the Company of an aggregate of 30,000 ounces of gold (including any silver based on a 1:65 gold:silver ratio) is met, then the Company will pay CRH $5 million in cash and $3.75 million in newly issued shares of CORE common stock. If the second threshold of (1) an aggregate “mineral resource” equal to 1,000,000 ounces of gold or (2) production and receipt by the Company of an aggregate of 60,000 ounces of gold (including any silver based on a 1:65 gold:silver ratio) is met, then the Company will pay CRH $5 million in cash and $5 million in newly issued shares of CORE common stock. If payable, the additional share consideration will be issued based on the 30-day volume weighted average price for each of the thirty trading days immediately prior to the satisfaction of the relevant production goal. The Company also agreed to make $10,000,000 in expenditures during the 36-month period following closing toward the existence, location, quantity, quality or commercial value of mineral deposits in, under and upon the Lucky Shot Property.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Management’s Estimates
The discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. The Company has identified below the policies that are of particular importance to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations and which require the application of significant judgment by management. The Company analyzes its estimates, including those related to its mineral reserve estimates, on a periodic basis and bases its estimates on historical experience, independent third party engineers and various other assumptions that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements:
Stock-Based Compensation. The Company applies the fair value method of accounting for stock-based compensation. Under this method, the Company measures and recognizes compensation expense for all stock-based payments at fair value at the date of grant and amortizes the amount over the employee’s service period. Management is required to make assumptions including stock price volatility and employee turnover that are utilized to measure compensation expense.
Investment in the Peak Gold JV. The Company’s consolidated financial statements include the investment in the Peak Gold JV, which is accounted for under the equity method. The Company has designated one of the three members of the Management Committee and on June 30, 2022 held a 30.0% ownership interest in the Peak Gold JV. KG Mining serves as the manager of the Peak Gold JV and manages, directs, and controls operations of the Peak Gold JV. The Company recorded its investment at the historical cost of the assets contributed. The cumulative losses of the Peak Gold JV exceed the historical cost of the assets contributed to the Peak Gold JV; therefore, the Company’s investment in the Peak Gold JV as of June 30, 2022 is zero. The portion of the cumulative loss that exceeds the Company’s investment will be suspended and recognized against earnings, if any, from the investment in the Peak Gold JV in future periods.
Business Combinations. In determining whether an acquisition should be accounted for as a business combination or asset acquisition, the Company first determines whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets. If this is the case, the single identifiable asset or the group of similar assets is not deemed to be a business, and is instead deemed to be an asset. If this is not the case, the Company then further evaluates whether the single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets and activities includes, at a minimum, an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs. If so, the Company concludes that the single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets and activities is a business. The Company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. Application of this method of accounting requires that (i) identifiable assets acquired (including identifiable intangible assets) and liabilities assumed generally be measured and recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date and (ii) the excess of the purchase price over the net fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized as goodwill, which is not amortized for accounting purposes but is subject to testing for impairment at least annually. The Company measures and recognizes asset acquisitions that are not deemed to be business combinations based on the cost to acquire the assets, which includes transaction costs. Goodwill is not recognized in asset acquisitions. Contingent consideration in asset acquisitions payable in the form of cash is recognized when payment becomes probable and reasonably estimable, unless the contingent consideration meets the definition of a derivative, in which case the amount becomes part of the asset acquisition cost when acquired. Contingent consideration payable in the form of a fixed number of the Company’s own shares is measured at fair value as of the acquisition date and recognized when the issuance of the shares becomes probable. Upon recognition of the contingent consideration payment, the amount is included in the cost of the acquired asset or group of assets.
Convertible Debenture. The Company accounts for its convertible debenture in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options ("ASC 470-20"), which requires the liability and equity components of convertible debt to be separately accournted for in a manner that reflects the issuer's nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. Debt discount created by the bifurcation of embedded features in the convertible debenture are reflected as a reduction to the related debt liability. The discount is amortized to interest expense over the term of the debt using the effective-interest method.
Derivative Asset for Embedded Conversion Features. The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates convertible notes to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be accounted for separately. In circumstances where the embedded conversion option in a convertible instrument is required to be bifurcated and there are also other embedded derivative instruments in the convertible instrument that are required to be bifurcated, the bifurcated derivative instruments are evaluated and accounted for separately. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is recorded as either an asset or a liability and marked-to-market each balance sheet date, with the change in fair value recorded in the statements of operations as other income or expense. Upon conversion or exercise of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the conversion date and then that fair value is reclassified to equity. The fair value of the embedded conversion features are estimated using several probability weighted binomial lattice models. The Company estimated the fair value of the convertible notes conversion feature at the time of issuance and subsequent remeasurement dates, utilizing the with-and without method, where the value of the derivative feature is the difference in values between a note simulated with the embedded conversion feature and the value of the same note simulated without the embedded conversion feature. Estimating fair values of embedded conversion features requires the development of significant and subjective estimates that may, and are likely to, change over the duration of the instrument with related changes in internal and external market factors.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements. See “Part II. Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 4 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.