Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, is intended to provide a better understanding of our consolidated financial statements, including a brief discussion of our business and products, key factors that impacted our performance, and a summary of our operating results. This information should be read in conjunction with Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Historical results and percentage relationships among any amounts in the consolidated financial statements are not necessarily indicative of trends in operating results for future periods.
Business Overview
Our Mission
At Charles & Colvard, Ltd., our mission is to provide a more conscious and conflict-free fine jewelry experience for our customers. We are dedicated to blaze a more brilliant path forward with our Made, Not Mined™ gemstones and committed to create fine jewelry with a conscience.
About Charles & Colvard
Charles & Colvard, Ltd., a North Carolina corporation founded in 1995 (which may be referred to as Charles & Colvard, we, us, or our) is a globally recognized fine jewelry company specializing in lab created gemstones. We manufacture, market, and distribute Charles & Colvard Created Moissanite® (which we refer to as moissanite or moissanite jewels) and in September 2020, we announced our expansion into the lab grown diamond market with the launch of Caydia®, an exclusive brand of premium lab grown diamonds. We offer gemstones and finished jewelry featuring our proprietary moissanite jewels and premium lab grown diamonds for sale in the worldwide fine jewelry market. Charles & Colvard is the original source of created moissanite, and in 2015, we debuted Forever One™, our premium moissanite gemstone brand. As an e-commerce and multi-channel destination for fine jewelry featuring lab grown gemstones, we believe that the addition of lab grown diamonds is a natural progression for the Charles & Colvard brand.
We sell loose moissanite jewels, lab grown diamonds, and finished jewelry set with these gems through two operating segments: our Online Channels segment, which encompasses our digital properties components, comprised of our charlesandcolvard.com and moissaniteoutlet.com websites, e-commerce outlets, including marketplaces, drop-ship customers, and other pure-play, exclusively e-commerce customers; and our Traditional segment, which consists of domestic and international distributors and retail customers. We report segment information based on the “management” approach. This segment reporting approach designates the internal reporting used by management for making operating decisions and assessing performance as the source of our operating and reportable segments.
We operate in an e-commerce environment characterized by both complexity in global markets and ongoing economic uncertainties in the U.S. and internationally. Our strategy is to build a globally revered and accessible brand of gemstones and finished fine jewelry products set with moissanite and lab grown diamonds. We believe that our goods appeal to a wide consumer audience and leverage our advantage of being the original and leading worldwide source of moissanite and purveyor of premium lab grown diamonds. We believe a direct relationship with consumers is an important component to this strategy, which entails delivering tailored educational content, engaging in interactive dialogue with our audience, and positioning our brand to meet the demands of today’s discerning consumer. A significant component of our strategy in this environment is to focus on our core products, improving the quality and predictability of the delivery of our products and services, and placing those products quickly into the hands of our U.S. and international customers at affordable prices. Moreover, recognizing today that our customers and vendors are resource constrained, we are endeavoring to develop and extend our portfolio of products in a disciplined manner with a focus on domestic markets close to our core capabilities, as well as growing our global marketplace sales. We continue to focus on affordability initiatives. We also expect to continue innovating and investing in lab created gemstone technologies to fulfill evolving product requirements for our customers and investing in our people so that we have the technical and production skills necessary to succeed without limiting our ability to build sound financial returns to our investors.
We believe our expanding application of an omni-channel sales strategy across the fine jewelry trade and to the end consumer with accessible gemstones and value branded finished jewelry featuring Charles & Colvard Created Moissanite® and Caydia® lab grown diamonds positions our products at the many touchpoints where consumers are when they are making their buying decisions - thereby continuing to create greater exposure for our brand and increasing consumer demand.
COVID-19
The global outbreak of the novel strain of coronavirus, known as COVID-19, was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the U.S. Government in March 2020. The pandemic has and continues to negatively affect the U.S. and global economy. In response to this pandemic, federal, state, county and local governments and public health organizations and authorities around the world from time to time implemented a variety of measures intended to control the spread of the virus including quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders, travel restrictions, business limitations and closures, social distancing, vaccine, and hygiene requirements. While some of these measures have been lifted or eased in certain jurisdictions, other jurisdictions - for example, most recently in China - have seen increases in new COVID-19 cases in recent periods, resulting in restrictions having been reinstated or new restrictions imposed for a period of time. There continues to be considerable uncertainty regarding such measures and potential future measures. These measures have adversely affected workforces, customers, economies, and global supply chains, and resulted in significant travel and transport restrictions. It has also disrupted the normal operations of many businesses, including ours.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to cause business impacts in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, or Fiscal 2022, primarily driven by the emergence of the Omicron variant in November 2021 with a resulting increase in COVID cases in early 2022. During Fiscal 2022, our performance was adversely affected by supply chain disruptions and delays, as well as labor challenges associated with employee absences, travel restrictions, site access, quarantine restrictions, remote work, and adjusted work schedules. Attendance for employees required to be onsite has fluctuated based on pandemic developments and rates of infection. We are actively engaging with our customers and are continuing to take measures to protect the health and safety of our employees by encouraging them to get vaccinated, including booster shots.
During the fiscal year ending June 30, 2023, or Fiscal 2023, if governmental or executive orders are reinstated, or new mandates implemented, that result in business suspensions, it is uncertain to what extent compliance with any such mandates could result in adverse impacts for us or our suppliers. If the adverse impacts are significant for us or our suppliers, our operations and ability to execute on our business strategy could be adversely affected. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance in future periods, including our ability to execute our business in the expected timeframe, remains uncertain and will depend on future pandemic-related developments, including the duration of the pandemic, potential subsequent waves of COVID-19 infection or potential new variants, such as the emergence of the Omicron subvariant BA.5, which according to recent medical research studies, has proven to be more vaccine-resistant than its previously more-evasive predecessor, and is currently accounting for principally all increased viral infection rates worldwide and across the U.S. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our business will also depend upon the effectiveness and adoption of COVID-19 vaccines, boosters, therapeutics, supplier impacts, and related government actions to prevent and manage disease spread, including the implementation of any federal, state, local, or foreign vaccine mandates, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
We have continued taking measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, including updating our return-to-work policies, as necessary, working with our customers and suppliers to minimize disruptions, and supporting our community in addressing the challenges posed by this ongoing global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to present personnel related business challenges and we expect these to continue into Fiscal 2023. Our management has reintroduced employees to the workplace, including in some cases permitting a hybrid blend of remote and onsite work for certain sectors of the workforce, as vaccine and related booster shot rates have increased and COVID-19 infection levels have decreased. We continue working with our customers and suppliers to minimize disruptions, including at times accelerating payments to key suppliers that are due by their terms in future periods. We expect to continue accelerating payments to our suppliers in some cases into Fiscal 2023.
Although the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a significant adverse impact on our financial results in Fiscal 2022, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our operations and financial performance in future periods, including our ability to execute our strategic initiatives in the expected timeframes, remains uncertain and will depend on future pandemic related developments, including the duration of the pandemic, any potential subsequent waves of COVID-19 and its variant and subvariant viral infections, the effectiveness, distribution, and acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines and boosters, and related government actions to prevent and manage disease spread, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. We cannot at this time predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, but we anticipate that the pandemic is likely to continue to impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows in Fiscal 2023.
As global and U.S economic activity continues evolving in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of constraints on our cash and working capital, including experiencing potential liquidity challenges, remains in the forefront of our working capital management practices. Despite our cost-saving efforts, many business and operating expenses have remained flat or continued to rise, particularly those relating to transportation and freight expenses. Cash flow management will remain crucial for our business in the months ahead and we intend to monitor fluctuations in our revenues that could impact our ongoing cash flow from operations. We continue to focus on being more nimble in managing our inventory levels given the possible uncertainties in the supply chain and the potential impact on general economic conditions, which may also place further demands on working capital.
Our outlook remains subject to the various risks and uncertainties in connection with the pandemic and is based on assumptions that management believes in good faith are reasonable, but which may be materially different from actual results. Currently, we believe there are multiple factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K, including our strategic goals for Fiscal 2023 set forth in Our Strategic Outlook, included in Part I, Item 1, “Business”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These factors include, but are not limited to: our ability to face the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic and implementation of any such related response plans; fluctuations in COVID-19 cases in the U.S. and the extent that geography of outbreak primarily matches the regions in which we and our principal business partners operate; the resiliency and potential adverse impacts on our various consumer end-use markets; the potential negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to continue producing and supplying finished goods and related services at normal levels or at all; the duration, impact and severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, including the markets in which we do business, our suppliers, customers or other business partners as well as our employees; the economic impact of government responses to the pandemic; the performance of the U.S. economy, including the impact on the economy of the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental orders restricting activities that may be imposed to prevent further outbreak of viral infections; and the resulting adverse economic events beyond our control.
We believe that our management has taken - and continues to take - swift and appropriate action designed to hedge against the overall impact that the pandemic may have on our business, to prepare for a potential recessionary environment, including the impact on current inflation rates, and to efficiently manage the business while maintaining adequate liquidity and maximum operating flexibility. We remain focused on three critical areas of wellbeing, including safeguarding the health and safety of our employees, streamlining operations while ensuring support of our brand and customers, and maintaining our financial strength and stability as we move forward into Fiscal 2023.
Highlights of the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, we delivered on several key initiatives, which we believe positions us for future growth as we move forward into Fiscal 2023. These accomplishments in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, include the following:
•
Expansion of Brand Awareness. During Fiscal 2022, we have made significant investments to strengthen the Charles & Colvard brand through our marketing strategy, which includes brand marketing campaigns across multiple digital platforms, social media outlets, earned media, and media placements as well as placements with key consumer-based influencers. As a result of our brand awareness expansion programs, we received positive press coverage during Fiscal 2022 for our fashion jewelry product lines on several major online shopping and fashion-related websites, such as Vogue.com, Brides.com, JCKonline.com, MSN.com, TheKnot.com, WWD.com, MensHealth.com, RetailMeNot.com, and Byrdie.com. We also received finished jewelry related press coverage on national online news outlet websites, such as CNN.com and NewsBreak.com. Our exclusive brand of premium lab grown diamonds, Caydia®, was photographed to be the featured cover story of the summer 2022 issue of JCK Magazine. In December, we kicked off our out-of-home marketing strategy and began a digital billboard advertising program in New York City that allowed us to present a collection of our fine jewelry and lab grown gemstones to live consumers in the New York City mass media market. In April, we announced our strategic distribution agreement with Cooksongold, a division of the Heimerle + Meule Group in Europe. We believe this expansion of our wholesale gemstone distribution network in the U.K. and surrounding areas will allow us to expand our global brand presence in a meaningful way. During the fourth quarter, we introduced our moissaniteoutlet.com product assortment to drop-ship retail partners and launched the secondary website on Amazon.com, which makes our line of consumer products sold at discounted prices available to a much broader market. Lastly, we believe that it is possible to make exquisite fine jewelry in an ethical and environmentally responsible way. During Fiscal 2022, we unveiled our Made, not Mined™ marketing campaign, which we believe demonstrates our commitment to continuously evolve our craft so that it aligns with our commitment as a steward of nature and our adherence to what we believe is a strict standard of environmental and humanitarian governance;
•
Enhanced Customer Engagement. This fiscal year we substantially completed construction of an innovative broadcast studio at our corporate headquarters, which will expand our content production capabilities and provide us a platform to live-stream consumer-based broadcasts on our websites and through other online media channels, including those of our business partners. We believe these capabilities will provide incremental sales channels for our direct-to-consumer business and allow us to compete more effectively and to increase our market share within the fine jewelry space. As we begin streaming live content from our own broadcast studio, this will be a digital extension of our sales team and a tool that our marketing team will utilize for video content production, live-stream shopping, designer and influencer interviews, and fashion photography. We believe this digital marketing capability will continue to further position and define our brand in what we believe is a rapidly evolving consumer landscape and to better meet the consumer’s current appetite for digital content. Also, during Fiscal 2022, we hosted a social media platform-based engagement ring sweepstakes program that was designed to promote our Made, not Mined™ marketing campaign. The engagement ring that was given away featured our Forever One™ moissanite gemstones;
•
Product Development. In Fiscal 2022, we launched our patented Signature Star Series line of finished jewelry featuring Caydia® lab grown diamonds set in unisex fine fashion jewelry styles and expanded our Moissanite by Charles & Colvard® product styles with our dropship business partners. In connection with other featured gemstone collections of fine jewelry, we launched expanded moissanite gemstone engagement and bridal assortments as well as our Zodiac Collection, which features our Caydia® lab grown diamond necklaces that present our unique designs of Western zodiac astrological signs. In addition, we added our specialty Pavé Collection, which also features the sophistication of our premium Caydia® lab grown pavé diamonds. While we believe other brands of fine jewelry may focus on creating jewelry that features such gemstones or recycled precious metals, we are pioneering a process to accomplish both components by capitalizing on our expertise in lab created gemstones along with our commitment to use recycled precious metals. We believe that we have set a new standard for such premium lines of fine jewelry set with lab grown gemstones. We also curated an assortment of fine fashion jewelry featuring our Forever One™ moissanite gemstones and Caydia® lab grown diamonds that is being used for the filming of upcoming seasons of the American Broadcast Company, or ABC, commercial broadcast television network’s series of The Bachelorette; and
•
Disciplined Growth. We have neared completion of our first Charles & Colvard Signature Showroom, or Signature Showroom, which we believe will complement and expand our omnichannel brand strategy in the fine jewelry space. This Signature Showroom, for which we expect to celebrate a grand opening during the second quarter of Fiscal 2023, will be the first location of our retail showroom expansion program and is located in our corporate headquarters in North Carolina’s Research Triangle Park. We believe that our retail showroom expansion program will allow us to develop a nationwide footprint to showcase our patented Signature Collection designs as well as a wide assortment of Forever One™ moissanite and Caydia® lab grown diamond fine jewelry. While we are in the early stages of expanding our geographic footprint, we believe these strategies will combine to help drive future and sustained growth and to present our brand and gemstone product lines to a broader range of consumers in the fine jewelry space.
As we move forward into Fiscal 2023, our strategic focus remains centered on the health and growth of our brand on a global scale. We will continue to execute on our key strategies with an ongoing commitment to measured spending and generating sustainable earnings improvement.
Further, as we continue managing through these challenging and dynamic times, we plan to remain highly focused on prudently developing the reach of our brand - both domestically and internationally - through select digital marketing initiatives that align with consumer engagement and demand. We continue to believe that our long-term mission will ultimately be accomplished through our ability to remain fluid and shift to brand awareness strategies that are sensitive and responsive to these ever-changing times.
Our MD&A generally discusses Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021. Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between Fiscal 2021 and the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, or Fiscal 2020, that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results or Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 filed with the SEC on September 3, 2021.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of operations data for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Consolidated Net Sales
Consolidated net sales for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 comprise the following:
Consolidated net sales were $43.09 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $39.24 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $3.85 million, or 10%. The increase in consolidated net sales for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was principally the result of our strong second quarter sales driven by robust calendar year-end holiday sales during the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2021, and strong Valentine’s Day sales in February 2022 during our fiscal third quarter ended March 31, 2022. These higher sales for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, were also related to increased consumer awareness and ongoing strong demand for our moissanite jewels, lab grown diamonds, and finished jewelry featuring both moissanite and lab grown diamonds. These increases resulted in higher finished jewelry product net sales during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 in our Online Channels segment and Traditional segment. The increases in our Online Channels segment net sales in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 were partially offset by lower loose jewel net sales in our Traditional segment and decreased international sales during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Sales of finished jewelry represented 69% and 62% of total consolidated net sales for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, finished jewelry sales were $29.71 million compared to $24.40 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $5.31 million, or 22%. This increase in finished jewelry sales was due primarily to higher finished jewelry sales of Forever One™ and Moissanite by Charles & Colvard® in our Online Channels segment as well as in our Traditional segment and higher finished jewelry sales of Caydia® lab grown diamond jewelry in our Online Channels segment.
Sales of loose jewels represented 31% and 38% of total consolidated net sales for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, loose jewel sales were $13.38 million compared to $14.83 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, a decrease of $1.46 million, or 10%. The decrease for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was due primarily to a lower level of sales through the distribution network in our Traditional segment.
U.S. net sales accounted for approximately 95% of total consolidated net sales during each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. U.S. net sales increased during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 primarily as a result of increased sales to U.S. customers in our Online Channels segment.
Our largest U.S. customer during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 accounted for 14% and 13% of total consolidated net sales during each of the respective periods then ended. Our second largest U.S. customer during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 accounted for 12% of total consolidated net sales during the period then ended. We did not have another U.S. customer account for 10% or more of total consolidated sales during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. We expect that we will remain dependent on our ability, and that of our largest customers, to maintain and enhance retail and wholesale programs. A change in or loss of any of these customers or retailer relationships could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
International net sales accounted for approximately 5% of total consolidated net sales during each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. International net sales decreased to $1.95 million, or 3%, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $2.01 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. International sales decreased during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to somewhat lower demand in our international distributor market coupled with a slight increase in demand in our direct-to-consumer international sales from our Online Channels segment in international markets. In light of the effects of ongoing global economic conditions and as the world continues to adapt to the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to evaluate these and other potential distributors in international markets to determine the best long-term partners. As a result, and in light of the ongoing worldwide pandemic and international trade challenges, we expect our sales in these markets may fluctuate significantly each reporting period.
We did not have an international customer account for 10% or more of total consolidated sales during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. A portion of our international consolidated sales represents jewels sold internationally that may be re-imported to U.S. retailers.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
Total cost of goods sold was $22.85 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $20.81 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, a net increase of approximately $2.04 million, or 10%. Product line cost of goods sold is defined as product cost of goods sold in each of our Online Channels segment and Traditional segment excluding non-capitalized expenses from our manufacturing and production control departments, comprising personnel costs, depreciation, rent, utilities, and corporate overhead allocations; freight out; inventory write-offs; and other inventory adjustments, comprising costs of quality issues, and damaged goods.
The increase in total cost of goods sold for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily driven by increased sales of finished jewelry, which reflect higher material and labor costs, in our Online Channels segment as a result of strong demand during the calendar year-end 2021 holiday season and Valentine’s Day period.
The net increase in non-product line cost of goods sold for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 comprises an approximate $182,000 increase in freight out principally from increased shipments resulting from Online Channels segment sales growth during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, as well as a reflection of the rising costs of fuel and shipping overall during the period; an approximate $70,000 increase in non-capitalized manufacturing production control expenses principally related to the timing of when work-in-process goods are received into inventory and overhead costs are allocated; and an approximate $45,000 increase in inventory write-offs primarily related to increases in obsolescence reserves in the first three months of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared to those in the comparable prior year period. These increases were partially offset by a $234,000 decrease in other inventory adjustments principally related to changes in production standard cost variances compared to those in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
For further discussion of non-product line cost of goods sold, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
Sales and marketing expenses were $12.42 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $8.48 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of approximately $3.94 million, or 47%. The increase in sales and marketing expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a $3.13 million increase in advertising and digital marketing expenses; a $194,000 increase in compensation expenses; a $221,000 increase in professional services principally comprising consulting services for marketing support in the current year period; a $185,000 increase in bank fees expenses, which are principally related to higher credit card transaction and payment platform fees from increased online sales levels; a $72,000 increase in software-related costs incurred primarily in connection with new software-related agreements associated with upgraded sales-related operating and cybersecurity systems; a $67,000 increase in general business taxes; a $41,000 increase in rent expense, primarily related to our corporate headquarters operating lease amendment that was executed in January 2021; and a $38,000 increase in travel expenses as we returned to more traditional business travel patterns following cut-backs relating to the COVID-19 pandemic and related cost-control measures in the prior year period. These increases were offset partially by a $4,000 net decrease in general office-related expenses.
The increase in digital marketing expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a $2.33 million increase in digital advertising spend; a $412,000 increase in cooperative advertising; a $209,000 increase in brand awareness marketing campaign expenditures in the current year period; a $137,000 increase in expenses relating to our participation in the 2022 JCK Trade Show (the JCK Trade Show organization did not hold an event in the prior fiscal year due to restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic); a $24,000 increase in outside agency fees; and a $23,000 increase in print media expenses.
Compensation expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 increased primarily as a result of a $157,000 increase in salaries, commissions, and related employee benefits in the aggregate and a $63,000 increase in employee stock-based compensation expense. These increases were partially offset by a $24,000 decrease in bonus expense and a $2,000 decrease in employee-related severance costs from the prior year.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
General and administrative expenses were $4.95 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $4.44 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of approximately $508,000, or 11%. The increase in general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a $336,000 increase in compensation expenses; a $110,000 increase in housing allowances and travel-related expenditures as we returned to more normal business travel patterns following cut-backs relating to the COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year period; a $75,000 increase in business taxes and licenses; a $74,000 increase in insurance expenses principally related to higher renewal premiums; a $57,000 increase in rent expense, primarily related to our corporate headquarters operating lease amendment that was executed in January 2021; a $51,000 increase in employee-related recruiting and search fees for new hires; a $13,000 increase in telephone expenses; a $12,000 increase in bad debt expense associated with our allowance for doubtful accounts reserve policy in connection with an increase in accounts receivable, compared with the prior period; and a $7,000 net increase in miscellaneous general and administrative expenses. These increases were partially offset by a $115,000 decrease in bank-related fees principally in connection with the Company’s prior credit facility that was terminated in accordance with its terms in July 2021; an $86,000 decrease in depreciation and amortization expense, principally related to fully depreciated assets when compared to those in prior periods; and a $26,000 decrease in professional services.
Compensation expenses increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to a $315,000 increase in employee stock-based compensation expense and a $75,000 net increase in salaries and related employee benefits in the aggregate. These increases were offset by a $54,000 decrease in bonus expense.
Professional services fees decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to a $67,000 decrease in legal fees associated with corporate governance matters and a $57,000 decrease in investor relations fees. These decreases were partially offset by a $63,000 increase in fees associated with audit and tax services, principally related to a discrete income tax-related projects, and a $35,000 increase in marketing consulting services.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on extinguishment of debt for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 is as follows:
On June 18, 2020, we received the proceeds from our Paycheck Protection Program Loan, or the PPP Loan, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or SBA. The PPP Loan in the principal amount of $965,000 was disbursed by Newtek Small Business Finance, LLC, or the Lender, pursuant to a promissory note, or the Promissory Note, dated June 15, 2020. During the period of time that the principal under the Promissory Note was outstanding, we accounted for the Promissory Note as debt within the accompanying consolidated financial statements. In accordance with applicable provisions of the CARES Act, effective June 23, 2021, our PPP Loan forgiveness was approved and processed by the SBA for the full principal of the PPP Loan in the amount of $965,000. The full amount of interest expense to-date in the amount of approximately $9,000 that the Company recognized during the period the principal of the PPP Loan was outstanding was also forgiven by the SBA. Accordingly, the full amount of the gain in connection with the extinguishment of this debt, including the benefit from the forgiveness of the inception to-date interest expense, was recognized in the prior fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Interest Income
Interest income for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 is as follows:
Certain cash balances in excess of operating needs are deposited into and maintained in an interest-bearing account with a federally insured commercial bank. Accordingly, during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, we earned interest from cash on deposit in this interest-bearing account. The increase in earned interest for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 reflects movement of invested funds into a higher-yield money market fund during the quarter ended June 30, 2022, coupled with the overall increase in interest rates during Fiscal 2022 compared with Fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 is as follows:
As described above, during the period of time the principal of the PPP Loan was outstanding, we accrued interest at a fixed rate of 1% per annum. Our accrual for interest expense associated with the PPP Loan began June 18, 2020, the date we received the proceeds for the PPP Loan from our Lender, through June 23, 2021, the date our PPP Loan, including the related accrued and unpaid interest, was forgiven by the SBA.
We had no outstanding debt during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Loss on Foreign Currency Exchange
Loss on foreign currency exchange related to foreign sales transacted in functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
During the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had international sales transactions denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar that resulted in foreign currency exchange net losses. The decrease in these losses reflects the lower level of international sales denominated in foreign currencies during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared with the prior fiscal year, coupled with fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our statutory tax rate as of June 30, 2022 is 22.45% and consisted of the federal income tax rate of 21.00% and a blended state income tax rate of 1.45%, net of the federal benefit. Our statutory tax rate as of the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was 22.24% and consisted of the federal income tax rate of 21.00% and a blended state income tax rate of 1.24%, net of the federal benefit. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, our effective income tax rate was 17.93%. Our effective income tax rate reflects the effect of federal and state income taxes on earnings and the impact of differences in book and tax accounting arising primarily from the permanent tax benefits associated with stock-based compensation transactions during the accounting period then ended.
We recognized a net income tax expense of approximately $519,000 for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared with a net income tax benefit of approximately $6.33 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
As of each reporting date, we consider new evidence, both positive and negative, that could impact our view with regard to future realization of deferred tax assets. Beginning in 2014, we determined that negative evidence outweighed the positive and established a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets and we maintained such full valuation allowance through the period ended June 30, 2020. However, as of June 30, 2021, cumulative positive taxable income over the last three tax years had been generated in the U.S., as compared to the negative evidence of cumulative losses in previous years. We also determined that our expectations of future taxable income in upcoming tax years, including estimated growth rates applied to future expected taxable income that includes significant management estimates and assumptions, would be sufficient to result in full utilization of our federal net operating loss carryforwards and certain of the deferred tax assets prior to any statutory expiration. As a result, we determined that sufficient positive evidence existed as of June 30, 2021, to conclude that it was more likely than not deferred tax assets of approximately $6.35 million would be realizable, and we reduced our valuation allowance accordingly. The reduction of the valuation allowances against these deferred tax assets was the main driver of the income tax benefit during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 of approximately $6.33 million.
With the reduction of our valuation allowance during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized deferred income tax expense during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 in the amount of approximately $499,000 compared to a deferred income tax benefit during the year ended June 30, 2021 in the amount of approximately $6.35 million. A valuation allowance remains against certain deferred tax assets primarily relating to state net operating loss carryforwards from our e-commerce subsidiary due to the timing uncertainty of when it will generate positive taxable income to utilize the associated deferred tax assets. In addition, a valuation allowance also remains against certain deferred tax assets relating to operating loss carryforwards relating to our dormant subsidiary located in Hong Kong.
As of June 30, 2022, we determined that our expectations of future taxable income in upcoming tax years, including estimated growth rates applied to future expected taxable income that includes significant estimates and assumptions, would continue to be sufficient to result in full utilization of our remaining federal net operating loss carryforwards and certain of the deferred tax assets prior to any statutory expiration. As a result, we determined that sufficient positive evidence existed as of June 30, 2022, to conclude that it is more likely than not deferred tax assets of approximately $5.85 million remain realizable. Conversely, we further determined that sufficient negative evidence continued to exist to conclude it was uncertain that we would have sufficient future taxable income to utilize certain of our deferred tax assets. Therefore, we continued to maintain a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets relating to certain state net operating loss carryforwards from our e-commerce subsidiary due to the timing uncertainty of when it will generate positive taxable income to utilize the associated deferred tax assets. In addition, a valuation allowance remains against certain deferred tax assets relating to operating loss carryforwards relating to our dormant subsidiary located in Hong Kong.
Certain Operating Metrics
We believe that certain metrics are key to our business, including but not limited to monitoring our average order value, or AOV. We use the AOV computation in part to make strategic digital marketing related decisions and to monitor the performance and return on investment of our marketing activities. Our AOV is based on financial results and customer-related data for charlesandcolvard.com, LLC, our wholly owned subsidiary and through which we operate our primary transactional website. Our calculation for AOV is sensitive to several factors, including sales volume and product mix. Therefore, we believe that this metric may vary widely going forward as we respond to ever changing consumer demand and provide the products - that may have widely variable price points - which our audiences are seeking.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, our AOV, based on charlesandcolvard.com revenue, net of returns, divided by the total number of customer orders, is estimated to be approximately $1,100.
An additional metric that we use to manage charlesandcolvard.com operations and to make strategic digital marketing decisions for our transactional website is period-over-period revenue growth. Accordingly, we believe this level of growth reinforces our current year’s digital marketing program and affirms our decision to increase our investment in consumer-driven marketing efforts in charlesandcolvard.com during Fiscal 2022. While we believe this metric is sensitive to many factors and may vary in future periods, we expect to continue to monitor and base our marketing-related investments in part on charlesandcolvard.com revenue growth going forward.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, we experienced a 24% year-over-year growth in charlesandcolvard.com revenue compared to revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global and domestic economy remains uncertain and the world continues adapting to the ongoing pandemic and evolving viral variants and its adverse effects on global economics and worldwide business operations. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to place unprecedented pressures on global and U.S. businesses including our own. Depending on future developments, including the success of the global vaccine efforts to control the spread of the underlying virus and evolving variants and sub-variants, the pandemic could materially adversely impact our capital resources and liquidity in the future. We remain increasingly focused on the COVID-19 pandemic and are continually evaluating its potential effect on our business and liquidity and capital resources.
Capital Structure and Debt
On June 18, 2020, we received the proceeds from the PPP Loan pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act, as administered by the SBA. The PPP Loan in the principal amount of $965,000 was disbursed by the Lender pursuant to a promissory note, or the Promissory Note, issued by us on June 15, 2020. In accordance with applicable provisions of the CARES Act, effective June 23, 2021, our PPP Loan forgiveness was approved and processed by the SBA for the full principal of the PPP Loan in the amount of $965,000. The full amount of the gain in connection with the extinguishment of this debt, including the forgiveness of accrued and unpaid interest of approximately $9,000, was recognized in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Short-Term Liquidity and Capital Structure
The CARES Act provided that existing AMT credit carryforwards were eligible for acceleration and refundable AMT credits were to be completely refunded to companies for taxable years beginning in 2019, or by election, taxable years beginning in 2018. Accordingly, we elected to have our then-existing AMT tax completely refunded and filed a refund claim for the remaining portion of our AMT tax credit. Accordingly, the remaining balance of our AMT credit refund in the amount of approximately $270,000 was completely refunded during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, provides that employers who received a PPP loan may also qualify for the Employee Retention Credit, or ERC. Previously, pursuant to the CARES Act, taxpayers that received a PPP loan were not eligible for the ERC and this change is retroactive to March 27, 2020. We believe that we may qualify for certain employer-related tax benefits pursuant to the ERC and are currently working with an independent third-party tax credit firm to amend our applicable federal payroll tax returns for such benefit. Any benefit received in connection with available ERC credits will be recognized in the period such credits are received.
Long-Term Liquidity and Capital Structure
We have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the SEC that allows us to periodically offer and sell, individually or in any combination, shares of common stock, shares of preferred stock, warrants to purchase shares of common stock or preferred stock, and units consisting of any combination of the foregoing types of securities, up to a total of $25.00 million, of which all is available. However, we may offer and sell no more than one-third of our public float (which is the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates) in any 12-month period. Our ability to issue equity securities under the shelf registration statement is subject to market conditions, which may be in turn, subject to, among other things, the potential disruption and volatility that may be caused by ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Any capital raise is not assured and may not be at terms that would be acceptable to us.
Financing Activities
As discussed above, on June 18, 2020, we received the proceeds from the PPP Loan pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act, as administered by the SBA. The PPP Loan in the principal amount of $965,000 was disbursed by the Lender pursuant to a Promissory Note issued by us on June 15, 2020. In accordance with applicable provisions of the CARES Act, effective June 23, 2021, our PPP Loan forgiveness was approved and processed by the SBA for the full principal of the PPP Loan in the amount of $965,000. The full amount of the gain in connection with the extinguishment of this debt, including the forgiveness of accrued and unpaid interest of approximately $9,000, was recognized in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Long-Term Financing Activities
In accordance with authority granted by our Board of Directors on April 29, 2022, we can repurchase up to $5.00 million in shares outstanding of our common stock over the three-year period ending April 29, 2025. Pursuant to the terms of the repurchase authorization, the common stock share repurchases are generally at the discretion of management. As we repurchase our common shares, which have no par value, we report such shares held as treasury stock on our consolidated balance sheets as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, with the purchase price recorded within treasury stock.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, we repurchased 30,287 shares of our common stock for an aggregate price of approximately $38,000 pursuant to the repurchase authorization. We repurchased no shares of our common stock during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Operating Activities and Cash Flows
We require cash to fund our operating expenses and working capital requirements, including outlays for capital expenditures. As of June 30, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $15.67 million, trade accounts receivable of $2.22 million, and net current inventory of $11.02 million, as compared to cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash totaling $21.45 million, trade accounts receivable of $1.66 million, and net current inventory of $11.45 million as of June 30, 2021. We also had access during Fiscal 2022 to a $5.00 million cash collateralized line of credit facility, or the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility, that we obtained effective July 9, 2021, as amended July 28, 2022, from JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., or JPMorgan Chase.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, our working capital decreased by approximately $1.08 million to $29.06 million from $30.14 million at June 30, 2021. As described more fully below, the decrease in working capital at June 30, 2022 is primarily attributable to an increase in our accounts payable, a decrease in our allocation of inventory from long-term to short-term due to a lower expected sell through of inventory on hand in the upcoming period, an increase in our short-term operating lease liabilities; and a net decrease in our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. These factors were offset partially by a decrease in our accrued expenses and other liabilities, an increase in our accounts receivable, and an increase in our prepaid expenses and other assets. Our cash used for investing activities principally for construction-in-process expenditures related to our retail expansion program and the construction of our first Signature Showroom and other leasehold improvements in our corporate offices was offset partially by cash provided by net financing activities.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, approximately $573,000 of cash was provided by our operations. The primary drivers of our cash flows from operations were the favorable effect of net income in the amount of $2.37 million, which also included $1.87 million of non-cash expenses; an increase in accounts payable of $1.63 million; and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $927,000. These factors were offset partially by an increase in inventory of $4.54 million; a decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $1.20 million; an increase in accounts receivable of $484,000; and a decrease in accrued income taxes of $10,000.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, accounts receivable increased as compared with our accounts receivable as of the prior year ended June 30, 2021. Throughout the course of the COVID-19 pandemic and through the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, from time to time we have offered extended Traditional segment customer payment terms beyond 90 days to certain credit-worthy customers. Because of the ongoing impact of the pandemic on the global economy, the extension of these terms may not immediately increase liquidity as a result of ongoing current-period sales, which we expect may continue to be pressured due to the effects of the ongoing pandemic. In addition, we believe our competitors and other vendors in the wholesale jewelry industry have expanded their use of extended payment terms and, in aggregate, we believe that, through our use of extended payment terms, we provide a competitive response in our market during the current global economic environment. We believe that we are unable to estimate the impact of these actions on our net sales, but we believe that if we ceased providing extended payment terms, we would be at a competitive disadvantage for some Traditional segment customers in the marketplace during this economic period and that our net sales and profits would likely be adversely impacted.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, prepaid expenses and other assets increased principally as a result of an increase in the right-of-use asset associated with leasehold improvements in connection with the lease for our corporate headquarters facilities (which for financial reporting purposes is classified with prepaid expenses and other assets in the consolidated statement of cash flows) and the timing of certain vendor payments, primarily for insurance-related premium expenses, in advance of goods or services received. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, accrued expenses and other liabilities decreased principally due the timing of payments for certain incurred expenses, principally for compensation and related benefits, partially offset by an increase in the operating lease liability associated with the lease for our corporate headquarters facilities. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, accounts payable increased primarily as a result of the timing of payments for costs associated with inventory-related purchases and professional services incurred. As a result of the pandemic, we have from time-to-time paid certain vendor business partners in advance of their payment terms to secure and achieve supply chain needs.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, our working capital increased by approximately $12.72 million to $30.14 million from $17.42 million at June 30, 2020. As described more fully below, the increase in working capital at June 30, 2021 is primarily attributable to an increase in our cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash, principally resulting from cash provided by our operations, increase in our allocation of inventory from long-term to short-term due to a higher expected sell through of inventory on hand in the upcoming period, an increase in our accounts receivable, a decrease in our accounts payable, an increase in connection with the issuance of a short-term note receivable, a decrease in the current portion of our long-term debt, resulting from the forgiveness of our PPP Loan, and a decrease in our short-term operating lease liabilities. These factors were offset partially by an increase in our accrued expenses and other liabilities and a decrease in our prepaid expenses and other assets.
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, approximately $6.47 million of cash was provided by our operations. The primary drivers of our cash flows from operations were the favorable effect of net income in the amount of $12.81 million; an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $3.71 million; a decrease in inventory of $1.31 million; and an increase in accrued income taxes in the amount of $2,000. These factors were offset partially by an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $3.14 million; an increase in accounts receivable of $955,000; and a decrease in accounts payable of $974,000. In addition, the net effect of non-cash items included in net income totaling $6.29 million, driven by the benefit recognized for deferred income taxes in the amount of approximately $6.35 million in connection with the release of our valuation allowance and the gain on extinguishment of debt resulting from the forgiveness of our PPP Loan, including forgiveness of accrued and unpaid interest, in the amount of approximately $974,000, also unfavorably impacted net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
We manufactured approximately $9.23 million and $7.63 million in loose jewels and $16.98 million and $12.72 million in finished jewelry, which includes the cost of the loose jewels and the purchase of precious metals and labor in connection with jewelry production, during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We expect our purchases of precious metals and labor to fluctuate in conjunction with the levels of our finished jewelry business. In addition, the price of gold has fluctuated significantly over the past decade, resulting in higher retail price points for gold jewelry. Because the market prices of gold and other precious metals are beyond our control, upward price trends could have a negative impact on our operating cash flow as we manufacture finished jewelry.
Historically, our raw material inventories of SiC crystals had been purchased under exclusive supply agreements with a limited number of suppliers. Because the supply agreements restricted the sale of these crystals exclusively to us, the suppliers negotiated minimum purchase commitments with us that, when combined with reduced sales levels during prior periods in which the purchase commitments were in effect, have resulted in levels of inventories that are higher than we might otherwise maintain. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, $22.49 million and $17.72 million, respectively, of our inventories were classified as long-term assets. Loose jewel sales and finished jewelry that we manufacture will utilize both the finished goods loose jewels currently on-hand and, as we deplete certain shapes and sizes, our on-hand raw material SiC crystals of $1.99 million and new raw material that we purchase pursuant to the Supply Agreement.
A more detailed description of our inventories is included in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We made income tax payments of approximately $0 and $15,000 during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. As of June 30, 2022, all of our remaining federal income tax credits had expired or been utilized, and therefore, are not available to be carried forward to offset future income taxes. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had federal tax net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $16.53 million and $19.00 million, respectively, expiring between 2034 and 2037, or that have no expiration, which can be used to offset against future federal taxable income; North Carolina tax net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $19.77 million and $19.87 million, respectively, expiring between 2023 and 2035; and various other state tax net operating loss carryforwards expiring between 2023 and 2040, which can be used to offset against future state taxable income.
Short-Term Capital Resources
Line of Credit
Effective July 7, 2021, we obtained from JPMorgan Chase our $5.00 million cash collateralized JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility. The JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility may be used for general corporate and working capital purposes, including permitted acquisitions and certain additional indebtedness for borrowed money, installment obligations, and obligations under capital and operating leases. The JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility is secured by a cash deposit in the amount of $5.05 million held by JPMorgan Chase as collateral for the line of credit facility. Effective July 28, 2022, the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility was amended to, among other things, extend the maturity date to July 31, 2023, and append our obligations under the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility to be guaranteed by our wholly owned subsidiaries, Charles & Colvard Direct, LLC, charlesandcolvard.com, LLC, and moissaniteoutlet.com, LLC.
Each advance under the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility, as amended, accrues interest at a rate equal to the sum of JPMorgan Chase’s monthly secured overnight financing rate, or the SOFR rate, to which JPMorgan Chase is subject with respect to the adjusted SOFR rate as established by the U.S. Federal Reserve Board, plus a margin of 1.25% per annum and an unsecured to secured interest rate adjustment of 0.10% per annum. Prior to its amendment, each advance under the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility would have accrued interest at a rate equal to JPMorgan Chase’s monthly LIBOR rate multiplied by a statutory reserve rate for eurocurrency funding to which JPMorgan Chase is subject with respect to the adjusted LIBOR rate as established by the U.S. Federal Reserve Board, plus a margin of 1.25% per annum. Interest is calculated monthly on an actual/360-day basis and payable monthly in arrears. Principal outstanding during an event of default, at JPMorgan Chase’s option, accrues interest at a rate of 3% per annum in excess of the above rate. Any advance may be prepaid in whole or in part at any time. See Note 2, under the caption of Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detailed information relating to concerns about structural risks of interbank offered rates, or IBORs, and, particularly, the risk of cessation of the LIBOR during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
The JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility is evidenced by a credit agreement, as amended, between us and JPMorgan Chase, or the JPMorgan Chase Credit Agreement, dated as of July 28, 2022, and customary ancillary documents, in the principal amount not to exceed $5.00 million at any one time outstanding and a line of credit note, or the JPMorgan Chase Line of Credit Note, in which we promise to pay on or before July 31, 2023, the amount of $5.00 million or so much thereof as may be advanced and outstanding. In the event of default, JPMorgan Chase, at its option, may accelerate the maturity of advances outstanding under the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility. The JPMorgan Chase Credit Agreement and ancillary documents contain customary covenants, representations, fees, debt, contingent obligations, liens, loans, leases, investments, mergers, acquisitions, divestitures, subsidiaries, affiliate transactions, changes in control, as well as indemnity, expense reimbursement, and confidentiality provisions.
In connection with the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility, effective July 7, 2021, we incurred a non-refundable origination fee in the amount of $10,000 that was paid in full to JPMorgan Chase upon execution of the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility on July 12, 2021. There was no origination fee paid to JPMorgan Chase in connection with the amended JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility, dated, July 28, 2022.
Events of default under the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility include, without limitation, a default, event of default, or event that would constitute a default or event of default (pending giving notice or lapse of time or both), of any provision of the JPMorgan Chase Credit Agreement, the JPMorgan Chase Line of Credit Note, or any other instrument or document executed in connection with the JPMorgan Chase Credit Agreement or with any of our indebtedness, liabilities, and obligations to JPMorgan Chase or would result from the extension of credit to us by JPMorgan Chase.
As of June 30, 2022, we had not borrowed against the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility.
Prior to obtaining the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility, we and our wholly owned subsidiary, charlesandcolvard.com, LLC, collectively referred to as the White Oak Borrowers, had a $5.00 million asset-based revolving credit facility, or the White Oak Credit Facility, from White Oak Commercial Finance, LLC, or White Oak, which we terminated in accordance with its terms as of July 9, 2021. The effective date of the White Oak Credit Facility was July 13, 2018, and it was scheduled to mature on July 13, 2021.
The White Oak Credit Facility was available for general corporate and working capital purposes, including permitted acquisitions and was guaranteed by the White Oak Borrowers. Under the terms of the White Oak Credit Facility, the Borrowers were required to maintain at least $500,000 in excess availability at all times. The White Oak Credit Facility contained no other financial covenants.
Advances under the White Oak Credit Facility could have been either revolving or non-revolving. During the first year of the term of the White Oak Credit Facility, any revolving advances would have accrued interest at a rate equal to one-month LIBOR (reset monthly, and subject to a 1.25% floor) plus 3.75%, and any non-revolving advances would have accrued interest at such LIBOR rate plus 4.75%. Thereafter, the interest margins would have been reduced upon the Company’s achievement of a specified fixed charge coverage ratio during the period of any outstanding advances. However, any advances were in all cases subject to a minimum interest rate of 5.50% and interest would have been calculated on an actual/360 basis and payable monthly in arrears. Principal outstanding during an event of default, which again did not occur during the term of the White Oak Credit Facility, would have accrued interest at a rate 2% in excess of the rate that would have been otherwise applicable.
We had not borrowed against the White Oak Credit Facility as of July 9, 2021, the date upon which we terminated the White Oak Credit Facility in accordance with its terms.
More detailed descriptions of both our JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility and former White Oak Credit Facility are included in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Long-Term Capital Commitments
Contractual Agreement
On December 12, 2014, we entered into the Supply Agreement with Wolfspeed. Under the Supply Agreement, subject to certain terms and conditions, we agreed to exclusively purchase from Wolfspeed, and Wolfspeed agreed to exclusively supply, 100% of our required SiC materials in quarterly installments that must equal or exceed a set minimum order quantity. The initial term of the Supply Agreement was scheduled to expire on June 24, 2018, unless extended by the parties. Effective June 22, 2018, the Supply Agreement was amended to extend the expiration date to June 25, 2023. The Supply Agreement, as amended, also provides for the exclusive production of our premium moissanite product, Forever One™ and provided us with one option, subject to certain conditions, to unilaterally extend the term of the Supply Agreement for an additional two-year period following the expiration of the initial term. In addition, the amendment to the Supply Agreement established a process by which Wolfspeed may begin producing alternate SiC material based on our specifications that will give us the flexibility to use the materials in a broader variety of our products, as well as to permit us to purchase certain amounts of SiC materials from third parties under limited conditions. On August 26, 2020, the Supply Agreement was further amended, effective June 30, 2020, to extend the expiration date to June 29, 2025, which may be further extended by mutual agreement of the parties. The Supply Agreement was also amended to, among other things, (i) spread our total purchase commitment under the Supply Agreement in the amount of approximately $52.95 million over the term of the Supply Agreement, as amended; (ii) establish a process by which Wolfspeed has agreed to accept purchase orders in excess of the agreed-upon minimum purchase commitment, subject to certain conditions; and (iii) permit us to purchase revised amounts of SiC materials from third parties under limited conditions. Our total purchase commitment under the Supply Agreement, as amended, until June 2025 is approximately $52.95 million, of which approximately $26.55 million remains to be purchased as of June 30, 2022.
For more information regarding the second amendment to our Supply Agreement, executed on August 26, 2020, see Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
During the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, we purchased approximately $6.29 million and $3.78 million, respectively, of SiC crystals from Wolfspeed. Going forward, we expect to use existing cash and cash equivalents and access to other working capital resources, including but not limited to the issuance of equity securities, together with future cash expected to be provided by operating activities to finance our purchase commitment under the Supply Agreement, as amended.
Liquidity and Capital Trends
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and access to other working capital resources, including but not limited to the issuance of equity securities, and cash expected to be provided by operating activities combined will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over the next twelve months.
From a long-term perspective, we believe that our ongoing access to capital markets, including but not limited to the issuance of equity securities or even potential debt securities, coupled with cash provided by operating activities in future periods beyond the next twelve months, will continue to provide us with the necessary liquidity to meet our long-term working capital and capital expenditure requirements.
In connection with our short- and long-term capital resources, we have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on file with the SEC that allows us to periodically offer and sell, individually or in any combination, shares of common stock, shares of preferred stock, warrants to purchase shares of common stock or preferred stock, and units consisting of any combination of the foregoing types of securities, up to a total of $25.00 million, of which all is available. However, we may offer and sell no more than one-third of our public float (which is the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates) in any 12-month period. Our ability to issue equity securities under the shelf registration statement is subject to market conditions, which may be in turn, subject to, among other things, the potential disruption and volatility that may be caused by ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Any capital raise is not assured and may not be at terms that would be acceptable to us.
Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including the ongoing uncertainty surrounding COVID-19 that could lead to further disruption and volatility in the global capital markets as well as its impact on our rate of sales growth; the expansion of our sales and marketing activities; the timing and extent of raw materials and labor purchases in connection with loose jewel production to support our moissanite jewels and lab grown diamond business and precious metals and labor purchases in connection with jewelry production to support our finished jewelry business; the timing of capital expenditures; and the risk factors described in more detail in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Currently, we have the JPMorgan Chase Credit Facility, as amended, through its expiration on July 31, 2023, which we believe would mitigate these risks to our cash and liquidity position. Also, we may make investments in, or acquisitions of, complementary businesses, which could also require us to seek additional equity or debt financing.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which we prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. “Critical accounting policies and estimates” are defined as those most important to the financial statement presentation and that require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Under different assumptions and/or conditions, those actual results of operations may materially differ. The most significant estimates impacting our consolidated financial statements relate to the valuation and classification of inventories, accounts receivable reserves, deferred tax assets, stock-based compensation, and revenue recognition. We also have other policies that we consider key accounting policies, but these policies typically do not require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective.
Valuation and Classification of Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value on an average cost basis. Inventory costs include direct material and labor, inbound freight, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, and warehousing costs.
Any inventory on hand at the measurement date in excess of our current requirements based on historical and anticipated levels of sales is classified as long-term on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The classification of our inventory as either current or long-term inventory requires us to estimate the portion of on-hand inventory that can be realized over the next 12 months and does not include precious metal, labor, and other inventory purchases expected to be both purchased and realized in cost of sales over the next 12 months.
Our work-in-process inventories include raw SiC crystals on which processing costs, such as labor and sawing, have been incurred; and components, such as metal castings and finished goods set with moissanite jewels, that have been issued to jobs in the manufacture of finished jewelry. Our moissanite jewel manufacturing process involves the production of intermediary shapes, called “preforms,” that vary depending upon the expected size and shape of the finished jewel. To maximize manufacturing efficiencies, preforms may be made in advance of current finished inventory needs but remain in work-in-process inventories. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, work-in-process inventories issued to active production jobs approximated $2.76 million and $2.23 million, respectively.
Each accounting period we evaluate the valuation and classification of inventories including the need for potential adjustments to inventory-related reserves and valuation allowances, which also include significant estimates by management.
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the Inventories caption for a further description of our inventories accounting policy and see Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detailed information relating to our accounting for inventory-related reserves and valuation allowances.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this principle, we perform the following five steps: (i) identification of a contract with a customer; (ii) identification of any separate performance obligations; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when we have satisfied the underlying performance obligations. We recognize substantially all of our revenue at a point in time when control of our goods has passed to the customer with the exception of consigned goods. We consider our performance obligation related to the shipment of goods satisfied at the time this control is transferred. We also have a variable consideration element related to most of our contracts in the form of product return rights. At the time revenue is recognized, an allowance for estimated returns is established and any change in the allowance for returns is charged against net sales in the current period. For our Traditional segment customers, the returns policy generally allows for the return of jewels and finished jewelry with a valid reason for credit within 30 days of shipment. Customers in both our charlesandcolvard.com and moissaniteoutlet.com websites may also generally return purchases within 30 days, respectively, of the shipment date in accordance with our returns policies as disclosed on our charlesandcolvard.com and moissaniteoutlet.com websites. Periodically, we ship loose jewel goods and finished goods to Traditional segment customers on consignment terms. Under these consignment terms, the customer assumes the risk of loss and has an absolute right of return for a specified period that typically ranges from six months to one year. Our Online Channels segment and Traditional segment customers are generally required to make payments on consignment shipments within 30 to 60 days upon the customer informing us that such inventory will be kept by the customer. Accordingly, we do not recognize revenue on these consignment transactions until the earlier of (i) the customer informing us that the inventory will be kept by the customer; (ii) the expiration of the right of returns period; or (iii) the customer informing us that the inventory has been sold.
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the Revenue Recognition caption for additional information regarding the underlying required disclosures arising from contracts with customers as well as a more detailed description of our revenue recognition accounting policy.
Accounts Receivable Reserves
Estimates are used to determine the amount of two reserves against trade accounts receivable. The first reserve is an allowance for sales returns. At the time revenue is recognized, we estimate future returns using a historical return rate that is reviewed quarterly with consideration of any contractual return privileges granted to customers and we reduce sales and trade accounts receivable by this estimated amount. Our allowance for sales returns was $591,000 and $675,000 at June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
The second reserve is an allowance for uncollectible accounts for the measurement of estimated credit losses resulting from the failure of our customers to make required payments. This allowance reduces trade accounts receivable to an amount expected to be collected. We use a current expected credit losses model whereby we estimate credit losses expected over the life of our pool of exposures based on historical percentages of uncollectible accounts, changes in payment history, and facts and circumstances, including any current extenuating economic conditions, for example those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or current worldwide adverse economic conditions, regarding specific accounts that become known to, or forecasted by, us when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for uncollectible accounts. We determine a credit loss percentage based on the age of the receivable that we deem uncollectible related to potential credit losses. We record an allowance for such credit losses, which includes a provision for expected losses based on historical write-offs, adjusted for current conditions as deemed necessary, reasonable and supportable forecasts about future conditions, and a specific reserve for accounts deemed at risk. The allowance is our estimate for accounts receivable as of the balance sheet date that ultimately will not be collected. Any changes in the allowance are reflected in the results of operations in the period in which the change occurs. We write-off accounts receivable and the related allowance recorded previously when it becomes probable, based upon customer facts and circumstances, that such amounts will not be collected. We generally use internal collection efforts, which may include our sales personnel as deemed appropriate. After all internal collection efforts have been exhausted, we generally write-off the underlying account receivable.
Any accounts with significant balances are reviewed separately to determine an appropriate allowance based on the facts and circumstances of the specific underlying customer account. During our review for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, we determined no additional reserves were necessary for specific accounts. Based on these criteria, we determined that allowances for uncollectible accounts receivable of $85,000 and $71,000 at June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, were required.
Deferred Tax Assets
As of each reporting date, management considers new evidence, both positive and negative, that could impact its view with regard to future realization of available deferred tax assets. As of June 30, 2021, cumulative positive taxable income over the preceding three tax years had been generated in the U.S., as compared to the negative evidence of cumulative losses in the prior years. We also determined that our expectations of future taxable income in upcoming tax years, including estimated growth rates applied to future expected taxable income that included significant management estimates and assumptions, would be sufficient to result in full utilization of our federal net operating loss carryforwards and certain of the deferred tax assets prior to any statutory expiration. As a result, we determined that sufficient positive evidence existed as of June 30, 2021, to conclude that it was more likely than not deferred tax assets of approximately $6.35 million would be realizable, and we reduced our valuation allowance accordingly. The reduction of the valuation allowances against these deferred tax assets was the main driver of the income tax benefit recognized during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 of approximately $6.33 million.
With the reduction of our valuation allowance during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, we recognized deferred income tax expense during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 in the amount of approximately $499,000 compared to a deferred income tax benefit during the year ended June 30, 2021 in the amount of approximately $6.35 million. A valuation allowance remains against certain deferred tax assets primarily relating to state net operating loss carryforwards from our e-commerce subsidiary due to the timing uncertainty of when it will generate positive taxable income to utilize the associated deferred tax assets. In addition, a valuation allowance also remains against certain deferred tax assets relating to operating loss carryforwards relating to our dormant subsidiary located in Hong Kong.
As of June 30, 2022, we determined that our expectations of future taxable income in upcoming tax years, including estimated growth rates applied to future expected taxable income that includes significant management estimates and assumptions, would continue to be sufficient to result in full utilization of our remaining federal net operating loss carryforwards and certain of the deferred tax assets prior to any statutory expiration. As a result, we determined that sufficient positive evidence existed as of June 30, 2022, to conclude that it is more likely than not deferred tax assets of approximately $5.85 million remain realizable. Conversely, we further determined that sufficient negative evidence continued to exist to conclude it was uncertain that we would have sufficient future taxable income to utilize certain of its deferred tax assets. Therefore, we continued to maintain a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets relating to certain state net operating loss carryforwards from our e-commerce subsidiary due to the timing uncertainty of when it will generate positive taxable income to utilize the associated deferred tax assets. In addition, a valuation allowance remains against certain deferred tax assets relating to operating loss carryforwards relating to our dormant subsidiary located in Hong Kong
As of June 30, 2022, all of our remaining federal income tax credits had expired or been utilized, and therefore, are not available to be carried forward to offset future income taxes. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had federal tax net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $16.53 million and $19.00 million, respectively, expiring between 2034 and 2037, or that have no expiration, which can be used to offset against future federal taxable income; North Carolina tax net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $19.77 million and $19.87 million, respectively, expiring between 2023 and 2035; and various other state tax net operating loss carryforwards expiring between 2023 and 2040, which can be used to offset against future state taxable income.
As of each of June 30, 2022 and 2021, there was approximately $6.03 million in net operating loss carryforwards in Hong Kong. In accordance with the Hong Kong tax code, these amounts can be carried forward indefinitely to offset future taxable income in Hong Kong. Our deferred tax assets in Hong Kong were fully reserved with a valuation allowance of $996,000 as of each of June 30, 2022 and 2021, and had been fully reserved in all prior fiscal periods due to the uncertainty of future taxable income in this jurisdiction to utilize the deferred tax assets. Charles & Colvard (HK) Ltd., our Hong Kong subsidiary, was entered into dormancy as of September 30, 2020, following its re-activation in December 2017. Charles & Colvard (HK) Ltd. previously became dormant in the second quarter of 2009 and has had no operating activity since 2008. If we use any portion of our deferred tax assets in future periods, the valuation allowance would need to be reversed and may impact our future operating results.