Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, future financial performance, expense levels and liquidity sources, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the acquisition, development and commercialization of novel targeted therapies for blood-related cancers where there is a significant unmet medical need. Our goal is to build a profitable company by generating income from products we develop and commercialize, either alone or with partners. We have one commercially approved product, VONJO™ (pacritinib), which has received accelerated approval in the United States by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, for the treatment of adult patients with intermediate or high-risk primary or secondary (post-polycythemia vera or post-essential thrombocythemia) myelofibrosis with a platelet count below 50 x 109/L.
Pacritinib is an oral kinase inhibitor with specificity for JAK2, IRAK1, FLT3 and CSF1R. At clinically relevant concentrations, pacritinib does not inhibit JAK1. The JAK family of enzymes is a central component in signal transduction pathways, which are critical to normal blood cell growth and development, as well as inflammatory cytokine expression and immune responses. Mutations in these kinases have been shown to be directly related to the development of a variety of blood-related cancers, including myeloproliferative neoplasms, leukemia and lymphoma. In addition to myelofibrosis, the kinase profile of pacritinib suggests its potential therapeutic utility in conditions such as AML, MDS, CMML, GvHD, and CLL, due to its inhibition of JAK2, IRAK1, FLT3 and CSF1R. We believe pacritinib has the potential to be delivered as a single agent or in combination therapy regimens.
We have historically funded our operations through the sale of equity securities, debt financing and funding received from our licensees and collaborators. We do not expect to achieve or sustain profitability for the foreseeable future. We had a net loss of $97.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and an accumulated deficit of $2.4 billion as of December 31, 2021, primarily from expenses incurred in connection with our research programs and from selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
We have incurred significant operating losses to date and expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for at least the next 12 to 24 months. We anticipate that our expenses will increase as we:
•continue our commercialization efforts for VONJO;
•continue our research and clinical development of pacritinib;
•seek regulatory and marketing approvals for pacritinib if we successfully complete the remainder of its anticipated clinical development paths; and
•maintain, protect and expand our intellectual property portfolio.
Factors Affecting Performance
Product Sales
Following FDA approval of VONJO in February 2022, we commenced shipping of VONJO to a limited number of specialty distributor customers and specialty pharmacy customers in the first quarter of 2022. Product sales are recognized upon delivery of our product to our customers and are recorded net of applicable deductions, including trade discounts, distribution service fees, product returns, chargebacks and discounts, government-mandated rebates and other incentives such as co-pay assistance. Our realization of product sales will be dependent, in part, upon our commercialization efforts and the market
acceptance of VONJO among physicians, patients, healthcare payers and the medical community. No product sales have been recognized in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales will primarily consist of shipping and distribution costs of VONJO as well as third-party royalty costs. Cost of sales will reflect only a portion of the costs related to the manufacture of VONJO and related materials, since, prior to FDA approval, these costs were expensed as research and development expenses. We expect to utilize zero cost inventory with respect to VONJO for an extended period of time. No cost of sales has been recognized in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development
We expect to commit significant time and resources to research and development activities relating to our current and any future product candidates. Pacritinib has received accelerated approval for the treatment of adult patients with intermediate or high-risk primary or secondary (post-polycythemia vera or post-essential thrombocythemia) myelofibrosis with a platelet count below 50 x 109/L and is being marketed as VONJO. However, a confirmatory study, PACIFICA, is ongoing and we expect to continue to devote resources to the completion of this study.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, expenses for outside consulting and professional services, allocated facilities costs and costs required to support the marketing and sales operations of our commercialized product. Following FDA approval of VONJO in February 2022, we anticipate that selling, general and administrative expenses will increase as we expand our commercial activities in support of product launch and further invest in infrastructure to support our expected growth in the United States.
Impact of COVID-19
We continue to evaluate and manage the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our operations and the conduct of our clinical trials, including considerations of the vulnerable nature of the patient population participating in our trials, reduced or halted activities at our clinical trial sites, an increase in fatalities or other adverse events due to medical problems related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the benefits of continued patient access to VONJO.
Financial Summary
Loss from operations was $95.3 million and $47.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Results of operations may vary substantially from year to year and from quarter to quarter and, as a result, you should not rely on them as being indicative of our future performance. As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $65.4 million.
Results of Operations
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating costs and expenses
Research and development expenses. Our research and development expenses were as follows (in thousands):
Costs for our compounds include external direct expenses such as principal investigator fees, charges from contract research organizations, or CROs, and contract manufacturing fees incurred for preclinical, clinical, manufacturing and regulatory activities associated with preparing the compounds for submissions of NDAs or similar regulatory filings to the
FDA, the EMA or other regulatory agencies outside the United States and Europe, as well as upfront license fees for acquired technology. Operating expenses include our personnel costs and an allocation of occupancy, depreciation and amortization expenses associated with developing our compounds. Cumulative to date external direct costs incurred by us through December 31, 2021 were $215.2 million for pacritinib (excluding costs for pacritinib prior to our acquisition of certain assets from S*BIO in May 2012 and $29.1 million of in-process research and development expenses associated with the acquisition of certain assets from S*BIO).
Research and development expenses increased to $39.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $25.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase between periods was primarily attributable to a $13.7 million increase in professional services, which included regulatory and other costs related to the NDA submission for VONJO, a $1.4 million increase in additional staffing and personnel costs, and a $0.9 million increase in costs related to the PACIFICA Phase 3 trial, offset by a $2.8 million decrease in costs related to the PRE-VENT Phase 3 trial.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $56.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Substantially all of the increase between periods was attributable to activities associated with preparation for the commercialization of VONJO, which consisted of the following: a $23.5 million increase in professional services, a $12.2 million increase in additional staffing and personnel costs, a $2.3 million increase in infrastructure including sales-related service agreements and a $0.6 million increase in travel and other expenses.
Other operating expenses. Other operating expenses of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relate to a full provision for uncollectability of our Italian VAT receivables and deposit. There was no such expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-operating expense
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net was as follows (in thousands):
Interest income was $38,000 and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest income was primarily related to our cash equivalent securities. The change was primarily related to decreases in interest rates and short-term investments between periods.
Interest expense was $1.9 million and $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest expense was related to our secured term loans. The change between periods was primarily related to an increase in average loan balances outstanding and an increase in interest rate due to the August 2021 $50.0 million loan under the Credit Agreement with DRI.
Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to the Credit Agreement with DRI and our term loan with Silicon Valley Bank. Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to our term loan with Silicon Valley Bank.
Other non-operating expenses. Other non-operating expenses were as follows (in thousands):
Loss on dissolution of majority-owned subsidiary of $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to a loss recognized upon dissolution of our majority-owned subsidiary, Aequus Biopharma, Inc., in June 2020.
Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to a loss recognized upon repayment of our secured term loan with Silicon Valley Bank in August 2021. See “Note 7. Debt Financing Arrangements” for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have historically funded our operations from proceeds from the sales and the issuance of equity securities, the incurrence of debt and payments received pursuant to license and collaboration agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we had $65.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, which excludes $60.0 million received from DRI following FDA approval of VONJO in February 2022 as discussed below.
Product Sales. We commercially launched VONJO in the first quarter of 2022 following the accelerated approval of VONJO by the FDA in February 2022. We intend to rely on cash flows from product sales as our source of liquidity in the near future as we continue our commercialization efforts with respect to VONJO.
Public Offering of Common Stock and Series X1 Preferred Stock. In April 2021, we issued 16.4 million shares of our common stock at a $2.50 per share price and 600 shares of our Series X1 Preferred Stock at a $25,000 per share price, collecting net proceeds of approximately $53.6 million.
Rights Offering. In March 2020, we issued 15.7 million shares of our common stock at a $1.00 per share price and 4,429 shares of our Series X Preferred Stock at a $10,000 per share price, collecting net proceeds of $59.1 million.
At-The-Market Equity Offering. In November 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies LLC to sell shares of our common stock, having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $15.0 million, from time to time, through an “at the market” equity offering program under which Jefferies acted as sales agent. In November and December 2020, we sold 2.1 million shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $7.2 million after compensation to Jefferies. In January 2021 we entered into a new Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies LLC to sell shares of our common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million. We sold 0.9 million shares of our common stock for net proceeds of approximately $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash received from first quarter 2022 sales under the Open Market Sale Agreement as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K was not material.
Credit Agreement. In August 2021, we entered into a Credit Agreement with Drug Royalty III LP 2, or DRI, as lender and administrative agent, which provided for a loan in the principal amount of $50 million funded by DRI at closing. As of December 31, 2021, we had an outstanding principal balance under the Credit Agreement of $50.0 million. We are required to pay quarterly interest-only payments until August 25, 2026, or the maturity date, with the unpaid principal amount of the outstanding loan due and payable on the maturity date. The loan bears interest at a rate equal to 8.25% per annum, plus the greater of (i) 1.75% and (ii) the three-month LIBOR rate and requires a back-end fee of $1.0 million. These borrowings are secured by a first priority security interest on substantially all of our assets, subject to certain exceptions. In addition, the Credit Agreement requires us to comply with restrictive covenants, including those that limit our operating flexibility and ability to borrow additional funds. A failure to make a required payment or an uncured covenant breach could lead to an event of default, and in such case, all amounts then outstanding may become due and payable immediately.
In connection with the Credit Agreement, we and DRI entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement, or the Royalty Financing Agreement, pursuant to which we sold to DRI the right to receive certain royalty payments from us for a purchase price of up to $85 million in cash. DRI funded the upfront purchase price of $60 million following FDA approval of VONJO in February 2022 and will be required to provide up to $25 million of additional funding to us if certain minimum VONJO sales thresholds are met in 2023, or sooner. Under the Royalty Financing Agreement, DRI is entitled to receive tiered, sales-based royalties on net product sales of VONJO in the United States.
Historical Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $84.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $42.2 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in
payments for research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses associated with continued development and preparation for the commercialization of VONJO.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $12.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, and net cash used in investing activities was $9.6 million during the same period in 2020. The change was due to short-term investments matured and purchased between periods.
Net cash provided by financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $97.9 million and $61.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2021, respectively. The change was primarily attributable to net proceeds from the completion of our public offering of common stock and Series X1 Preferred Stock in April 2021, loan proceeds from the Credit Agreement with Drug Royalty III LP 2 in August 2021, and net proceeds from the completion of our rights offering in March 2020.
Capital Resources
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. However, we believe that, as of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our present financial resources, combined with $60.0 million received from Drug Royalty III LP 2 following FDA approval of VONJO in February 2022, will be sufficient to fund our operations into the fourth quarter of 2022. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and we will need to raise substantial additional capital in the near term in order to fund our operations through and beyond the fourth quarter of 2022 and to continue as a going concern thereafter. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our assessment. Further, we have incurred net losses since inception and expect to generate losses for the foreseeable future, primarily due to research and development costs for pacritinib. We have historically funded our operations through equity financings, borrowings and funds obtained under product collaborations, any or all of which may not be available to us in the future. As of December 31, 2021, our available cash and cash equivalents totaled $65.4 million and we had an outstanding principal balance of $50.0 million under our Credit Agreement with DRI.
Financial resource forecasts are subject to change as a result of a variety of risks and uncertainties. Changes in our commercialization efforts, manufacturing, developments in and expenses associated with our clinical trials and the other factors identified under “Capital Requirements” below may consume capital resources earlier than planned. Due to these and other factors, the foregoing forecast for the period for which we will have sufficient resources to fund our operations may be inaccurate.
Capital Requirements
We will require additional capital in order to pursue our strategic objectives. We expect to satisfy our capital needs through existing capital balances, revenue from VONJO and a combination of public or private equity financings, partnerships, collaborations, joint ventures, disposition of assets, debt financings or restructurings, bank borrowings or other sources of financing. However, we have a limited number of authorized shares of common stock available for issuance and additional funding may not be available on favorable terms or at all. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, substantial dilution to existing stockholders may result. If we fail to obtain additional capital when needed, our ability to operate as a going concern will be harmed, and we may be required to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs and commercialization efforts and/or reduce our selling, general and administrative expenses, be unable to attract and retain highly-qualified personnel, be unable to obtain and maintain contracts necessary to continue our operations and at affordable rates with competitive terms, refrain from making our contractually required payments when due (including debt payments) and/or be forced to cease operations, liquidate our assets and possibly seek bankruptcy protection.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including: our ability to generate sales of VONJO; the cost and timing of establishing our commercial infrastructure and distribution capabilities; our ability to reach milestones triggering payments under certain of our contractual arrangements; the cost of manufacturing VONJO; the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies or of establishing commercial supplies of any products that we may develop in the future; developments in and expenses associated with our research and development activities; our clinical development plans and any changes that we may initiate or that may be requested by the FDA or other regulators as we seek product approval; acquisitions or collaborations with respect to compounds or other assets; competitive market developments; disruptions or other delays to our business and clinical trials resulting from the ongoing worldwide COVID-19 pandemic; and other unplanned business developments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management makes certain judgments and uses certain estimates and assumptions when applying accounting principles generally accepted in the United States in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis and base our estimates on historical experience and on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our experience and assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Given the global economic climate and additional or unforeseen effects from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, these estimates are becoming more challenging. Actual results may vary from what we anticipate and different assumptions or estimates about the future could change our reported results. We believe the following estimates are the most critical to us, in that they are important to the portrayal of our consolidated financial statements and require our subjective or complex judgment in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Research and Development Expenses
We accrue expenses for clinical trial activities performed by CROs based upon the estimated amount of work completed on each trial. The significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, the number of active clinical sites, clinical milestones achieved, the duration for which the patients have been enrolled in the trial, and other criteria related to the efforts of our vendors. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent possible through internal reviews, review of contractual terms and correspondence with CROs. We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. However, these estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available, which will allow us to make a more accurate estimate in future periods. In that event, we may be required to record adjustments to research and development expenses in future periods when the actual level of activity becomes more certain. Amounts ultimately incurred in relation to amounts accrued for these services may be substantially higher or lower than our estimates. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, we record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Equity-based Compensation Expense
Equity-based compensation expense for all equity-based payment awards made to employees and directors is recognized and measured based on estimated fair values. For option valuations, we have elected to utilize the Black-Scholes valuation method in order to estimate the fair value of options on the date of grant. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available for United States Treasury securities at maturity with an equivalent term. We have not declared or paid dividends on our common stock and do not currently expect to do so in the future. The expected term of options represents the period that our equity-based awards are expected to be outstanding and was determined based on historical weighted average holding periods and projected holding periods for the remaining unexercised options. Consideration was given to the contractual terms of our equity-based awards, vesting schedules and expectations of future employee behavior. Expected volatility is based on the annualized daily historical volatility, including consideration of the implied volatility and market prices of traded options for comparable entities within our industry. These assumptions underlying the Black-Scholes valuation model involve management’s best estimates.
Generally accepted accounting principles for equity-based compensation also require that we recognize compensation expense for only the portion of awards expected to vest. Therefore, we apply an estimated forfeiture rate that we derive from historical employee termination behavior. If the actual number of forfeitures differs from our estimates, adjustments to compensation expense may be required in future periods. For performance-based awards that do not include market-based conditions, we record share-based compensation expense only when the performance-based milestone is deemed probable of achievement. We utilize both quantitative and qualitative criteria to judge whether milestones are probable of achievement. For awards with market-based performance conditions, we recognize the grant-date fair value of the award over the derived service period regardless of whether the underlying performance condition is met.
Contingencies
On a quarterly basis, we review the status of each significant matter and assess its potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim, asserted or unasserted, or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to pending claims and litigation and may revise our estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial position.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements, including the expected effects on our results of operations and financial condition, refer to Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” which is incorporated herein by reference.