Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Form 10-K, as well as the discussion under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” For further discussion of the business, industry, our products and services, competitive strengths, and growth strategy, see “Item 1. Business.” Unless stated otherwise, the comparisons presented in this discussion and analysis refer to the year-over-year comparison of changes in our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021. Discussion of fiscal year 2021 items and the year-over year comparison of changes in our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020 can be found in Part II, “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, which was previously filed with the SEC on September 3, 2021.
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with current year presentation. The changes in presentation did not affect our total revenues, total costs of sales, gross profit, total operating expenses, operating loss, net loss or net loss per common share. For further information on the presentation changes, see Item 1. Financial Statements - Note 2. Accounting Policies.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Furthermore, the period to period comparison of our historical results is not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future.
OVERVIEW OF THE COMPANY
Cantaloupe, Inc., previously known as USA Technologies, Inc., is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. We are a digital payments and software services company that provides end-to-end technology solutions for the unattended retail market. We are transforming the unattended retail world by offering a single platform for self-service commerce which includes integrated payments processing and software solutions that handle inventory management, pre-kitting, route logistics, warehouse and back-office management. Our enterprise-wide platform is designed to increase consumer engagement and sales revenue through digital payments, digital advertising and customer loyalty programs, while providing retailers with control and visibility over their operations and inventory. As a result, customers ranging from vending machine companies to operators of micro-markets, car wash, electric vehicle charging stations, commercial laundry, kiosks, amusements and more, can run their businesses more proactively, predictably, and competitively.
The Company's fiscal year ends June 30. The Company generates revenue in multiple ways. During the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, we derived approximately 82% and 83% respectively, of our revenue from subscription and transaction fees and approximately 18% and 17%, respectively, of our revenue from equipment sales. Active Devices on our service include point of sale ("POS") electronic payment devices, certified payment software, or the servicing of similar third-party installed POS terminals. Customers can obtain POS electronic payment devices from us in the following ways:
•Purchasing devices directly from the Company or one of its authorized resellers;
•Financing devices under the Company’s QuickStart Program, which are non-cancellable sixty-month sales-type leases directly from the Company; and
•Participating in a monthly bundled subscription under the Company's Cantaloupe ONE program, which are 36-month rental agreements that transition to month-to-month agreements after the initial subscription commitment period.
Highlights
Highlights of the Company for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 are below:
•Approximately 24 thousand Active Customers and 1.14 million Active Devices (as defined in Item 1. Business) connected to our service.
•In August 2021, we completed the acquisition of certain assets and liabilities of Delicious Nutritious LLC, doing business as Yoke Payments ("Yoke"), a micro market payments company. Through the acquisition, Yoke's POS platform offers self-checkout while seamlessly integrating with Cantaloupe’s inventory management and payment processing platforms. During the year, we implemented the newly enhanced Yoke Micro Market Platform upgrade that includes new features and functionality for Yoke Pay, Yoke POS, and the Yoke Portal.
•A successful rollout of the ePort Engage and ePort Engage Combo devices which began shipping during the current fiscal year. ePort Engage series is our next generation of digital touchscreen devices for the market which provides retailers the ability to captivate consumers in new ways and enables truly frictionless purchasing.
•Cantaloupe announced and launched a bundled subscription model, the Cantaloupe ONE Platform which provides operators the flexibility and predictability of a monthly, fixed subscription amount covering the hardware and service fees.
•Entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (the "Amended JP Morgan Credit Facility") with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. in March 2022 that provides for a $15 million secured revolving credit facility and a $25 million secured term facility, which replaces our previous 2021 JPMorgan Credit Facility.
•The Company announced a partnership with HIVERY, a data-science company that specializes in Artificial Intelligence ("AI") technology to streamline category management for retailers in the consumer packaged goods industry. The partnership aims to provide the Company's Seed customers an enhanced merchandising technology leveraging AI and Machine Learning to improve vending machine performance. The integration was available to customers as of June 30, 2022.
•The Company expanded its machine compatibility for remote price change (RPC), a feature within the Seed suite of services that enables customers to make price changes to products at vending machines remotely. Customers started subscribing to RPC in the quarter ended June 30, 2022.
COVID-19 Update
The Company, its employees, and its customers operate in geographic locations in which its business operations and financial performance continues to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. While businesses, schools and other organizations re-open, which has led to increased foot-traffic to distributed assets containing our electronic payment solutions, the emergence of new strains and variants and resurgence of the virus, such as the outbreak of the Omicron variant in early calendar year 2022, have and may in the future lead to additional shutdowns and closures that impact our operations and financial results. Such impacts to our financial statements have in the past included, and may in the future include the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, impairment of long-lived assets including operating lease assets, property and equipment and allowance for doubtful accounts for accounts and finance receivables. We have concluded that there are no material impairments as a result of our evaluation for the year ended June 30, 2022. Where applicable, we have incorporated judgments and estimates of the expected impact of COVID-19 in the preparation of the financial statements based on information currently available. These judgments and estimates may change, as new events develop and additional information is obtained, and are recognized in the consolidated financial statements as soon as they become known.
While we are encouraged by our strong operating and financial results, we continue to monitor the evolving situation and follow guidance from federal, state and local public health authorities. Given the potential uncertainty of the situation, the Company cannot, at this time, reasonably estimate the longer-term repercussions of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”, "GAAP"), and they conform to general practices in our industry. The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
Critical accounting policies require numerous estimates and strategic or economic assumptions that may prove inaccurate or subject to variations and may significantly affect our reported results and financial position for the period or in future periods. Changes in underlying factors, assumptions, or estimates in any of these areas could have a material impact on our future financial condition and results of operations. We apply critical accounting policies consistently from period to period and intend that any change in methodology occur in an appropriate manner.
Accounting policies currently deemed critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations are listed below. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition. The Company derives revenue primarily from the sale or lease of equipment and services to the small ticket, unattended POS market.
The Company’s application of the accounting principles in U.S. GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Complex arrangements may require significant judgment in contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting.
The Company enters into arrangements with multiple performance obligations, which may include various combinations of equipment and services. Our equipment and service deliverables qualify as separate performance obligations and can be sold on a standalone basis. A deliverable constitutes a separate unit of accounting when it has standalone value and, where return rights exist, delivery or performance of the undelivered items is considered probable and substantially within the Company’s control. For these multiple deliverable arrangements, the Company allocates revenue to the deliverables based on their relative standalone selling prices. To the extent that a deliverable is subject to specific guidance on whether and/or how to allocate the consideration in a multiple element arrangement, that deliverable is accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. The Company limits the amount of revenue recognition for delivered items to the amount that is not contingent on the future delivery of products or services or meeting other future performance obligations.
Capitalization of internal-use software and cloud computing arrangements. We have significant expenditures associated with the technological maintenance and improvement of our network and technology offerings. These expenditures include both the cost of internal employees, who spend portions of their time on various technological projects, and the use of external temporary labor and consultants. Capitalization of internal-use software occurs when we have completed the preliminary project stage, management authorizes the project, management commits to funding the project, it is probable the project will be completed and the project will be used to perform the function intended. We are required to assess these expenditures and make a determination as to whether the costs should be expensed as incurred or are subject to capitalization. In making these determinations, we consider the stage of the development project, the probability of successful development and if the development is resulting in increased features and functionality. In addition, if we determine that a project qualifies for capitalization, the amount of capitalization is subject to various estimates, including the amount of time spent on the development work and the cost of internal employees and external consultants. Internal-use software is included within Property and equipment, net on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and is amortized over its estimated useful life, which is typically 3 to 7 years.
We capitalize certain costs related to hosting arrangements that are service contracts (cloud computing arrangements) following the internal-use software capitalization criteria described above. Our cloud computing arrangements involve services we use to support internal corporate functions, our platforms and technology offerings. Capitalized costs relating to cloud computing arrangements are included within Prepaid expenses and other current assets or Other assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life, which is typically 3 to 5 years.
Goodwill. We test goodwill for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment utilizing either a qualitative or a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we choose to perform a qualitative assessment and determine the fair value more likely than not exceeds the carrying value, no further evaluation is necessary. When we perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test, we compare the fair value of our reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, then goodwill is not considered impaired. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which, if any, the carrying value exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. However, the loss recognized cannot exceed the reporting unit’s goodwill balance.
The quantitative impairment test process requires valuation of the reporting unit, which we determine using the income approach, the market approach or a combination of the two approaches. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of the reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows derived from assumptions that include expected growth rates and revenues, projected expenses, discount rates, capital expenditures and income tax rates. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on the quoted stock price, recent equity transactions of our business, market transactions involving similar businesses and market comparables.
The Company has selected April 1 as its annual goodwill impairment testing date. The Company has concluded there has been no impairment of goodwill during the years ended June 30, 2022, 2021, or 2020. As of the date of our annual impairment test for fiscal year 2022, the fair value of our reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by a significant margin. Subsequent to our annual impairment test, no indicators of impairment were identified. As of June 30, 2022, if our estimate of the fair value of our reporting unit was 10% lower, no goodwill impairment would have existed.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We review long-lived assets, such as finite-lived intangible assets, property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets for potential impairment, when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances
which indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. If the sum of the expected future undiscounted cash flow is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment is indicated. A loss is then recognized for the difference, if any, between the fair value of the asset (as estimated by management using its best judgment) and the carrying value of the asset. If actual market value is less favorable than that estimated by management, additional write-downs may be required. We recorded an impairment charge relating to our operating lease right-of-use assets of $1.6 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. There were no material impairment charges recorded for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Allowances for Accounts and Finance Receivables. We maintain lifetime expected loss allowances for accounts and finance receivables based on historical experience of payment performance, current conditions of the customer, and reasonable and supportable economic forecasts of collectability for the asset’s entire expected life, which is generally less than one year for accounts receivable and five years for finance receivables. Historical loss experience is utilized as there have been no significant changes in the mix or risk characteristics of the receivable revenue streams used to calculate historical loss rates. Current conditions are analyzed at each measurement date to reassess whether our receivables continue to exhibit similar risk characteristics as the prior measurement date, and determine if the reserve calculation needs to be adjusted for new developments, such as a customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations. Reasonable and supportable macroeconomic trends also are incorporated into the analysis. Estimating the allowances therefore requires us to apply judgment in relying on historical customer payment experience, regularly analyzing the financial condition of our customers, and developing macroeconomic forecasts to adequately cover expected credit losses on our receivables. By nature, such estimates are highly subjective, and it is possible that the amount of receivables that we are unable to collect may be different than the amounts initially estimated in the allowances.
Inventories. We determine the value of inventories using the lower of cost or net realizable value. We write down inventories for the difference between the carrying value of the inventories and their net realizable value. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional write-downs may be required.
We estimate our reserves for inventory obsolescence by continuously examining our inventories to determine if there are indicators that carrying values exceed net realizable values. Experience has shown that significant indicators that could require the need for additional inventory write-downs are the age of the inventory, the length of its product life cycles, anticipated demand for our products, changes to technical standards required by payment companies or by law, and current economic conditions. While we believe that adequate write-downs for inventory obsolescence have been made in the consolidated financial statements, actual demand could be less than forecasted demand for our products and we could experience additional inventory write-downs in the future.
Loss Contingencies. Loss contingencies are uncertain and unresolved matters that arise in the ordinary course of business and result from events or actions by others that have the potential to result in a future loss. Such contingencies include, but are not limited to, litigation.
When a loss is considered probable and reasonably estimable, we record a liability in the amount of our best estimate for the ultimate loss. When there appears to be a range of possible costs with equal likelihood, liabilities are based on the low-end of such range. However, the likelihood of a loss with respect to a particular contingency is often difficult to predict and determining a meaningful estimate of the loss or a range of loss may not be practicable based on the information available and the potential effect of future events and decisions by third parties that will determine the ultimate resolution of the contingency. Moreover, it is not uncommon for such matters to be resolved over many years, during which time relevant developments and new information must be continuously evaluated to determine both the likelihood of potential loss and whether it is possible to reasonably estimate a range of possible loss.
Disclosure is provided for material loss contingencies when a loss is probable but a reasonable estimate cannot be made, and when it is reasonably possible that a loss will be incurred or when it is reasonably possible that the amount of a loss will exceed the recorded provision. We regularly review all contingencies to determine whether the likelihood of loss has changed and to assess whether a reasonable estimate of the loss or range of loss can be made. As discussed above, development of a meaningful estimate of loss or a range of potential loss is complex when the outcome is directly dependent on negotiations with or decisions by third parties, such as regulatory agencies, the court system and other interested parties. Such factors bear directly on whether it is possible to reasonably estimate a range of potential loss and boundaries of high and low estimates.
Deferred Income Tax Assets and Liabilities. The carrying values of deferred income tax assets and liabilities reflect the application of our income tax accounting policies in accordance with applicable accounting standards and are based on management’s assumptions and estimates regarding future operating results and levels of taxable income, as well as management’s judgment regarding the interpretation of the provisions of applicable accounting standards. The carrying values of liabilities for income taxes currently payable are based on management’s interpretations of applicable tax laws and incorporate management’s assumptions and judgments regarding the use of tax planning strategies in various taxing jurisdictions.
We evaluate the recoverability of these deferred tax assets by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely heavily on estimates. We use our historical experience and our short and long-term business forecasts to provide insight. To the extent we do not consider it more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be recovered, a valuation allowance is established. Federal and state net operating loss carryforwards are reserved with a full valuation allowance because, based on the available evidence, we believe it is more likely than not that we would not be able to utilize those deferred tax assets in the future. If the actual amounts of taxable income differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted.
Sales tax reserve. The Company has recorded a contingent liability for sales tax, included in accrued expenses in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. On a quarterly basis, the Company accrues interest on the unpaid balance. The estimated liability is adjusted upon the payment of sales tax related to the accrual, the changes in state tax laws that may impact the accrual and the expiration of the statute of limitations for open years under review. The liability includes significant judgments and estimates that may change in the future, and the actual liability may be different from our current estimate. Changes to the sales tax reserve amount are recorded within general and administrative expenses and interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and accrued expenses in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table shows certain financial and non-financial data that management believes give readers insight into certain trends and relationships about the Company’s financial performance. We believe the metrics (Active Devices, Active Customers, Total Number of Transactions and Total Dollar Volume of Transactions) are useful in allowing management and readers to evaluate our strategy of driving growth in devices and transactions.
Active Devices
Active Devices are devices that have communicated with us or have had a transaction in the last twelve months. Included in the number of Active Devices are devices that communicate through other devices that communicate or transact with us. A self-service retail location that utilizes an ePort cashless payment device as well as Seed management services constitutes only one device.
Active Customers
The Company defines Active Customers as all customers with at least one active device.
Total Number Of Transactions and Total Dollar Volume of Transactions
Transactions are defined as electronic payment transactions that are processed by our technology-enabled solutions. Management uses Total Number of Transactions and Total Dollar Volume of Transactions to monitor recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and to evaluate the effectiveness of our new customer strategy and ability to leverage existing customers and partners.
Highlights for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 include:
•1.14 million Active Devices as of June 30, 2022 compared to 1.09 million as of June 30, 2021, an increase of approximately 43 thousand Active Devices, or 4.0%;
•23,991 Active Customers to our service as of June 30, 2022 compared to 19,834 as of June 30, 2021, an increase of 4,157 Active Customers, or 21%.
•2.3 billion in dollar volume of transactions for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to 1.8 billion for the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $0.53 billion, or 30%.
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
The following tables and charts summarize our results of operations and significant changes in our financial performance for the periods presented:
Revenues and Gross Profit
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $205.2 million, consisting of $168.9 million of subscriptions and transactions fees and $36.4 million of equipment sales, compared to $166.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, consisting of $139.2 million of subscription and transaction fees and $27.7 million of equipment sales. The $38.3 million increase in total revenue from the prior year was attributable to a $29.6 million increase in subscription and transaction fees and a $8.7 million increase in equipment sales. The increase in subscription and transaction fees is primarily driven by increased processing volumes, with an approximately 30% increase in total dollar volumes for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the prior year. We are currently exceeding pre-pandemic (COVID-19) levels of processing volumes. We continue to benefit from a broader macroeconomic recovery across the United States as businesses, schools and other organizations across the country continue to maintain normal levels of operations. Increase in revenues is also attributed to continued focus of management to grow our recurring services to our customer base and a 4% in the Active Devices count compared to last year.
The increase in equipment sales relates to more equipment shipments in the current year compared to last year driven by continued upgrades by our customers from 3G to 4G network compatible devices and customers upgrading their hardware devices to the latest payment technology security standards. We expect equipment revenue to continue to be a significant contributor to our total revenues through the 3G network discontinuation date in North America through the end of the 2022 calendar year.
Costs of sales
Costs of sales increased $28.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in costs of sales is attributed to a $19.8 million and $8.3 million increase in subscription and transaction costs and equipment costs respectively. The increase in cost of subscription and transaction fees was primarily driven by an corresponding increase in transaction processing fees. Similarly, the increase in the cost of equipment sales was driven by an increase in the volume of equipment sold during the current fiscal year.
Gross Margin
Total gross margin decreased from 32.4% for year ended June 30, 2021 compared to 31.3% for the year ended June 30, 2022. The decrease in gross margin was primarily a result of a change in revenue mix with a higher percent of our total revenue being transaction fees, which is inherently a lower margin revenue stream. We were able to offset a portion of this decrease with an increase in our transaction fees margin by lowering costs for our payment processor and payment networks. Additionally, we have seen an increase in average price per transaction relative to the same period in the prior year, which is additive to our gross margin.
Lastly we did improve the gross margin on equipment sales driven by the rollout of the ePort Engage devices which are priced to have higher margins relative to the equipment sales last year.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses. Operating expenses increased by $4.1 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The change is primarily attributed to a $5.9 million increase in technology and product development expenses, a $2.0 million increase in sales and marketing costs and a $1.2 million increase in investigation, proxy solicitation and restatement expenses offset by a decrease of $5.2 million in general and administrative expenses. Outside of the non-recurring investigation, proxy solicitation and restatement expenses; the change in total operating expenses reflects the Company's overall objectives to reduce general and administrative expenses and utilize savings to invest in innovative technologies and products and increase marketing spend to penetrate new and existing customers with our products and services. See further details within individual categories below.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased approximately $2.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The change is primarily attributed to an increase of approximately $1.4 million in advertising and trade show costs. The increase in trade show costs was due to our participation in industry conventions throughout FY22, along with launching our first Cantaloupe Innovation Summit in August 2022. These events were leveraged to drive increased sales and customer retention, while showcasing the latest innovations for self-service operators. Additional spending went into lead generation activities tied to advertising in trade publications, search, and retargeting campaigns to drive increased small- and medium-business (SMB) opportunities. The increase in expenses is also attributed to a $0.4 million increase in sales and marketing employee compensation expense which comprised of headcount increases and additional sales commissions costs incurred in the current year. The increased compensation expense supports our expanding business and service offerings in the United States and internationally.
Technology and product development. Technology and product development expenses increased approximately $5.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was driven primarily by the Company's objectives of investing in innovative technologies, specifically advancing mobile enhancements across the Seed platform (including Seed Warehouse App, Seed Driver App) and the mobile loyalty platform for consumers. Other innovations include continuous improvements and machine acceptance of remote price change, integration with HIVERY Enhance for leveraging artificial intelligence/machine learning technology and new ePort hardware devices that were launched during the year. Additional expenses in technology were incurred to further strengthen our network environment and platform by preparing and transitioning to Amazon Web Services (completed in July 2022), which will provide our customers greater stability, reliability, and overall higher performance on processing transactions and transmitting data.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased approximately $5.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $5.4 million decrease in professional fees due to reduced reliance on external consultants who previously supported the Company’s accounting, financial reporting and legal functions, a $1.6 million change relating to the network incident in the prior year, a $1.6 million lease impairment charge in the prior year, a $1.9 million decrease in stock
compensation, partially offset by a $0.9 million increase in salary and bonuses, an increase in bad debt expense of approximately $2.1 million, a $0.9 million change in sales tax reserve and an increase in travel and expense costs of $0.6 million during the current year.
Investigation, proxy solicitation and restatement expenses. In fiscal year 2019, the Audit Committee, with the assistance of independent legal and forensic accounting advisors, conducted an internal investigation of then-current and prior period matters relating to certain of the Company’s contractual arrangements, including the accounting treatment, financial reporting and internal controls related to such arrangements. Additionally, in fiscal year 2019, significant financial reporting issues were identified which were unrelated to the internal investigation and which resulted in further adjustments to the Company’s previously issued or prior fiscal years’ unissued financial statements. As a result of the findings, the Company restated its consolidated financial statements as of and for the fiscal year 2017 and our unaudited consolidated financial statements for the quarterly periods ended September 30, 2016, December 31, 2016, March 31, 2017, September 30, 2017, December 31, 2017, and March 31, 2018.
Investigation, proxy solicitation and restatement expenses were incurred primarily in fiscal year 2020 and 2019 in connection with the 2019 Investigation and the restatements of previously filed financial statements, bank consents, the remediation of deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting, the proxy solicitation, and professional services fees to assist with accounting and compliance activities in fiscal year 2020 following the filing of the 2019 Form 10-K.
The Company did not incur any material investigation, proxy solicitation and restatement expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the Company and former officers incurred additional legal charges primarily relating to responding to inquiries from the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”) and Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) in regards to the 2019 Investigation. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further information on the above mentioned matters.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense was predominantly consistent for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
Other income (expense), Net
____________
NM - not meaningful
Other income (expense), Net
Total other income (expense), net for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was $1.1 million, compared to $0.4 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. The $0.7 million increase in Other income (expense), net from the prior fiscal year was primarily attributable to a $0.7 million increase in interest income, a $3.5 million decrease in Interest expense offset by a $(3.4) million decrease in Other income.
Interest income. The increase in interest income is primarily driven by a larger finance receivables amount on our balance sheet as of June 30, 2022 compared to June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
Interest expense. The higher interest expense for the for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily related to the recognition of the remaining balance of unamortized debt issuance costs and debt discount associated with the senior secured term loan facility with Antara Capital Master Fund LP of $2.6 million into interest expense, when the Antara Term Facility was fully repaid and terminated. The remaining reduction in interest expense was mainly due to a $0.8 million change in the interest component of the sales tax reserve in fiscal year 2022 compared to the fiscal year 2021. The change in the sales tax reserve was driven by the expiration of statute of limitations and other factors considered by management while establishing the reserve.
Other income (expense): The higher other income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily attributed to Company receiving notification from the Small Business Administration that the $3.1 million Paycheck Protection Program loan and related accrued interest were forgiven in full. The Company recorded the forgiveness as a gain on debt extinguishment in our consolidated financial statements resulting in the increase in Other Income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures - Adjusted EBITDA
"Adjusted EBITDA” (as defined is a non-GAAP financial measure which is not required by or defined under GAAP. We use this non-GAAP financial measure for financial and operational decision-making purposes and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We believe that this non-GAAP financial measure provides useful information about our operating results, enhances the overall understanding of past financial performance and future prospects and allows for greater transparency with respect to metrics used by our management in its financial and operational decision making. The presentation of this financial measure is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the financial measures prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, including our net income or net loss or net cash used in operating activities. Management recognizes that non-GAAP financial measures have limitations in that they do not reflect all of the items associated with our net income or net loss as determined in accordance with GAAP, and are not a substitute for or a measure of our profitability or net earnings. Adjusted EBITDA is presented because we believe it is useful to investors as a measure of comparative operating performance. Additionally, we utilize Adjusted EBITDA as a metric in our executive officer and management incentive compensation plans.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as U.S. GAAP net loss before (i) interest income (ii) interest expense on debt and reserves (iii) income tax expense (iv) depreciation (v) amortization (vi) stock-based compensation expense (vii) fees and charges that were incurred in connection with the 2019 Investigation and financial statement restatement activities as well as proxy solicitation costs that are not indicative of our core operations and (viii) certain other significant infrequent or unusual losses and gains that are not indicative of our core operations including asset impairment charges and gain on extinguishment of debt.
Below is a reconciliation of U.S. GAAP net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022, 2021, and 2020:
(a) As an adjustment to EBITDA, we have excluded stock-based compensation, as it does not reflect our cash-based operations.
(b) As an adjustment to EBITDA, we have excluded the fees incurred in connection with the costs and expenses related to the 2019 Investigation, financial statement restatement activities, and proxy solicitation costs because we believe that they represent charges that are not related to our core operations.
(c) As an adjustment to EBITDA, we have excluded the non-cash impairment charges related to long-lived operating lease right-of-use assets because we believe that these do not represent charges that are related to our core operations.
(d) As an adjustment to EBITDA, we have excluded the one-time gain related to the forgiveness of our PPP loan.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources and Uses of Cash
Historically, we have financed our operations primarily through cash from operating activities, debt financings, and equity issuances. The Company has the following primary sources of capital available: (1) cash and cash equivalents on hand of $68.1 million as of June 30, 2022; (2) the cash that may be provided by operating activities; and (3) up to $15 million available to be drawn on the Amended Revolving Facility (defined below) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (4) up to an additional $10 million available through March 2023 to be drawn on the Amended Secured Term Facility (defined below) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company entered into an amended and restated credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. which provides for a $15 million secured revolving credit facility (the “Amended Revolving Facility”) and a $25 million secured term facility (the “Amended Secured Term Facility” and together with the Amended Revolving Facility, the “Amended JPMorgan Credit Facility”), and fully replaces our previous 2021 JPMorgan Credit Facility. For additional discussion on the amended credit facility see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company also has estimated and recorded for potential sales tax and related interest and penalty liabilities of $14.7 million in the aggregate as of June 30, 2022. The Company continues to evaluate these liabilities and the amount and timing of any such payments.
The Company believes that its current financial resources will be sufficient to fund its current twelve-month operating budget from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
Below are charts that reflect our cash liquidity and outstanding debt for the years ended June 30, 2022, 2021, and 2020.
Cash Flows
See Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Item 8 of this Annual Report for details on the changes in cash and cash equivalents classified by operating, investing and financing activities during our respective reporting periods.
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
Cash used in operating activities was $8.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to cash provided by operating activities of $8.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The $8.7 million cash used in operating activities reflects our net loss of $1.7 million, $22.5 million utilized by changes in working capital accounts offset by $15.5 million in non-cash operating charges.
Cash utilized by working capital accounts of approximately $22 million was principally a function of a $14.1 million increase in inventory, $13.6 million increase in accounts receivable, $4.3 million increase in prepaids and other assets, offset by an increase of $12.2 million to accounts payable and accrued expenses. Increase in inventory is driven by increased equipment sales as well as strategic planning to mitigate potential supply chain disruptions. The Company has increased inventory on hand in order to efficiently fulfill orders as they are placed and as we anticipate orders for customers who are continuing to upgrade 3G devices to 4G as the 3G network sunset date approaches near the end of calendar year 2022. Increase in cash utilized by accounts receivable of was as a result of increased sales and processing volumes during fiscal year 2022; offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses which was comprised of funds owed to customers as a result of larger processing volumes in fiscal year 2022.
Non-cash operating charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation, depreciation of property and equipment, and amortization of our intangible assets.
Net cash used in investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $12.2 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to cash used of $1.8 million in the same period in the prior year. Increase in cash used is due to the cash paid for the Yoke acquisition of $3 million and $9.3 million for increased property and equipment balances driven primarily by the Company's continued focus on investing in innovative technologies and products.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 which was primarily used to increase property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $0.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to cash provided of $50.1 million in the prior year. During the prior fiscal year, the Company raised $52.4 million of proceeds (net of issuance costs) through a private placement transaction with respect to the sale of an aggregate of 5,730,000 shares of the Company’s common stock to accredited investors (described below). The Company paid $1.2 million as a prepayment penalty and commitment termination fee to Antara as part of the repayment of the 2020 Antara Term Facility and paid $0.5 million of debt issuance costs as a result of entering into the 2021 JPMorgan Credit Facility.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
As of June 30, 2022, the Company had certain contractual obligations due over a period of time as summarized in the following table:
(a) Our debt and financing obligations include both principal and interest obligations. As of June 30, 2022, an interest rate of 5% was used to compute the amount of the contractual obligations for interest on the Amended JPMorgan Credit Agreement. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
(b) Operating lease obligations represent our undiscounted operating lease liabilities as of June 30, 2022. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
(c) Purchase obligations primarily represent firm commitments to purchase inventory. See Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements for further information.