Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the attached financial statements and notes thereto. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the following sections, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. For a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties, see the “Risk Factors” section in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements, which reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
For a discussion related to the results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage, oncology-focused biopharmaceutical company dedicated to destroying cancer differently. By pioneering a novel class of conditionally activated biologics, powered by our Probody® technology platform, our goal is to transcend the limits of current cancer treatments and successfully leverage therapeutic targets and strategies that were once thought to be inaccessible.
Probody therapeutic candidates are designed to be conditionally activated in the tumor microenvironment, effectively enabling the targeting of cancer tissues more specifically, while minimizing deleterious activity in healthy tissues and in circulation. We achieve this conditional activation by modifying our therapeutic product candidates with a mask that is designed to block binding to target until the mask is removed by proteases, which are enzymes that are more active in the tumor microenvironment than in normal tissue. We believe this innovative approach has the promise to improve cancer treatments in three ways by:
(1)Enhancing a potential product’s therapeutic window, the balance between tolerability and anti-tumor activity;
(2)Allowing the pursuit of anti-cancer targets that were previously considered “undruggable,” due to their widespread presence on normal tissues; and
(3)Enabling the development of new combination therapies that are otherwise poorly tolerated.
We are employing our industry-leading conditionally activated Probody platform to address some of the biggest challenges today in oncology biologics research and development and have successfully applied our technology to a variety of biologic modalities including antibodies, antibody-drug conjugates (“ADCs”), T-cell bispecifics ("TCBs"), and cytokines; all of which are in various stages of development spanning from discovery to clinical development.
Our robust and differentiated product pipeline includes the wholly-owned, praluzatamab ravtansine (CX-2009) and the AbbVie-partnered CX-2029, two investigational conditionally activated ADCs directed toward the previously undruggable targets CD166 and CD71, respectively. These cancer targets were considered inaccessible to conventional ADCs due to their ubiquitous expression in many healthy tissues, but we believe they are potentially addressable with our Probody technology. Having demonstrated favorable tolerability and encouraging anti-tumor activity in separate dose-escalation Phase 1 studies, praluzatamab ravtansine and CX-2029 are currently in Phase 2 clinical studies.
We are currently enrolling patients into a three-arm study of praluzatamab ravtansine in patients with advanced human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (“HER2”)-non-amplified breast cancer. Arms A and B will evaluate praluzatamab ravtansine monotherapy in patients with hormone receptor-positive (“HR+”)/HER2-non-amplified breast cancer and triple-negative breast cancer (“TNBC”), respectively. Arm C will evaluate praluzatamab ravtansine in combination with pacmilimab (CX-072), our wholly-owned PD-L1 inhibitor, both administered every three weeks in patients with TNBC. We expect approximately 40 efficacy-evaluable patients will be enrolled in each arm of the study. Initial data for Arms A and B are expected in the second half of 2022.
CX-2029, our CD71-directed ADC is being evaluated as monotherapy in a four-cohort Phase 2 expansion study designed to enroll twenty five efficacy evaluable patients with squamous non-small cell lung cancer (“sqNSCLC”), head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (“HNSCC”), esophageal and gastro-esophageal junction cancers, and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Preliminary data from the CX-2029 study for sqNSCLC and HNSCC were disclosed via a company press release in December 2021 in which encouraging activity in patients with sqNSCLC was highlighted. Patient enrollment continues in the expansion phase of this study with certain additional data updates expected in 2022.
Our robust clinical pipeline also includes cancer immunotherapeutic candidates against validated targets such as CTLA-4. Our partner, Bristol Myers Squibb, is conducting a randomized Phase 2 study evaluating BMS-986249, a Probody version of the CTLA-4-targeting
antibody, ipilimumab, in combination with the anti-PD-1 antibody, nivolumab, in patients with metastatic melanoma. In addition, BMS-986249 is being studied in combination with nivolumab in three additional indications: advanced hepatocellular carcinoma, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer and advanced TNBC. Bristol Myers Squibb also continues to evaluate BMS-986288, a Probody version of non-fucosylated ipilimumab, as monotherapy or in combination with nivolumab in a Phase 1 clinical study.
Underscoring our commitment to destroying cancer differently, we have recently introduced the third treatment modality overall into the clinic from our versatile and tunable Probody platform, reinforcing our leadership in the field of conditional activation of biologic therapeutics. As part of our partnership with Amgen, we are advancing CX-904, a conditionally activated T-cell-engaging bispecific antibody candidate against the epidermal growth factor receptor (“EGFR”) on tumor cells and CD3 on T cells. In January 2022, our investigational new drug application (“IND”) for CX-904 was allowed to proceed by the FDA. We are in the process of initiating a first-in-human Phase 1 study to evaluate CX-904 as a treatment for patients with advanced solid tumors and expect to dose the first patient in the first half of 2022.
In preclinical studies, we are developing CX-2043, our third conditionally activated ADC directed toward the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (“EpCAM”), a widely expressed tumor antigen. CX-2043 has demonstrated potent anti-tumor activity across multiple cancer types and superior tolerability in animal models compared to the corresponding unmasked ADC. We are also engaged in drug discovery efforts towards the generation of new clinical candidates for the treatment of cancer, including the application of our conditional activation platform to the engineering of novel, locally active cytokines, including interferon-alpha-2b, as well as additional TCBs.
In January and February 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 16,428,571 shares of common stock at a price of $7.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds received by us from the offering were $107.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of $7.3 million.
We do not have any products approved for sale, and we continue to incur significant research and development and general administrative expenses related to our operations. We are not profitable and have incurred losses in each year since our founding in 2008. Our net loss was $83.6 million, $32.9 million, and $102.2 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $533.7 million and $450.1 million, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future.
Global health authorities, including the FDA, regulate many aspects of a product candidate’s life cycle, including research and development and preclinical and clinical testing. We will need to commit significant time, resources, and funding to develop our wholly-owned and partnered product candidates in clinical trials, including praluzatamab ravtansine, CX-2029, pacmilimab, and CX-904 as well as any additional product candidates for which we initiate clinical studies in the future. We are unable to provide the nature, timing, and estimated costs of the efforts necessary to complete the development of our product candidates because, among other reasons, of regulatory uncertainty, manufacturing limitations, and the pace of enrollment of our clinical trials, which is a function of many factors, including the availability and proximity of patients with the relevant condition.
We currently have no manufacturing capabilities and do not intend to establish any such capabilities in the near term. As such, we are dependent on third parties to supply our product candidates according to our specifications, in sufficient quantities, on time, in compliance with appropriate regulatory standards and at competitive prices.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, a strain of novel coronavirus-caused disease (now commonly known as COVID-19) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China and in March 2020 the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a pandemic There continues to be uncertainty as to the extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic including the emergence and impact of new variants.
During 2020 and 2021, the COVID-19 outbreak impacted our ongoing operations, including clinical trials. Any preventative or protective actions that we, our collaboration partners or others have taken, or may take, in respect of the virus may result in further disruption for our clinical trials, including clinical trials for praluzatamab ravtansine, CX-2029 and CX-904, manufacturing, research, financial reporting capabilities and operations generally and could potentially impact our patients, partners, employees and third parties. Any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but may materially affect the business and our financial condition and results of operations. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions necessary to contain the virus or treat its impact, among others. Currently, it is not possible to predict how long the pandemic will last or the extent or degree of its ongoing impact on economic activity, and our business. We do not know the full extent of any impact or delay on our business or our operations, including clinical trial activity,
however, we will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely and operate in accordance with all relevant health and safety guidelines as they evolve in response to changing public health conditions.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue to date has been primarily derived from non-refundable license payments, milestone payments and reimbursements for research and development expenses under our research, collaboration, and license agreements. We recognize revenue from upfront payments over the term of our estimated period of performance under the agreement using a cost-based input method or a common measure of progress for the entire performance obligation. In addition to receiving upfront payments, we may also be entitled to milestone and other contingent payments upon achieving predefined objectives. Revenue from milestones and other contingent payments, when it is probable that there will not be a significant revenue reversal, is also recognized over the performance period based on a similar method. Reimbursements from Astellas and Bristol Myers Squibb for research and development costs when incurred under our research, collaboration and license agreements with them are classified as revenue.
For the foreseeable future, we do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products unless and until such time as our product candidates have advanced through clinical development and obtained regulatory approval. We expect that any revenue we generate in the foreseeable future will fluctuate from year to year as a result of the timing and amount of milestones and other payments from our collaboration agreements with AbbVie, Amgen, Astellas, Bristol Myers Squibb and any other collaboration partners, and as a result of the fluctuations in the research and development expenses we incur in the performance of assigned activities under these agreements.
AbbVie, one of our collaboration partners, entered into a license agreement with Seagen Inc., (“SGEN”) to license certain intellectual property rights. As part of our collaboration agreement with AbbVie, we received a sublicense to these intellectual property rights and therefore pay SGEN sublicense fees. These sublicense fees are treated as reductions to the transaction price and combined with the performance obligation to which they relate. Milestone payments, when considered probable of being reached and when a significant revenue reversal would not be probable of occurring, are also recorded net of the associated sublicense fees and included in the transaction price.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates, clinical development, including activities with third parties, such as contract research organizations (“CRO”) and contract development and manufacturing organizations (“CMO”), and the manufacture of drug products used in clinical trials, as well as the development of product candidates pursuant to our research, collaboration and license agreements. Research and development expenses include personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense, contractor services, laboratory materials and supplies, depreciation and maintenance of research equipment, and an allocation of related facilities costs. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially in absolute dollars in the future as we advance our product candidates through clinical trials, initiate additional clinical trials, and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. Examples include our Phase 2 clinical trials for praluzatamab ravtansine (CX-2009) and CX-2029, potential future clinical trials for CX-2029 and for praluzatamab ravtansine in combination with pacmilimab (CX-072) and our Phase 1 clinical trial for CX-904 which is in the process of being initiated. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including: the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, the ability of collaborators to successfully develop our licensed product candidates, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include personnel costs, expenses for outside professional services and other allocated expenses. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation. Outside professional services consist of accounting and audit services, legal and other consulting fees. Allocated expenses primarily consist of rent expense related to our office and information technology related costs.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest income from our cash equivalents and investments, and accretion of discounts or amortization of premiums on our investments.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of gains and losses resulting from changes to currency exchange rates.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, or ASC 740, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our financial statements or tax returns. We determine our deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, which are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We also account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The tax relief measures under the CARES Act for businesses include a five-year net operating loss carryback, suspension of annual deduction limitation of 80% of taxable income from net operating losses generated in a tax year beginning after December 31, 2017, changes in the deductibility of interest, acceleration of alternative minimum tax credit refunds, payroll tax relief, and a technical correction to allow accelerated deductions for qualified improvement property. We record the effect of an enacted change in a tax law in the period that includes the enactment date in accordance with ASC 740.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The following table summarizes our revenue by collaboration partner during the respective periods:
The decrease in revenue of $30.8 million for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to:
•a decrease in revenue of $26.3 million from AbbVie primarily due to the $40.0 million milestone payment earned in the first quarter of 2020 for satisfying the CD71 dose escalation success criteria milestone under the CD71 Co-Development and Licensing Agreement (the “CD71 Agreement”), of which $26.6 million was recognized reflecting the project percentage completion to date in the first quarter of 2020; and
•a decrease in revenue from Bristol Myers Squibb of $10.0 million due to the recognition in full of the $10.0 million milestone payment earned for achieving the dosing of the first patient in the Part 2 cohort expansion of the ongoing CTLA-4 program by Bristol Myers Squibb in February 2020; partially offset by
•an increase in revenue from Astellas of $5.4 million due to a full year recognition of the $80.0 million upfront payment over the estimated research service period of five years under the Astellas Agreement entered into in March 2020, as well as the increased research services during the current period.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program incurred during the respective periods presented:
The increase in research and development expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 was attributable to the following changes by project:
•The increase in CX-2029 expenses was primarily driven by a $5.8 million increase in clinical trial expenses and laboratory contract and services due to increase in patient enrollment activities;
•The increase in CX-2009 expenses was primarily driven by a $3.9 million increase in clinical trial studies and laboratory contract services due to increase in manufacturing and development activities, as well as a $1.2 million increase in consulting expenses; partially offset by a $3.0 million licensing payment to ImmunoGen in the first quarter of 2020;
•The decrease in CX-072 expenses was primarily due to a $5.1 million decrease in clinical trial related expenses and a $1.3 million decrease in laboratory contract services as a result of the timing of manufacturing and other research activities in the CX-072-001 study and the termination of the CX-072-002 study;
•The decrease in “Other wholly owned and partnered programs” was primarily due to a $6.0 million sublicense fee payment to UCSB related to the $80.0 million upfront payment under the Astellas Agreement during the first quarter of 2020; a $4.1 million decrease in laboratory contracts and services related to the CX-904 program as it moved into the IND application preparation phase; partially offset by an increase of $7.9 million in laboratory contracts and services expenses related to the EpCAM program due to an increase in pre-clinical activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.1 million during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in personnel related and recruiting expenses.
Interest Income and Other Expense, Net
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $1.6 million during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by lower interest rates in 2021.
Income Taxes
Income tax benefit decreased by $13.9 million for 2021 compared to 2020. The income tax benefit of $13.9 million for 2020 was generated due to the recognition of net operating loss carrybacks under the CARES Act, which generated a tax refund of taxes paid for 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $305.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $533.7 million, compared to cash, cash equivalents and investments of $316.1 million and an accumulated deficit of $450.1 million as of December 31, 2020. In January and February 2021, in an underwritten public offering of our common stock, we raised an aggregate net proceeds of approximately $107.7 million. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of our common stock in conjunction with the IPO, subsequent stock offerings and through our at-the-market offering, sales of our convertible preferred securities prior to our IPO and payments received under our collaboration agreements.
Based upon our current operating plan, we expect our existing capital resources will be sufficient to fund operations for a period of at least twelve months from the issuance date of the financial statements included in this report. However, if the anticipated operating results and future financing are not achieved in future periods, our planned expenditures may need to be reduced in order to extend the time period over which the then-available resources would be able to fund the operations. The amounts and timing of our actual expenditures depend on numerous factors, including the progress of our preclinical and clinical development efforts, the results of any clinical trials and other studies, our operating costs and expenditures and other factors described under the caption “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The cost and timing of developing our product candidates is highly uncertain and subject to substantial risks and changes. As such, we may alter our expenditures as a result of contingencies such as the failure of one or all of our product candidates currently in clinical development, the acceleration of one or all of our product candidates in clinical development, the initiating of clinical trials for additional product candidates, the identification of more promising product candidates in our research efforts or unexpected operating costs and expenditures. We will need to raise additional funds in the future. There can be no assurance, however, that such efforts will be successful; or if they are successful, that the terms and conditions of such financing will be favorable to us.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $119.0 million, which consisted of a net loss of $83.6 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $19.3 million and a net decrease of $54.7 million relating to the changes in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of $13.2 million in stock-based compensation, $3.1 million in non-cash lease expense, $2.7 million in depreciation and amortization and $0.3 million in net accretion of discounts on our investments.
The change of our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to:
•a net decrease of $66.2 million in deferred revenue resulting from the continued recognition of deferred revenue from existing customers;
•an increase of $7.4 million in accrued liabilities and accounts payable primarily due to timing of payments and an increase in research and clinical expenses
•an increase of $4.1 million in cash flows from prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets primarily due to reduced advance payments to our third-party manufacturing vendors and timing of payments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $5.3 million, which consisted of a net loss of $32.9 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $20.1 million and a net increase of $18.1 million relating to the change of our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of $14.8 million in stock-based compensation, $2.9 million in non-cash lease expense and $2.6 million in depreciation and amortization, which amounts were partially offset by $0.2 million in net accretion of discounts on our short-term investments.
The change of our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to:
•a net increase of $30.9 million in deferred revenue resulting primarily from the $80.0 million upfront payment from Astellas as well as the $40.0 million milestone payment from AbbVie, partially offset by the continued recognition of deferred revenue from other existing customers;
•an increase of $0.1 million in cash flows from prepaid expenses and other current assets;
•a decrease of $0.2 million in cash flows from other assets;
•a decrease of $11.0 million in accrued liabilities primarily due to payment of $7.5 million for the ImmunoGen 2019 License and $2.8 million for lease liabilities;
•a decrease in cashflow of $0.8 million from accounts receivable primarily related to research and development service fees due from Astellas pursuant to the Astellas Agreement; and
•a decrease in cashflow of $0.9 million from accounts payable.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by investing activities was $22.5 million, which consisted of $124.0 million in proceeds received upon the maturity of short-term marketable securities, partially offset by $99.9 million used in the purchase of long-term investments and $1.6 million of capital expenditures used to purchase property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $18.7 million, which consisted of $199.1 million used in the purchase of short-term investments and $2.3 million of capital expenditures used to purchase property and equipment, partially offset by $182.7 million in proceeds received upon the maturity of marketable securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $110.2 million, which consisted of $107.7 million of net proceeds from the follow-on public offering in January and February 2021 and $2.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases under the employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”).
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $16.9 million, which primarily consisted of proceeds from our common stock issuance of $11.3 million under the Open Market Sales Agreement (net of underwriting discounts and stock issuance costs of $0.4 million) and $5.6 million from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchases under the ESPP.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations that become due within the next twelve months (in thousands):
(1)We lease our current facility under a long-term operating lease, which expires in 2026. The lease provides us with one option to extend the lease term for a period of five years at the then fair market rental value.
(2)We have royalty obligations under the terms of certain exclusive licensed patent rights. The royalty obligations are cancellable any time by giving notice to the licensor, with the termination being effective 60 days after giving notice. See Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10 - “License Agreement" in the accompanying Notes to the financial statements for more information.
(3)We have annual license maintenance fees under the terms of certain license agreement with UCSB. See Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10 - “License Agreement” in the accompanying Notes to the financial statements for more information.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials and with vendors for pre-clinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes, which are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 to 60 days prior written notice. These payments are not included in the above table of contractual obligations. The above table also excludes unrecognized tax benefits of $7.8 million as of December 31, 2021 because these uncertain tax positions, if recognized, would be an adjustment to our deferred tax assets, which are subject to a valuation allowance.
Segment Information
We have one primary business activity and operate as one reportable segment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of the promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we have received or expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
Our revenues are primarily derived through our license, research, development and commercialization agreements. The terms of these types of agreements may include (i) licenses for our technology or programs, (ii) research and development services, and (iii) services or obligations in connection with participation in research or steering committees. Payments to us under these arrangements typically include one or more of the following: nonrefundable upfront and license fees, research funding, milestone and other contingent payments to us for the achievement of defined collaboration objectives and certain preclinical, clinical, regulatory and sales-based events, as well as royalties on sales of any commercialized products. We assess whether the promises in our arrangements with customers are considered as distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately. Judgment is required to determine whether the license to our intellectual property is distinct from the research and development services or participation on steering committees.
Our collaboration and license agreements may include contingent payments related to specified research, development and regulatory milestones. Such milestone payments are typically payable under the collaborations when the collaboration partner claims or selects a target, or initiates or advances a covered product candidate in preclinical or clinical development, upon submission for marketing approval of a covered product with regulatory authorities; or upon receipt of actual marketing approvals of a covered product or for additional indications. To date we have concluded that these contingent payments should be fully constrained until the conditions are met. At each reporting date, we re-evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price by using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price in such period of determination.
Our collaboration and license agreements may also include contingent payments related to sales-based milestones. Sales-based milestones are typically payable when annual sales of a covered product reach specified levels. Sales-based milestones are recognized at the later of when the associated performance obligation has been satisfied or when the sales occur. Unlike other contingency payments, such as regulatory milestones, sales-based milestones are not included in the transaction price based on estimates at the inception of the contract, but rather, are included when the sales or usage occur.
The transaction price in each arrangement is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on the relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) of each distinct performance obligation, which requires judgment. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when a license or service is not sold separately, SSP is determined using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. Due to the early stage of our licensed technology, the license of such technology is typically combined with research and development services and steering committee participation as one performance obligation. In the event that we receive non-cash consideration such as consideration in the form of a research license and research support services from the counterparty, the transaction price of a non-monetary exchange that has commercial substance is estimated based on the fair value of the non-cash consideration received, which may be determined through a valuation analysis.
Most of our collaboration arrangements are related to delivering a combined performance obligation satisfied over time. Some of our revenue is recognized over a defined research period as stand-ready obligations, while others are recognized using a cost-based input measure based on our actual full time employee ("FTE") hours incurred as a percentage of projected FTE hours for completing the performance obligation. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, we adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. There have been changes in estimates of research service periods and the related estimated FTE hours-to-completion, of certain of our research development programs in 2021, 2020, and 2019. Such adjustments have impacted and may continue to impact the amounts and timing of our revenue recognized.
Research and Development Expenses
We record accrued liabilities for estimated costs of research, preclinical and clinical studies and contract manufacturing activities, which are a significant component of research and development expenses. A substantial portion of our ongoing research and development activities is conducted by third-party service providers, including CROs. Our contracts with CROs generally include pass-through costs, such as regulatory expenses, investigator fees, travel costs and other miscellaneous costs. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payments that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. We accrue the costs incurred under agreements with these third parties based on actual work completed in accordance with the respective agreements. In the event we make advance payments, they are recorded as prepaid expenses and recognized as the services are performed. We determine the estimated costs through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress of stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fees to be paid for such services.
We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrual balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accruals. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different than the actual amounts incurred, such estimates for the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any one period. Our accrual is dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party vendors. Variations in the assumptions used to estimate accruals including, but not limited to, the number of patients enrolled, the rate of patient enrollment and the actual services performed, may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to clinical trial expenses in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our financial condition and results of operations. There has not been material changes in estimates in recent years.