Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
On April 1, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Nesco Holdings II, Inc., a subsidiary of Custom Truck One Source, Inc. (formerly Nesco Holdings, Inc.), completed the acquisition of Custom Truck One Source, L.P. (“Custom Truck LP”) in a series of transactions described below (the “Acquisition”). On April 1, 2021, Nesco Holdings, Inc. (“Nesco Holdings”) changed its name to “Custom Truck One Source, Inc.” and changed The New York Stock Exchange ticker for its shares of common stock (“Common Stock”) from “NSCO” to “CTOS,” and the ticker of its redeemable warrants from “NSCO.WS” to “CTOS.WS.”
Throughout this section, unless otherwise noted, terms such as “we,” “our,” “us,” or “the Company” refer to Nesco Holdings prior to the Acquisition and to the combined company after the Acquisition. Unless the context otherwise requires, the terms “Nesco” or
“Nesco Holdings” mean Nesco Holdings and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Acquisition, and the term “Custom Truck LP” means Custom Truck LP and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Acquisition.
Acquisition of Custom Truck LP
On December 3, 2020, Nesco Holdings and Nesco Holdings II, Inc., a subsidiary of Nesco Holdings (the “Buyer” or the “Issuer”), entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement (as amended, the “Purchase Agreement”) with certain affiliates of The Blackstone Group (“Blackstone”) and other direct and indirect equity holders (collectively, “Sellers”) of Custom Truck LP, Blackstone Capital Partners VI-NQ L.P., and PE One Source Holdings, LLC, an affiliate of Platinum Equity, LLC (“Platinum”), pursuant to which Buyer agreed to acquire 100% of the partnership interests of Custom Truck LP. In connection with the Acquisition, Nesco Holdings and certain Sellers entered into Rollover and Contribution Agreements (the “Rollover Agreements”), pursuant to which such Sellers agreed to contribute a portion of their equity interests in Custom Truck LP (the “Rollovers”) with an aggregate value of $100.5 million in exchange for shares of Common Stock, valued at $5.00 per share.
Also on December 3, 2020, Nesco Holdings entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Investment Agreement”) with Platinum, relating to, among other things, the issuance and sale to Platinum (the “Subscription”) of shares of Common Stock, for an aggregate purchase price in the range of $700 million to $763 million, with the specific amount calculated in accordance with the Investment Agreement based upon the total equity funding required to fund the consideration paid pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement. The shares of Common Stock issued and sold to Platinum had a purchase price of $5.00 per share. In accordance with the Investment Agreement, on December 21, 2020, Nesco Holdings entered into Subscription Agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”) to finance, in part, the Acquisition. Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, concurrently with the closing of the transactions contemplated by the Investment Agreement, the PIPE Investors agreed to purchase an aggregate of 28,000,000 shares of Common Stock at $5.00 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $140 million (the “Supplemental Equity Financing”).
On the Closing Date, in connection with (i) the Rollovers, the Company issued, in the aggregate, 20,100,000 shares of Common Stock to the parties to the Rollover Agreements, (ii) the Subscription, the Company issued 148,600,000 shares of Common Stock to Platinum, and (iii) the Supplemental Equity Financing, the Company issued, in the aggregate, 28,000,000 shares of Common Stock to the PIPE Investors. Following the completion of these transactions, as of April 1, 2021, the Company had 245,919,383 shares of Common Stock issued and outstanding. The trading price of the Common Stock was $9.35 per share on the Closing Date. The purchase price for the Acquisition was $1.5 billion.
On the Closing Date, the Issuer issued $920 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.50% senior secured second lien notes due 2029 (the “2029 Secured Notes”) and, together with its direct parent, and certain of its direct and indirect subsidiaries, entered into a senior secured asset-based revolving credit agreement (the “ABL Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent and collateral agent, and certain other lenders party thereto, consisting of a $750.0 million first lien senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility with a maturity of five years (the “ABL Facility,” together with the offering of the 2029 Secured Notes, the Acquisition, the Rollover, the Subscription and the Supplemental Equity Financing, the “Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions”). For more detail regarding the 2029 Secured Notes and the ABL Facility, see “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Presentation of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Custom Truck LP became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company on April 1, 2021. The Company's consolidated financial statements prepared under United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) include Custom Truck LP as of December 31, 2021 and for the period from April 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021. Accordingly, information presented for the year ended December 31, 2021 represents the financial results of Nesco Holdings and its subsidiaries for that entire period and the financial results of Custom Truck LP and its subsidiaries only from April 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021. Financial information for the year ended December 31, 2021 is not comparable to the year ended December 31, 2020 because of the Acquisition. We have provided an analysis of the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which financial results are those of Nesco Holdings and its subsidiaries prior to the Acquisition and does not include Custom Truck LP. Additionally, we have included information on a "pro forma" basis as further described below, which we believe provides for more meaningful year-over-year comparability. The discussion of results of operations in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is presented on a historical basis, as of or for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the year ended December 31, 2020.For a discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, please refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K dated March 9, 2021.
Pro Forma Financial Information
The unaudited pro forma combined financial information presented in the section entitled “Supplemental Pro Forma Information,” give effect to the Acquisition, as if the Acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2020, and is presented to facilitate comparisons with our results following the Acquisition. This information has been prepared in accordance with Securities and Exchange Commission Article 11 of Regulation S-X. Such unaudited pro forma combined financial information also uses the fair value of assets and liabilities and the estimated fair value of tax assets and liabilities on the Closing Date, and makes the following assumptions: (1) removes acquisition-related costs and charges that were recognized in the Company's consolidated financial statements in the year ended December 31, 2021 and applies these costs and charges to the year ended December 31, 2020, as if the Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions had occurred on January 1, 2020; (2) removes the loss on the extinguishment of debt that was recognized in the Company's consolidated financial statements in the year ended December 31, 2021 and applies the charge to the year ended December 31, 2020, as if the debt extinguishment giving rise to the loss had occurred on January 1, 2020; (3) adjusts for the impacts of purchase accounting in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020; (4) adjusts interest expense, including amortization of debt issuance costs, to reflect borrowings on the ABL Facility and issuance of the 2029 Secured Notes, as if the funds had been borrowed and notes had been issued on January 1, 2020 and used to repay pre-acquisition debt; and (5) adjusts for the income tax effect using a tax rate of 25%.
Financial and Performance Measures
Financial Measures
Revenue - As a full-service equipment provider, we generate revenue through renting, selling, assembling, upfitting, and servicing new and used heavy-duty trucks and cranes, as well as the sale of related parts. We also sell and rent specialized tools on an individual basis and in kits. Rental revenue is primarily comprised of revenues from rental agreements and freight charges billed to customers. For periods after January 1, 2021, the Company records changes in estimated collectability directly against rental revenue. Equipment sales revenue reflects the value of vocational trucks and other equipment sold to customers. Parts and service revenue is derived from maintenance and repair services, light upfit services, and parts, tools and accessories sold directly to customers.
Cost of rental revenue - Cost of rental revenue reflects repairs and maintenance costs of rental equipment, parts costs, labor and other overheads related to maintaining the rental fleet, and freight associated with the shipping of rental equipment.
Depreciation of rental equipment - Depreciation of rental equipment is comprised of depreciation expense on the rental fleet. We allocate the cost of rental equipment generally over the rentable life of the equipment. The depreciation allocation is based upon estimated lives ranging from five to seven years. The cost of equipment is depreciated to an estimated residual value using the straight-line method.
Cost of equipment sales - Cost of equipment sales reflects production and inventory costs associated with new units sold, parts costs, labor and other overheads related to production, and freight associated with the shipping and receiving of equipment and parts. Cost of equipment sales also includes the net book value of rental units sold.
Selling, general and administrative expenses - Selling, general and administrative expenses include sales compensation, fleet licensing fees and corporate expenses, including salaries, stock-based compensation expense, insurance, advertising costs, professional services, fees earned on customer arranged financing, gains or losses resulting from insurance settlements, and information technology costs.
Amortization and non-rental depreciation - Amortization expense relates to intangible assets such as customer lists, trade names, etc. Non-rental depreciation expense reflects the depreciation of property and equipment that is not part of the rental fleet.
Transaction expenses - Transaction expenses and other include expenses directly related to the acquisition of businesses. These expenses generally are comprised of travel and out-of-pocket expenses and legal, accounting and valuation or appraisal fees incurred in connection with pre- and post-closure activities. We also include costs and expenses associated with post-acquisition integration activities related to the acquired businesses.
Financing and other expense (income) - Financing and other expense (income) reflects the financing income associated with sales-type lease activity, foreign currency gains and losses related to our Canadian operations, as well as other miscellaneous gains or losses from non-operating activities. Also included in financing and other expense (income) are the unrealized remeasurement gains and losses related to our interest rate collar and redeemable warrants.
Interest expense - Interest expense consists of contractual interest expense on outstanding debt obligations, floorplan financing facilities, amortization of deferred financing costs and other related financing expenses.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit) - We have net operating loss carryforward and disallowed interest deduction carryforward assets, which are generally available to be used to offset taxable income generated in future years. Due to limitations on the use of these carryforwards under U.S. federal and state income tax regulations, we record valuation allowances to reduce the carryforward assets to amounts that we estimate will be realized. Accordingly, income tax expense or benefit generally is comprised of changes to these valuation allowance estimates and does not reflect taxes on current period income (or tax benefit on current period losses). For these reasons, our effective tax rate differs from the federal statutory tax rate.
Performance Measures
We consider the following key operational measures when evaluating our performance and making day-to-day operating decisions:
Ending OEC - Original equipment cost (“OEC”) is the original equipment cost of units at a given point in time.
Average OEC on rent - Average OEC on rent is calculated as the weighted-average OEC on rent during the stated period. OEC represents the original equipment cost, exclusive of the effect of adjustments to rental equipment fleet acquired in business combinations, and is the basis for calculating certain of the measures set forth below. This adjusted measure of OEC is used by our creditors pursuant to our credit agreements, wherein this is a component of the basis for determining compliance with our financial loan covenants. Additionally, the pricing of our rental contracts and equipment sales prices for our equipment is based upon OEC, and we measure a rate of return from our rentals and sales using OEC. OEC is a widely used industry metric to compare fleet dollar value independent of depreciation.
Fleet utilization - Fleet utilization is defined as the total numbers of days the rental equipment was rented during a specified period of time divided by the total number of days available during the same period and weighted based on OEC. Utilization is a measure of fleet efficiency expressed as a percentage of time the fleet is on rent and is considered to be an important indicator of the revenue generating capacity of the fleet.
OEC on rent yield - OEC on rent yield (“ORY”) is a measure of return realized by our rental fleet during a period. ORY is calculated as rental revenue (excluding freight recovery and ancillary fees) during the stated period divided by the average OEC on rent for the same period. For periods less than 12 months, ORY is adjusted to an annualized basis.
Sales order backlog - Sales order backlog consists of purchase orders received for products expected to be shipped within the next 12 months, although shipment dates are subject to change due to design modifications or changes in other customer requirements. Sales order backlog should not be considered an accurate measure of future net sales.
Operating Segments
Following the Acquisition, we modified our management structure and expanded from two reportable operating segments to three: Equipment Rental Solutions, Truck and Equipment Sales and Aftermarket Parts and Services. Segment information provided within this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been adjusted for all prior periods consistent with the current reportable segment presentation.
Equipment Rental Solutions (“ERS”) Segment - We own a broad range of new and used specialty equipment, including truck-mounted aerial lifts, cranes, service trucks, dump trucks, trailers, digger derricks and other machinery and equipment. As of December 31, 2021, this equipment (the “rental fleet”) is comprised of more than 9,000 units. The majority of our rental fleet can be used across a variety of end-markets, which coincides with the needs of many of our customers who operate in multiple end-markets. As is customary for equipment rental companies, we sell used equipment out of our rental fleet to end user customers. These sales are often made in response to specific customer requests. These sales offer customers an opportunity to buy well-maintained equipment with long remaining useful lives and enable us to effectively manage the age and mix of our rental fleet to match current market demand. We also employ rental purchase options (“RPOs”) on a select basis, which provide a buyout option with an established purchase price that decreases over time as rental revenue is collected. Customers are given credit against such purchase price for a portion of the amounts paid over the life of the rental, allowing customers the flexibility of a rental with the option to purchase at any time at a known price. Activities in our ERS segment consist of the rental and sale from the rental fleet, of the foregoing products.
Truck and Equipment Sales (“TES”) Segment - We offer a broad variety of new equipment for sale to be used across our end-markets, which can be modified to meet our customers’ specific needs. We believe that our integrated production capabilities and extensive knowledge gained over a long history of selling equipment have established us as a trusted partner for customers seeking tailored solutions with short lead times. In support of these activities, we primarily employ a direct-to-customer sales model, leveraging our dedicated salesforce of industry and product managers, who are focused on driving national and local sales. We also opportunistically engage in the sale of used equipment purchased from third parties or received via trade-ins from new equipment sales customers. In all of these cases, we will sell used equipment directly to customers, rather than relying on auctions. Activities in
our TES segment consist of the production and sale of new and used specialty equipment and vocational trucks, which includes equipment from leading original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) across our end-markets, as well as our Load KingTM brand.
Aftermarket Parts and Services (“APS”) Segment - The APS segment includes the sale of specialized aftermarket parts, including captive parts related to our Load KingTM brand, used in the maintenance and repair of the equipment we sell and rent. Specialized tools, including stringing blocks, insulated hot stick, and rigging equipment, are sold or rented to customers on an individual basis or in packaged specialty kits. We also provide truck and equipment maintenance and repair services, which are executed throughout nationwide branch network and fleet of mobile technicians supported by our 24/7 call center based in Kansas City, Missouri.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In this MD&A and in the Supplemental Pro Forma Information, we report certain financial measures that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, GAAP. We utilize these financial measures to manage our business on a day-to-day basis, and some of these measures are commonly used in our industry to evaluate performance. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide investors with expanded insight to assess performance, in addition to the standard GAAP-based financial measures. Reconciliation of the most directly comparable GAAP measure to each non-GAAP measure that we refer to is included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following provides a description of the non-GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial performance measure that the Company uses to monitor its results of operations, to measure performance against debt covenants and performance relative to competitors. The Company believes Adjusted EBITDA is a useful performance measure because it allows for an effective evaluation of operating performance when compared to peers, without regard to financing methods or capital structures. The Company excludes the items identified in the reconciliations of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA because these amounts are either non-recurring or can vary substantially within the industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, including the method by which the assets were acquired, and capital structures. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income (loss) determined in accordance with GAAP. Certain items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historical costs of depreciable assets, none of which are reflected in Adjusted EBITDA. The Company's presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indication that results will be unaffected by the items excluded from Adjusted EBITDA. The Company’s computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be identical to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss before interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation, and other items that the Company does not view as indicative of ongoing performance. The Company’s Adjusted EBITDA includes an adjustment to exclude the effects of purchase accounting adjustments when calculating the cost of inventory and used equipment sold. When inventory or equipment is purchased in connection with a business combination, the assets are revalued to their current fair values for accounting purposes. The consideration transferred (i.e., the purchase price) in a business combination is allocated to the fair values of the assets as of the acquisition date, with amortization or depreciation recorded thereafter following applicable accounting policies; however, this may not be indicative of the actual cost to acquire inventory or new equipment that is added to product inventory or the rental fleets apart from a business acquisition. Additionally, the pricing of rental contracts and equipment sales prices for equipment is based on OEC, and the Company measures a rate of return from rentals and sales using OEC. The Company also includes an adjustment to remove the impact of accounting for certain of our rental contracts with customers containing a rental purchase option that are accounted for under GAAP as a sales-type lease. We include this adjustment because we believe continuing to reflect the transactions as an operating lease better reflects the economics of the transactions given our large portfolio of rental contracts. These, and other, adjustments to GAAP net income or loss that are applied to derive Adjusted EBITDA are specified by the Company’s senior secured credit agreements.
Although management evaluates and presents the Adjusted EBITDA non-GAAP measure for the reasons described herein, please be aware that this non-GAAP measure has limitations and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue, operating income/loss, net income/loss, earnings/loss per share or any other comparable operating measure prescribed by GAAP. In addition, we may calculate and/or present this non-GAAP financial measure differently than measures with the same or similar names that other companies report, and, as a result, the non-GAAP measure we report may not be comparable to those reported by others.
Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA
We present Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA as if the Acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2020. Refer to the reconciliation of pro forma combined net income (loss) to Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA for the three and twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 in the section entitled “Supplemental Pro Forma Information.”
Gross Profit Excluding Depreciation of Rental Equipment
Gross profit excluding depreciation of rental equipment is a financial performance measure that we use to monitor our results from operations. We believe the exclusion of depreciation expense of the rental fleet provides a meaningful measure of financial performance because it provides useful information relating to profitability that reflects ongoing and direct operating expenses, such as freight costs and fleet maintenance costs, related to our rental fleet. Although management evaluates and presents this non-GAAP measure for the reasons described herein, please be aware that this non-GAAP measure has limitations and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue, gross profit or any other comparable operating measure prescribed by GAAP. In addition, we may calculate and/or present this non-GAAP financial measure differently than measures with the same or similar names that other companies report, and as a result, the non-GAAP measure we report may not be comparable to those reported by others.
Overview of Markets
We continue to focus on four primary end markets: Transmission and Distribution, or T&D, Telecom, Rail, and Infrastructure. In the T&D end market, we continue to observe demand for new generation assets resulting in the development of new transmission lines as well as repair projects to address advanced-age transmission and distribution grids to replace existing lines and poles. These factors resulted in continued demand from our customers of the Company’s products and services. Telecom, specifically the roll-out of 5G, has seen some positive trends over the last year and half. Our existing T&D related contactor customers are expected to deliver the roll-out, and our existing equipment portfolio aligns well with the needs of this market. Rail investment, both in the freight and commuter markets, remains robust. The existing rail infrastructure is aged and in need of maintenance. Infrastructure also provides potential growth opportunities as seen by the major road and bridge maintenance work experienced across the United States.
Uncertainty remains regarding emerging variant strains of COVID-19, and regarding the length of time it will take for the COVID-19 pandemic to subside, including the time it will take for vaccines to be broadly distributed and accepted in the United States and the rest of the world, and the effectiveness of such vaccines in slowing or stopping the spread of COVID-19 and mitigating the economic effects of the pandemic. The Company serves critical infrastructure sectors that have been identified by the United States Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (“CISA”) as vital to the U.S., and the Company has continued to meet the needs of customers during the pandemic. We continue to adhere to protocols designed to maintain the health and safety of our employees and their families, as well as our customers, vendors and communities. These protocols have allowed the Company to keep all business and service locations operational throughout the pandemic with little to no disruption. The unprecedented nature of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to make it difficult to predict our future business and financial performance. The ensuing economic impacts from restrictions put in place around the globe to address the COVID-19 pandemic, including shutdowns and workplace changes, have led to issues, broadly, in the global flow of goods and services (the “supply chain”). The Company continues to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions on our supply chain, including, but not limited to, the commercial vehicle manufacturers that provide the chassis used in our production and manufacturing processes. Supply chain disruptions, such as the ongoing semiconductor shortage, could potentially limit the ability of these manufacturers to meet demand in future periods.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The consolidated operating results presented below for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the results of Custom Truck LP from April 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021. The consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020 represent those of Nesco Holdings before the acquisition of Custom Truck LP and, therefore, are not comparable.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Total Revenue - The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, both in total and for each of our individual revenue streams, was driven by the addition of Custom Truck LP’s revenues to our operating results. The Acquisition significantly increased the size of our rental fleet and added a new equipment production and sales line of business (which we report under our TES segment) and a parts sales and heavy equipment service business.
Cost of Revenue, Excluding Depreciation - Consistent with the increase in revenue versus the prior year period, the increase in cost of revenue was driven by the addition of Custom Truck LP’s cost of revenue, to our operating results.
Operating Expenses - The primary drivers of the increase in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 are the addition of Custom Truck, LP’s operating expenses to our operating results, as well as certain transaction and post-acquisition integration costs related to the Acquisition. Certain expenses directly related to the Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions are not expected to recur in future periods.
Other Expense - The increase in other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was largely driven by the $61.7 million loss on extinguishment of debt recognized during the period, which was directly related to the refinancing of Nesco’s asset-based revolving credit facility (the “2019 Credit Facility”) and its 10% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Secured Notes”) in connection with the Acquisition.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit) - The Company's effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 of negative 2.5%, differs from the U.S. federal statutory tax rate due primarily to the recording of valuation allowances against deferred tax assets. The Income tax expense and benefit in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 primarily relates to changes in the valuation allowance and was an expense of $4.4 million and a benefit of $30.1 million, respectively.
Net Income (Loss) - The net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 is due to the addition of Custom Truck LP and the significant expenses incurred and recognized directly related to the Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions.
Key Performance Measures
We believe that our operating model, together with our highly variable cost structure, enables us to sustain high margins, strong cash flow generation and stable financial performance throughout various economic cycles. We are able to generate cash flow through our earnings. Our highly variable cost structure adjusts with the utilization of our equipment, thereby reducing our costs to match our
revenue. We principally evaluate financial performance based on the following measurements: ending OEC, average OEC on rent, fleet utilization, OEC on rent yield, and sales backlog. The table below presents these key measures.
(a) Original equipment cost (“OEC”) on rent is the original equipment cost of units rented to customers at a given point in time.
(b) Average OEC on rent is the average original equipment cost of units on rent during the period. The measure provides a value dimension to the fleet utilization statistics.
(c) Fleet utilization for the period is calculated by dividing the amount of time an asset is on rent by the amount of time the asset has been owned during the period. Time on rent is weighted by OEC.
(d) OEC on rent yield (“ORY”) is a measure of return realized by our rental fleet during the 12-month period. ORY is calculated as rental revenue (excluding freight recovery and ancillary fees) during the stated period divided by the Average OEC on rent for the same period. For periods less than 12 months, the ORY is adjusted to an annualized basis.
(e) Sales order backlog consists of purchase orders received for products expected to be shipped within the next 12 months, although shipment dates are subject to change due to design modifications or changes in other customer requirements. Sales order backlog should not be considered an accurate measure of future net sales.
Ending OEC - The increase in Ending OEC for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was driven by the addition of Custom Truck LP’s rental fleet.
Average OEC on Rent - The increase in Average OEC on rent for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was driven by the addition of Custom Truck LP’s rental fleet.
Fleet Utilization - Fleet utilization improved for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 due to continued customer demand during the current year period, coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that affected rental volume in 2020.
OEC on Rent Yield - The increase in ORY was driven by the addition of the Custom Truck LP rental fleet and its impact on the mix of equipment types on rent. Also contributing to the increase in ORY in the year ended December 31, 2021 versus the year ended December 31, 2020 is the impact of pricing increases during 2021.
Sales Order Backlog - Sales order backlog consists of customer orders placed for customized and stock equipment. The increase in sales order backlog relates to the addition of Custom Truck LP’s new equipment sales business along with strong customer demand.
Adjusted EBITDA
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As previously noted, Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for revenue, operating income/loss, net income/loss, earnings/loss per share or any other comparable operating measure prescribed by GAAP.
(1) Represents the non-cash impact of purchase accounting, net of accumulated depreciation, on the cost of equipment and inventory sold. The equipment and inventory acquired received a purchase accounting step-up in basis, which is a non-cash adjustment to the equipment cost pursuant to our ABL Credit Agreement.
(2) Represents transaction costs related to acquisitions of businesses, including the Acquisition, which are recognized within operating expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). These expenses are comprised of professional consultancy, legal, tax and accounting fees. Also included are expenses associated with the integration of acquired businesses.
(3) Loss on extinguishment of debt represents special charges, which are not expected to recur. Such charges are adjustments pursuant to our ABL Credit Agreement.
(4) Represents the impact of sales-type lease accounting for certain leases containing RPOs, as the application of sales-type lease accounting is not deemed to be representative of the ongoing cash flows of the underlying rental contracts. The adjustments are made pursuant to our ABL Credit Agreement.
(5) Represents non-cash share-based compensation expense associated with the issuance of stock options and restricted stock units.
(6) Represents the charge to earnings for our interest rate collar and the change in fair value of the liability for warrants.
Operating Results by Segment
Equipment Rental Solutions (ERS) Segment
Total Revenue - For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase in total revenue for the ERS segment was driven by the Acquisition. The increase in rental revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by continued demand related to infrastructure investments in T&D and Telecom and the Acquisition.
Cost of Revenue - The increase in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was largely the result of the Acquisition.
Depreciation - Depreciation of our rental fleet increased in the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the Acquisition.
Gross Profit - The increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 is due to the increase in rental revenue for the period, and improved margins on sales of used rental equipment. The improvement in margins on sales of used rental equipment was a function of the age and condition of the unit sold, and a lower mix of units subject to a rental purchase option.
Truck and Equipment Sales (TES) Segment
Equipment Sales - Equipment sales increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the Acquisition. We continue to see strong customer demand for our products, as evidenced by the growth in our sales order backlog versus the end of the third quarter of 2021.
Cost of Equipment Sales - Cost of equipment sales increased in line with the increase in equipment sales revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021. Included in the cost of equipment sales is the amortization of the purchase accounting inventory step-up of $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Gross Profit - The increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily a function of the increase in equipment sales revenue.
Aftermarket Parts and Services (APS) Segment
Total Revenue - The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by the acquisition of Custom Truck L.P.
Cost of Revenue - Compared to the prior year, cost of revenue increased due to the Acquisition.
Gross Profit - Total segment gross profit was impacted by increased revenue in the period.
Supplemental Pro Forma Information
As result of the Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions, we believe presenting supplemental pro forma financial information is beneficial to the readers of our financial statements. The following table sets forth key metrics used by management to run our business on a pro forma and combined basis as if the Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions had occurred on January 1, 2020. Refer to the information below for a full reconciliation of the statements of operations.
Summary Pro Forma Financial Information and Operational Data
Pro Forma Financial Statements
The following pro forma information has been prepared in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation S-X, "Pro Forma Financial Information," as amended by the Securities and Exchange Commission's Final Rule Release No. 33-10786, "Amendments to Financial Disclosures About Acquired and Disposed Businesses," as adopted on May 21, 2020 ("Article 11"). The amended Article 11 became effective on January 1, 2021. The pro forma combined statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 combine the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) of Nesco Holdings and Custom Truck LP, giving effect to the following items as if they had occurred on January 1, 2020:
i.the sale of the Company’s Common Stock, proceeds from which were used for the Acquisition;
ii.the extinguishment of Nesco’s asset-based revolving credit facility (the "2019 Credit Facility") and its 10% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2024 (the "2024 Secured Notes") and the contemporaneous issuance of the 2029 Secured Notes and borrowings under the ABL Facility, proceeds from which were used for the Acquisition; and
iii.the estimated effects of the Acquisition of Custom Truck LP, inclusive of the estimated effects of debt repaid.
The adjustments presented in the following pro forma financial information have been identified and presented to provide relevant information necessary for a comprehensive understanding of the combined company following the transactions and events described above. The pro forma financial information set forth below is based upon available information and assumptions that we believe are reasonable and is for illustrative purposes only. The financial results may have been different if the transactions described above had been completed sooner. You should not rely on the pro forma financial information as being indicative of the historical results that would have been achieved if these transactions and events had been completed as of January 1, 2020. The pro forma combined financial information below should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes of the Company included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All pro forma adjustments and their underlying assumptions are described more fully below.
During the preparation of these pro forma combined financial statements, we assessed whether there were any material differences between the accounting policies of the Company and Custom Truck LP. The assessment we performed did not identify any material differences and, as such, these pro forma combined financial statements do not adjust for or assume any differences in accounting policies between the two entities.
The following pro forma combined financial information and associated notes are based on the historical financial statements of Nesco Holdings and Custom Truck LP prior to the Acquisition. The pro forma combined statements of operations for periods indicated below are based on, derived from, and should be read in conjunction with, the Company’s historical financial statements.
Pro Forma Combined Statements of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021
a.The pro forma adjustments give effect to the following as if they occurred on January 1, 2020: (i) the Acquisition, (ii) the extinguishment of Nesco Holdings’ 2019 Credit Facility the 2024 Secured Notes repaid in connection with the Acquisition and (iii) the extinguishment of the outstanding borrowings of Custom Truck LP’s credit facility and term loan that was repaid on the closing of the Acquisition.
b.Represents the elimination from cost of revenue of the run-off of the estimated step-up in fair value of inventory acquired that was recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. The impact of the step-up is reflected as an adjustment to the comparable prior period ended December 31, 2020, as if the Acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2020. Includes the reduction to depreciation expense for the difference between historical depreciation and depreciation of the fair value of the property and equipment acquired from the Acquisition.
c.Represents the adjustment for depreciation of rental fleet relating to the estimated mark-up to fair value from purchase accounting as a result of the Acquisition.
d.Represents the differential in other amortization and depreciation related to the estimated fair value of the identified intangible assets from purchase accounting as a result of the Acquisition.
e.Represents the elimination of transaction expenses recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. The expenses were directly attributable to the Acquisition and are reflected as adjustments to the comparable prior period (e.g. December 31, 2020) as if the Acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2020.
f.Represents the elimination of the loss on extinguishment of debt recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 as though the repayment of the 2019 Credit Facility and the 2024 Secured Notes had occurred on January 1, 2020.
g.Reflects the differential in interest expense, inclusive of amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs, related to the Company’s debt structure after the Acquisition as though the following had occurred on January 1, 2020: (i) borrowings under the ABL Facility; (ii) repayment of the 2019 Credit Facility; (iii) repayment of the 2024 Secured Notes; (iv) repayment of Custom Truck LP’s borrowings under its revolving credit and term loan facility; and (v) the issuance of the 2029 Secured Notes.
h.Reflects the adjustment to recognize the tax impacts of the pro forma adjustments for which a tax expense is recognized using a statutory tax rate of 25%.
Pro Forma Combined Statements of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020
a.The pro forma adjustments give effect to the following as if they occurred on January 1, 2020: (i) the Acquisition, (ii) the extinguishment of Nesco Holdings’ 2019 Credit Facility and the 2024 Secured Notes repaid in connection with the Acquisition and (iii) the extinguishment of the outstanding borrowings of Custom Truck LP’s credit facility and term loan that was repaid on the closing of the Acquisition.
b.Represents adjustments to cost of revenue for (i) the run-off of the estimated step-up in fair value of inventory acquired and (ii) a reduction to depreciation expense for the difference between historical depreciation and depreciation of the fair value of the property and equipment acquired from the Acquisition.
c.Represents the adjustment for depreciation of rental fleet relating to the estimated mark-up to fair value from purchase accounting as a result of the Acquisition.
d.Represents the differential in other amortization and depreciation related to the estimated fair value of the identified intangible assets from purchase accounting as a result of the Acquisition.
e.Represents transaction expenses directly attributable to the Acquisition as if the Acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2020.
f.Represents the loss on extinguishment of debt as though the repayment of the 2019 Credit Facility and the 2024 Secured Notes had occurred on January 1, 2020.
g.Reflects the differential in interest expense, inclusive of amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs, related to the Company’s debt structure after the Acquisition as though the following had occurred on January 1, 2020: (i) borrowings under the ABL Facility; (ii) repayment of the 2019 Credit Facility; (iii) repayment of the 2024 Secured Notes; (iv) repayment of Custom Truck LP’s borrowings under its revolving credit and term loan facility; and (v) the issuance of the 2029 Secured Notes.
h.Reflects the adjustment to recognize the tax impacts of the pro forma adjustments for which a tax expense is recognized using a statutory tax rate of 25%.
Reconciliation of Pro Forma Net Income (Loss) to Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA
The following table provides a reconciliation of pro forma net income (loss) to pro forma Adjusted EBITDA:
a.Represents the non-cash impact of purchase accounting, net of accumulated depreciation, on the cost of equipment and inventory sold. The equipment and inventory acquired received a purchase accounting step-up in basis, which is a non-cash adjustment to the equipment cost pursuant to our credit agreement.
b.Represents transaction costs related to acquisitions of businesses, including post-acquisition integration costs, which are recognized within operating expenses in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). These expenses are comprised of professional consultancy, legal, tax and accounting fees. Also included are expenses associated with the integration of acquired businesses.
c.Loss on extinguishment of debt represents a special charge, which is not expected to recur. Such charges are adjustments pursuant to our credit agreement.
d.Represents the adjustment for the impact of sales-type lease accounting for certain leases containing rental purchase options (or “RPOs”), as the application of sales-type lease accounting is not deemed to be representative of the ongoing cash flows of the underlying rental contracts. This adjustment is made pursuant to our credit agreement.
e.Represents non-cash share-based compensation expense associated with the issuance of stock options and restricted stock units.
f.Represents the charge to earnings for our interest rate collar and the change in fair value of the liability for warrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity include cash generated by operating activities and borrowings under revolving credit facilities as described below. We believe that our liquidity sources and operating cash flows are sufficient to address our operating, debt service and capital requirements over the next 12 months; however, we are continuing to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our business and the financial markets. As of December 31, 2021, we had $35.9 million in cash and cash equivalents compared to $3.4 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had $394.9 million of outstanding borrowings under our ABL Facility compared to $251.0 million of outstanding borrowing under the 2019 Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020.
We expect that our principal short-term (over the next 12 months) and long-term needs for cash relating to our operations will be to fund operating activities and working capital, the purchase of rental equipment and inventory items offered for sale, payments due under leases, debt service, and acquisitions. We plan to fund such cash requirements from our existing sources of cash. In addition, we may seek additional financing through the use of additional operating leases or other financing sources as market conditions permit. The table below presents information on payments coming due under the most significant categories of our needs for cash (excluding operating cash flows pertaining to normal business operations, such as human capital costs, which are not accurately estimable) as of December 31, 2021:
We enter into purchase agreements with manufacturers and suppliers of equipment for our rental fleet and inventory. All of these agreements are cancellable within a specified notification period to the supplier. Such amounts are not estimable as of December 31, 2021.
ABL Facility
In connection with the Acquisition on the Closing Date, the Buyer, as borrower, and the ABL Guarantors (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) entered into the ABL Credit Agreement. The ABL Facility provides for revolving loans, in an amount equal to the lesser of the then-current borrowing base (described below) and the committed maximum borrowing capacity of $750.0 million, with a $75.0 million swingline sublimit, and letters of credit in an amount equal to the lesser of (a) $50.0 million and (b) the aggregate unused amount of commitments under the ABL Facility then in effect. The ABL Facility permits the Buyer to incur additional capacity under the ABL Facility in an aggregate amount equal to the greater of (x) $200.0 million and (y) 60.0% of Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) in additional commitments. As of the Closing Date, Buyer had no commitments from any lender to provide incremental commitments.
Borrowings under the ABL Facility are limited by a borrowing base calculation based on the sum of, without duplication:
(a) 90.0% of book value of eligible accounts of Buyer and certain ABL Guarantors; plus
(b) the lesser of (i) 75.0% of book value of eligible parts inventory of Buyer and certain ABL Guarantors (subject to certain exceptions) and (ii) 90.0% of the net orderly liquidation value of eligible parts inventory of Buyer and certain ABL Guarantors; plus
(c) the sum of (i) 95.0% of the net book value of the eligible fleet inventory of Buyer and certain ABL Guarantors that has not been appraised and (ii) 85.0% of the net orderly liquidation value of the eligible fleet inventory of Buyer and certain ABL Guarantors that has been appraised; plus
(d) 100.0% of eligible cash of Buyer and certain ABL Guarantors; minus
(e) any reserves established by the administrative agent from time to time.
As of December 31, 2021, borrowing availability under the ABL Facility was $347.0 million, and outstanding standby letters of credit were $4.0 million. Borrowings under the ABL Facility will bear interest at a floating rate, which, at Buyer’s election, will be (a) in the case of U.S. dollar denominated loans, either (i) the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin or (ii) the base rate plus an applicable margin or (b) in the case of Canadian dollar denominated loans, the CDOR rate plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin varies based on Average Availability (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) from (x) with respect to base rate loans, 0.50% to 1.00% and (y) with respect to LIBOR loans and CDOR rate loans, 1.50% to 2.00%. The ability to draw under the ABL Facility or issue letters of credit thereunder is conditioned upon, among other things, delivery of prior written notice of a borrowing or issuance, as applicable, the ability to reaffirm the representations and warranties contained in the ABL Credit Agreement and the absence of any default or event of default under the ABL Facility.
Buyer is required to pay a commitment fee to the lenders under the ABL Facility in respect of the unutilized commitments thereunder at a rate equal to 0.375% per annum, which may be reduced following the first full fiscal quarter to 0.250% per annum based on average daily usage. Buyer must also pay customary letter of credit and agency fees.
The balance outstanding under the ABL Facility will be due and payable on April 1, 2026. Buyer may, at any time and from time to time, prepay, without premium or penalty, any borrowing under the ABL Facility and terminate, or from time to time reduce, the commitments under the ABL Facility.
The obligations under the ABL Facility are guaranteed by Capitol Investment Merger Sub 2, LLC, Buyer and each of Buyer’s existing and future direct and indirect wholly owned domestic restricted subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions, as well as certain of Buyer’s material Canadian subsidiaries (the “ABL Guarantors”). The obligations under the ABL Facility and the guarantees of those obligations are secured by (subject to certain exceptions): (i) a first priority pledge by each ABL Guarantor of all of the equity interests of restricted subsidiaries directly owned by such ABL Guarantors (limited to 65% of voting capital stock in the case of foreign subsidiaries owned directly by a U.S. subsidiary and subject to certain other exceptions and to certain exceptions in the case of non-wholly owned subsidiaries) and (ii) a first priority security interest in substantially all of the ABL Guarantors’ present and after-acquired assets (subject to certain exceptions).
The ABL Facility contains customary negative covenants for transactions of this type, including covenants that, among other things, limit Buyer’s and its restricted subsidiaries’ ability to: incur additional indebtedness; pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions; repurchase, prepay or redeem subordinated indebtedness; make investments; create restrictions on the ability of Buyer’s restricted subsidiaries to pay dividends to Buyer; create liens; transfer or sell assets; consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of Buyer’s assets; enter into certain transactions with Buyer’s affiliates; and designate subsidiaries as unrestricted subsidiaries, in each case subject to certain exceptions, as well as a restrictive covenant applicable to each Specified Floor Plan Company (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) limiting its ability to own certain assets and engage in certain lines of business. In addition, the ABL Facility contains a springing financial covenant that requires Buyer and its restricted subsidiaries to maintain a Consolidated Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) of at least 1.00 to 1.00; provided that the financial covenant shall only be tested when Specified Excess Availability (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) under the ABL Facility is less than the greater of (i) 10.0% of the Line Cap (as defined in the ABL Credit Agreement) and (ii) $60.0 million (the “FCCR Test Amount”), in which case it shall be tested at the end of each succeeding fiscal quarter thereafter until the date on which Specified Excess Availability has exceeded the FCCR Test Amount for 30 consecutive calendar days.
The ABL Facility provides for a number of customary events of default, including, among others, and in each case subject to an applicable grace period: payment defaults to the lenders; covenant defaults; material inaccuracies of representations and warranties; failure to pay certain other indebtedness after final maturity or acceleration of other indebtedness exceeding a specified amount; voluntary and involuntary bankruptcy proceedings; material judgments for payment of money exceeding a specified amount; and certain change of control events. The occurrence of an event of default could result in the acceleration of obligations and the termination of revolving commitments under the ABL Facility.
2029 Secured Notes
On the Closing Date, the Issuer issued $920.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.50% senior secured second lien notes due 2029. The 2029 Secured Notes were issued pursuant to an indenture, dated as of April 1, 2021, between the Issuer, Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee and the guarantors party thereto (the “Indenture”). The Issuer will pay interest on the 2029 Secured Notes semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing on October 15, 2021. Unless earlier redeemed, the 2029 Secured Notes will mature on April 15, 2029.
Ranking and Security
The 2029 Secured Notes are jointly and severally guaranteed on a senior secured basis by Capitol Investment Merger Sub 2, LLC and, subject to certain exceptions, each of the Issuer’s existing and future wholly owned domestic restricted subsidiaries that is an obligor
under the ABL Credit Agreement or certain other capital markets indebtedness. Under the terms of the Indenture, the 2029 Secured Notes and the related guarantees rank senior in right of payment to all of the Issuer’s and the guarantors’ subordinated indebtedness and are effectively senior to all of the Issuer’s and the guarantors’ unsecured indebtedness and indebtedness secured by liens junior to the liens securing the 2029 Secured Notes, in each case, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing the 2029 Secured Notes. The 2029 Secured Notes and the related guarantees rank equally in right of payment with all of the Issuer’s and the guarantors’ senior indebtedness, without giving effect to collateral arrangements, and effectively equal to all of the Issuer’s and the guarantors’ senior indebtedness secured on the same priority basis as the 2029 Secured Notes. The 2029 Secured Notes and the related guarantees are effectively subordinated to any of the Issuer’s and the guarantors’ indebtedness that is secured by assets that do not constitute collateral for the 2029 Secured Notes to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness, and indebtedness that is secured by a senior-priority lien, including the ABL Credit Agreement to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness, and are structurally subordinated to the liabilities of the Issuer’s non-guarantor subsidiaries.
Optional Redemption Provisions and Repurchase Rights
At any time, upon not less than 10 nor more than 60 days’ notice, the 2029 Secured Notes are redeemable at the Issuer’s option, in whole or in part, at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes redeemed, plus a make-whole premium as set forth in the Indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the applicable redemption date. Beginning April 15, 2024, the Issuer may redeem the 2029 Secured Notes, at its option, in whole or in part, at any time, subject to the payment of a redemption price together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the applicable redemption date. The redemption price includes a call premium that varies (from 2.750% to 0.000%) depending on the year of redemption.
In addition, at any time prior to April 15, 2024, the Issuer may redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes, at a redemption price equal to 105.5% of the principal amount thereof, together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the applicable redemption date, with the net cash proceeds of sales of one or more equity offerings by the Issuer or any direct or indirect parent of the Issuer, subject to certain exceptions.
In addition, at any time prior to April 15, 2024, the Issuer may redeem during each calendar year up to 10% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes at a redemption price equal to 103% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes to be redeemed, together with accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the applicable redemption date; provided that in any given calendar year, any amount not previously utilized in any calendar year may be carried forward to subsequent calendar years.
Subject to certain exceptions, the holders of the 2029 Secured Notes also have the right to require the Issuer to repurchase their 2029 Secured Notes upon the occurrence of a change in control, as defined in the Indenture, at an offer price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the date of repurchase.
In addition, if the Issuer or any of its restricted subsidiaries sells assets, under certain circumstances, the Issuer is required to use the net proceeds to make an offer to purchase the 2029 Secured Notes at an offer price in cash equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the repurchase date.
In connection with any offer to purchase all or any of the 2029 Secured Notes (including a change of control offer and any tender offer), if holders of no less than 90% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Secured Notes validly tender their 2029 Secured Notes, the Issuer or a third party is entitled to redeem any remaining 2029 Secured Notes at the price offered to each holder.
Restrictive Covenants
The Indenture contains covenants that limit the Issuer’s (and certain of its subsidiaries’) ability to, among other things: (i) incur additional debt or issue certain preferred stock; (ii) pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions; (iii) make other restricted payments or investments; (iv) create liens on assets; (v) transfer or sell assets; (vi) create restrictions on payment of dividends or other amounts by the Issuer to the Issuer’s restricted subsidiaries; (vii) engage in mergers or consolidations; (viii) engage in certain transactions with affiliates; or (ix) designate the Issuer’s subsidiaries as unrestricted subsidiaries.
Events of Default
The Indenture provides for customary events of default, including non-payment, failure to comply with covenants or other agreements in the Indenture and certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency. If an event of default occurs and continues with respect to the 2029 Secured Notes, the trustee or the holders of at least 30% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 2029 Secured Notes of such series may declare the entire principal amount of all the 2029 Secured Notes to be due and payable immediately (except that if such event of default is caused by certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency, the entire principal of the 2029 Secured Notes will become due and payable immediately without further action or notice).
Floor Plan Financing
Daimler Truck Financial
The Company is party to the Wholesale Financing Agreement with Daimler Truck Financial (the “Daimler Facility”) which bears interest at a rate of the Federal Funds Rate (“Prime”) plus 0.80% after an initial interest free period of up to 150 days. The total capacity under the Daimler Facility is $175.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, borrowings on the Daimler Facility were $46.0 million. The Daimler agreement is evergreen and is subject to termination by either party through written notice.
PACCAR
The Company has an Inventory Financing Agreement with PACCAR Financial Corp that provides the Company with a line of credit of $50.0 million to finance inventory purchases of new Peterbilt and/or Kenworth trucks, tractors, and chassis. Amounts borrowed against this line of credit incur interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 2.4%. As of December 31, 2021, borrowings on the PAACAR line of credit were $26.7 million. The PACCAR agreement extends automatically each April and is subject to termination by either party through written notice.
PNC Equipment Finance, LLC
The Company has an Inventory Loan, Guaranty and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with PNC Equipment Finance, LLC. The Loan Agreement provides the Company with a $295.0 million revolving credit facility, which matures on August 25, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of LIBOR plus 3.05%. As of December 31, 2021, borrowings on the Loan Agreement were $165.2 million.
Notes Payable
Our notes payable require the Company to pay monthly and quarterly interest payments and have maturities beginning in 2022 through 2026. Notes payable includes (i) debt assumed from the Acquisition related to borrowings for facilities renovations and to support general business activities, (ii) notes payable related to past businesses acquired, and (iii) term loans. Subsequent to the Acquisition, the Company consolidated certain notes payable assumed from the Acquisition into a $23.9 million loan agreement with Security Bank of Kansas City (“SBKC”) that bears interest at a rate of 3.125% per annum, and a $3.5 million loan agreement with SBKC that bears interest at a rate of 3.5% per annum.
Historical Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash:
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $35.9 million, an increase of $32.5 million from December 31, 2020. Generally, we manage our cash flow by using any excess cash, after considering our working capital and capital expenditure needs, including paying down the outstanding balance under our ABL Facility.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $138.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $42.8 million in the same period of 2020. The increase was driven by the addition of Custom Truck LP’s equipment sales levels in the current period.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,429.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash used in investing activities of $29.3 million in 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities is due to the Acquisition.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,323.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $16.4 million in 2020. The increase is primarily due to the refinancing of Nesco’s debt and sale of Common Stock in connection with the Acquisition and Related Financing Transactions.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). In applying accounting principles it is often required to use estimates. These estimates consider the facts, circumstances, and information available, and may be based on subjective inputs, assumptions, and information known and unknown to us. Material changes in certain of the estimates that we use, could potentially affect, by a material amount, our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Although results may vary, we believe our estimates are reasonable and appropriate. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies. The following describes certain of our significant accounting policies that involve more subjective and complex judgments where the effect on our consolidated financial position and operating performance could be material.
Revenue Recognition
Rental Revenue - Our rental contracts are for various equipment, aftermarket parts and services under 28 day or monthly agreements which include automatic renewal provisions. The majority of our rental payments are due upon receipt, with a minority that are billed in arrears. Revenue is recognized ratably over the rental agreement period and in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 840, Leases (“Topic 840”) prior to January 1, 2021 and in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 842, Leases (“Topic 842”) subsequent to December 31, 2020. Unearned revenue is reported in our deferred rent income line of our Consolidated Balance Sheet. We had deferred revenue of $3.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Equipment Sales - We sell both new and used equipment. Our new equipment products are sold at list price. We do not discount or offer other pricing incentives or concessions. The contractual sales price for each individual product represents the standalone selling price. Our used equipment is of a sufficiently unique nature - based on the specifics of its age, usage, etc. - that it does not have an observable standalone selling price. Equipment sales revenue is recognized when vehicles are delivered, which is when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership, and control are considered passed to the customer. Payment is usually due and collected within 30 days subsequent to transfer of control of the vehicle. There are no rights of return or warranties offered on equipment sales.
Parts Sales and Services - We sell aftermarket parts and services in addition to services. We record revenue as parts and services are delivered. The amount of consideration we receive for parts is based upon a list price net of discounts and incentives. The amount of consideration received for service is based upon labor hours expended and parts utilized to perform and complete the necessary services for our customers. There are no rights of return or warranties offered on parts sales. Payment is usually due and collected within 30 days subsequent to delivery of parts or performance of service.
Useful Lives and Salvage Values of Rental Equipment and Property and Equipment
Our rentable equipment consists of aftermarket parts and specialized rental equipment. Purchases of our equipment are recorded at cost, the OEC and we depreciate OEC to an estimated salvage value. We depreciate our aftermarket parts over their estimated useful rentable life of five years. We depreciate our rental equipment over its estimated useful rentable life of five to seven years with an estimated residual value of 15% to 35% of the OEC, using the straight-line method. Useful life is estimated based upon the expected period the equipment will be in the fleet as a rentable unit. A salvage value is estimated to approximate the value of the equipment at the end of its useful (i.e., rentable) life, allowing for a reasonable profit margin on the sale of the equipment when we remove the unit from the fleet. In establishing useful lives and salvage values, we consider factors related to customer demand of differing types of equipment in order for us to hold and maintain an optimal mix of equipment types in our fleet. We also continuously evaluate factors related to the condition and serviceability of the equipment in our fleet in order to make estimates of useful life and expected end-of-life value. Depreciation of our equipment is recognized as a component of our cost of revenue. For sold equipment, the carrying value of an item is recognized as cost of equipment sale within cost of revenue. Changes in estimated useful life and/or salvage value would impact our gross profit in our consolidated financial statements. To the extent that the useful lives of our rental equipment were to increase or decrease by one year, we estimate that our annual depreciation expense would increase or decrease by approximately $104.3 million, respectively. Similarly, to the extent the estimated salvage values of our rental equipment were to increase or decrease by one percentage point, we estimate that our annual depreciation expense would change by approximately $2.8 million. Any change in depreciation expense as a result of a hypothetical change in either useful lives or salvage values would generally result in a proportional increase or decrease in the gross profit we would recognize upon the ultimate sale of the asset.
Business Combinations
We have made acquisitions in the past and may continue to make acquisitions in the future. We allocate the cost of the acquired enterprise to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. Rental equipment generally represents the largest component and was 38% of total assets acquired over the last three years followed by
goodwill at 29% and other intangible assets at 19%. Goodwill is attributable to the synergies and economies of scale expected from the combination of the businesses.
In addition to long-lived fixed assets, we also acquire other assets and assume liabilities. These other assets and liabilities typically include, but are not limited to, parts inventory, accounts receivable, accounts payable, deferred revenue and other working capital items. Because of their short-term nature, the fair values of these other assets and liabilities generally approximate the carrying values reflected on the acquired entities’ balance sheets. However, when appropriate, we adjust these carrying values for factors such as collectability and existence. The intangible assets that we have acquired are primarily goodwill, customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete agreements. Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the cost of the acquired entity over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete agreements are valued based on an excess earnings or income approach with consideration to projected cash flows.
Our estimates of the values of tangible assets from our business combinations, principally rental equipment, utilize data that reflect quoted prices for similar assets available in active markets (such as the used equipment market). For this reason, estimates of the fair values of these items is not considered to be highly subjective or complex. However, to estimate the values of intangible assets we utilize income methods that involve forecasting future cash flow related to the acquired businesses. The estimates of future cash flow require us to establish expectations about customer demand, investments in maintaining or expanding infrastructure for the markets the businesses serve, and the supply and capacity of equipment in the rental market, among others. Additionally, we are required to establish expectations for the businesses’ cost of capital and ability to acquire and maintain equipment in the future. Critical estimates utilized in valuing intangible assets acquired include, but are not limited to, free cash flows, taxes, amortization, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, and discount rates. Changes in these assumptions would have an impact to the amount of intangible assets recorded and the resulting amortization expense.
Goodwill and the Evaluation of Goodwill Impairment
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over the fair value of identifiable net assets of businesses acquired. We review goodwill for impairment at least annually or more frequently as warranted by triggering events that indicate potential impairment. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which we have determined to be ERS, TES, and APS. We use a variety of methodologies in conducting impairment assessments, including qualitative analysis, income and market approaches. The market value approach compares current and projected financial results to entities of similar size and industry to determine market value. The income approach utilizes assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows and other factors to determine the fair value of the respective assets. These cash flows consider factors regarding expected future operating income and historical trends.
Factors that management must estimate when performing impairment tests include sales volume, prices, inflation, discount rates, tax rates and capital spending. Significant management judgment is involved in estimating these factors, and they include inherent uncertainties. The estimates of future cash flow require us to establish expectations about customer demand, investments in maintaining or expanding infrastructure for the markets each reporting unit serves, and the supply and capacity of equipment in the rental market, among others. Additionally, we are required to establish expectations for the businesses’ cost of capital and ability to acquire and maintain equipment in the future. Measurement of the recoverability of these assets is dependent upon the accuracy of the assumptions used in making these estimates, as well as how the estimates compare to our eventual future operating performance. Changes in these estimates could change our conclusion regarding the impairment of goodwill assets and potentially result in a non-cash impairment in the future period.
Income Taxes
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted comprehensive tax legislation commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”). The TCJA made broad and complex changes to the U.S. tax code. The principal change impacting our tax provision includes the limitation on deductible interest expense, the resulting federal limitation from which creates an indefinite lived deferred tax asset for which a valuation allowance assessment is required. This limitation is affected by the determination of the meaning of depreciation, which was clarified by the final regulations issued on July 27, 2020 described below. In March 2020, the United States Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) reduced the amount of disallowed interest expense which resulted in a greater amount of interest deduction. On July 27, 2020, the United States Department of Treasury and Internal Revenue Service issued final regulations that provided guidance on the determination of disallowed interest expense (the “Final Regulations”).
The provision for, or benefit from, income taxes includes deferred taxes resulting from temporary differences in income for financial and tax purposes using the liability method. Such temporary differences result primarily from differences in the carrying value of assets and liabilities. Future realization of deferred income tax assets requires sufficient taxable income within the carryback and/or carryforward period available under tax law. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets.
The evaluation includes the consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, regarding the estimated future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, estimated future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, historical taxable income in prior carryback periods if carryback is permitted, and potential tax planning strategies which may be employed to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carryforward from expiring unused. The verifiable evidence such as future reversals of existing temporary differences and the ability to carryback are considered before the subjective sources such as estimated future taxable income exclusive of temporary differences and tax planning strategies. Our income tax carryforwards are comprised of federal and state net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”), some of which are subject to annual usage limitations. Certain of our state NOLs are subject to expiration, while other state NOLs and all of our federal NOLs do not have expirations. Valuation allowances are established when it is estimated that it is more likely than not that the tax benefit of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
While we remain in a cumulative loss condition, our ability to evaluate the realizability of deferred tax assets is generally limited to the ability to offset timing differences on taxable income associated with deferred tax liabilities. Therefore, a change in estimate of deferred tax asset valuation allowances for federal or state jurisdictions during this cumulative loss condition period will primarily be affected by changes in estimates of the time periods that deferred tax assets and liabilities will be realized, or on a limited basis to tax planning strategies that may result in a change in the amount of taxable income realized. At December 31, 2021, our deferred tax asset valuation allowance was $84.6 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.