ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the section entitled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Discussions of our results of operations for the year ended January 30, 2021 compared to the year ended February 1, 2020 that have been omitted under this item can be found in "Part II, Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Form 10-K for the year ended January 30, 2021, which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on April 14, 2021.
Executive Overview
We are a growing specialty value retailer of apparel, accessories and home trends for way less spend primarily for African American and Latinx families in the United States. Our high-quality and trend-right merchandise offerings at everyday low prices are designed to appeal to the fashion and trend preferences of value-conscious customers. As of January 29, 2022, we operated 609 stores in urban, suburban and rural markets in 33 states.
Fiscal 2021 Business Highlights
● Launched and market tested our new “CTx” store formats, the first major overhaul to our store format in over 10 years
● Opened 27 new stores and remodeled 25 stores
● Navigated the supply chain challenges and disruptions while maintaining healthy inventory stock with high freshness
● Managed store and distribution labor headwinds with prudent leadership and effective staffing solutions
● Initiated investments in infrastructure, including system enhancements for our merchandising teams and capacity upgrades for our distribution centers
● Strengthened our diversity and leadership with two new additions to our board of directors
● Launched “Citi Life” which encapsulates our brand purpose values and represents the emotional connection that our customers and associates have with Citi Trends
Fiscal 2021 Financial Highlights
● Total sales of $991.6 million
● Operating margin of 8.0%
● Earnings of $6.91 per diluted share
● Cash of $49.8 million at the end of the year with no debt
● Repurchased $115.3 million of shares
For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could affect our future operating results related to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Report.
Our Strategy
We believe that Citi Trends is in a unique position for growth. We have a loyal customer base, a long runway for store growth and a motivated leadership team, supported by a healthy balance sheet. As described in more detail in “Item 1 - Business,” we have identified four strategic areas of focus that we believe will accelerate our sales and earnings growth over the next few years:
Growing Our Fleet. We believe that we have the potential to grow to more than 1,000 stores over time through both densification and new market entries. By the end of fiscal 2024, we expect about 50% of our stores will be in our compelling new CTx format.
Optimizing the Assortment. We believe that our unique ability to curate assortments for our customers further differentiates our model. In addition, we leverage consumer insights and analytics to add incremental assortments, and we employ pricing studies to expand margin.
Investing in Our Infrastructure. We believe that we have an opportunity to make strategic investments in our business that will improve our efficiencies and our capabilities to “buy,” “move” and “sell” our assortments to effectively engage current and new customers.
Making a Difference. Our team is dedicated to our neighborhoods and committed to positively impacting the African American and Latinx communities that we serve.
We strongly believe that our growth strategy centered around these four areas will accelerate our sales and earnings growth.
Uncertainties and Challenges
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and has caused significant volatility and disruptions in our business during fiscal 2021 and 2020. We remain focused on providing a safe store environment for our customers and associates while delivering an engaging shopping experience. We also prioritize the wellness and safety of our associates in our corporate offices and distribution centers. The communities we serve were severely impacted by the omicron variant at the end of fiscal 2021. Despite the recent improvement in trends, we cannot reasonably predict the extent to which our future business will be impacted by the pandemic.
Inflation
In addition to COVID-19, we expect that our operations will continue to be influenced by general economic conditions, including the recent surge in prices for food, fuel and energy due to inflationary pressures, which are particularly impactful to the communities we serve. In addition, we are closely monitoring the impacts of higher unemployment, wage inflation and costs to source our merchandise.
Supply Chain Disruptions
We have encountered increasing supply chain disruptions that began in the second half of fiscal 2021 and have continued through the date of this Report. In particular, our vendors have faced production delays and we have been impacted by industry-wide U.S. port and ground transportation delays. In response, we have taken various actions, including ordering merchandise earlier, leveraging our packaway merchandise stock and expanding the drop shipping program that we initiated in fiscal 2020. These supply chain disruptions have resulted in increased costs, and we expect supply chain pressures will persist through at least the first half of fiscal 2022.
Seasonality and Weather Patterns
The nature of our business is seasonal. Historically, sales in the first and fourth quarters have been higher than sales achieved in the second and third quarters of the fiscal year. In addition, sales of clothing are directly impacted by the timing of the seasons to which the clothing relates. While we have greatly expanded our product offerings to become a one-stop-shop, traffic to our stores is still influenced by weather patterns to some extent.
Basis of Presentation
Net sales consist of store sales and layaway fees, net of returns by customers. Cost of sales consists of the cost of products we sell and associated freight costs. Depreciation is not considered a component of cost of sales and is included as a separate line item in the consolidated statements of operations. Selling, general and administrative expenses are comprised of store costs, including payroll and occupancy costs, corporate and distribution center costs and advertising costs. We operate on a 52- or 53-week fiscal year, which ends on the Saturday closest to January 31. Each of our fiscal quarters consists of four 13-week periods, with an extra week added to the fourth quarter every five to six years. The years ended January 29, 2022, January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020 are referred to herein as fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial performance is based on the consolidated financial statements set forth in the financial pages of this Report. The nature of our business is seasonal. Results of a period shorter than a full year may not be indicative of results expected for the entire year due to changes in our business, consumer spending patterns, and the macroeconomic environment, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, the seasonal nature of our business may affect comparisons between periods.
Net Sales and Additional Operating Data
The following table provides selected consolidated statement of operations data expressed both in dollars and as a percentage of net sales:
The following table provides information about store activity and the change in comparable store sales for each fiscal year:
(1) Stores included in the comparable store sales calculation for any year are those stores that were opened prior to the beginning of the preceding fiscal year and were still open at the end of such year. Relocated stores and expanded stores are included in the comparable store sales results. Stores that are closed permanently or for an extended period are excluded from the comparable store sales results.
Key Operating Statistics
We measure performance using key operating statistics. One of the main performance measures we use is comparable store sales growth. We define a comparable store as a store that has been open for an entire fiscal year. Therefore, a store will not be considered a comparable store until its 13th month of operation at the earliest or until its 24th month at the latest. As an example, stores opened in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021 were not considered comparable stores in fiscal 2021. Relocated and expanded stores are included in the comparable store sales results. Stores that are closed permanently or for an extended period are excluded from the comparable store sales results. We also use other operating statistics, most notably average sales per store, to measure our performance. As we typically occupy existing space in established outdoor community shopping centers rather than sites built specifically for our stores, store square footage (and therefore sales per square foot) varies by store. We focus on overall store sales volume as the critical driver of profitability.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net Sales. Net sales increased $208.3 million, or 26.6%, to $991.6 million in fiscal 2021 from $783.3 million in fiscal 2020, primarily due to temporary store closures in fiscal 2020 related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in net sales was also driven by government stimulus payments and the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions that created a surge in demand, particularly in the first quarter of 2021.
Cost of Sales (exclusive of depreciation). Cost of sales increased $112.5 million, or 23.8%, to $584.1 million in fiscal 2021 from $471.6 million in fiscal 2020. As a percentage of net sales, cost of sales leveraged 130 basis points to 58.9% in fiscal 2021 from 60.2% in fiscal 2020 due to an increase of 195 basis points in the core merchandise margin (initial mark-up, net of markdowns) primarily driven by fewer markdowns, along with an improvement of 40 basis points in shrinkage, partially offset by 105 basis points deleverage in freight costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”). SG&A expenses increased $47.4 million, or 18.2% to $307.6 million in fiscal 2021 from $260.2 million in fiscal 2020 driven primarily by reduced payroll and occupancy expenses in 2020 related to COVID-19 temporary store closures. Also contributing to the increase in SG&A expenses was $8.0 million higher incentive-based compensation expense resulting from improved operating results in relation to budget, as well as the impact on expenses of opening 27 new stores in fiscal 2021 and 18 new stores in fiscal 2020. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses leveraged 220 basis points to 31.0% from 33.2%.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense increased $1.1 million to $20.4 million in fiscal 2021 from $19.3 million in fiscal 2020.
Asset Impairment. There were no impairment charges related to underperforming stores in fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2020, impairment charges related to an underperforming store totaled $0.3 million, comprised of $0.1 million for leasehold improvements and fixtures and equipment, and $0.2 million for an operating lease right-of-use asset.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense increased $9.6 million to $17.0 million in fiscal 2021 from $7.4 million in fiscal 2020 due primarily to an increase of $47.8 million in pretax income. Our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was 21.5% compared to 23.6% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to excess tax benefits from stock-based payment arrangements.
Net Income. Net income increased $38.2 million to $62.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $24.0 million in fiscal 2020, due to the factors discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Allocation
Our capital allocation strategy is to prioritize investments in opportunities to profitably grow our business and maintain current operations, then to return excess cash to shareholders through our repurchase programs. Our year-end cash and cash equivalents balance was $49.8 million compared to $123.2 million at the end of last year. Until required for other purposes, we maintain cash and cash equivalents in deposit or money market accounts.
Our principal sources of liquidity consist of: (i) cash and cash equivalents on hand; (ii) short-term trade credit arising from customary payment terms and trade practices with our vendors; (iii) cash generated from operations on an ongoing basis; and (iv) a revolving credit facility with a $75 million credit commitment.
In addition, on March 14, 2022, we entered into an agreement to consummate a sale and leaseback transaction of our distribution center in Darlington, South Carolina, and at our discretion, our distribution center in Roland, Oklahoma. The sale of the Darlington property is expected to provide net proceeds (after tax and transaction-related costs) of approximately $37 million. The sale of the Roland property, if elected by the Company, is expected to provide net proceeds of approximately $32 million. The sale of the Roland property is subject to due diligence and other customary closing conditions.
Inventory
Our year-end inventory balance was $123.8 million, compared with $103.8 million at the end of last year. The increase was primarily due to depleted inventory levels at the end of last year driven by outsized sales, combined with opportunistic purchases of packaway inventory at the end of fiscal 2021.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 were $29.7 million, an increase of $12.7 million over the prior year as we invested in our strategic initiatives, including opening 27 new stores, remodeling 25 stores and investing in system upgrades and distribution center enhancements. We anticipate capital expenditures in fiscal 2022 of $40 million to $45 million, primarily for opening approximately 35 new stores and remodeling approximately 50 stores, combined with continued investments in our systems and distribution centers.
Share Repurchases
During fiscal 2021 and 2020, we returned $115.3 million and $32.9 million, respectively, to shareholders through share repurchases. See Part II, Item 5 of this Report and Note 6 to the Financial Statements for more information.
Revolving Credit Facility
We have a revolving credit facility that matures in April 2026 and provides a $75 million credit commitment and a $25 million uncommitted “accordion” feature. Additional details of the credit facility are in Note 4 to the Financial Statements. At the end of fiscal 2021, we had no borrowings under the credit facility and $0.6 million in letters of credit outstanding.
Cash Flows
Cash Flows From Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $74.3 million in fiscal 2021 compared with $110.9 million in fiscal 2020. For fiscal 2021, significant sources of cash included: (1) $142.1 million from net income adjusted for non-cash expenses and insurance proceeds; and (2) a $12.8 million increase in accounts payable. Significant uses of cash included: (1) a $53.2 million decrease in accrued expenses and other-long-term liabilities due primarily to payments of operating lease liabilities; (2) a $20.4 million increase in inventory due primarily to depleted inventory levels at the end of last year driven by outsized sales; and (3) an $8.6 million change in income tax receivable/payable.
For fiscal 2020, significant sources of cash included: (1) $96.2 million from net income adjusted for non-cash expenses and insurance proceeds; (2) a $33.6 million decrease in inventory due to efforts to reduce inventory levels combined with outsized sales in the fourth quarter; (3) a $16.3 million increase in accrued compensation due primarily to higher incentive compensation earned relative to 2019; (4) a $5.8 million change in income tax payable; and (5) a $5.1 million increase in accounts payable. Significant uses of cash included: (1) a $38.4 million decrease in accrued expenses and other long-term liabilities due primarily to payments of operating lease liabilities; and (2) a $7.7 million increase in prepaid and other current assets due to a credit under the CARES Act and increases in tenant improvement allowances and charge card receivables.
Cash Flows From Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $29.5 million in fiscal 2021 compared to cash provided of $26.7 million in fiscal 2020. Cash used in fiscal 2021 was primarily for capital expenditures in new and remodeled stores, along with investments in system upgrades and distribution center enhancements. Cash provided in fiscal 2020 was the result of $43.3 million of net proceeds from the sale of investment securities, partially offset by $17.0 million of capital expenditures.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities was $118.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared with $34.3 million in fiscal 2020. Repurchases of common stock totaled $115.3 million in fiscal 2021, while repurchases of common stock and dividend payments totaled $33.7 million in fiscal 2020.
Cash Requirements and Commitments
Our principal cash requirements consist of (1) inventory purchases; (2) capital expenditures to invest in our infrastructure; and (3) operational needs, including salaries, occupancy costs, taxes and other operating costs. We also use cash to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase programs. Historically, we have met these cash requirements using cash flow from operations and short-term trade credit. As of January 29, 2022, our contractual commitments for operating leases totaled $234.0 million (with $53.3 million due within 12 months) and our purchase obligations for open merchandise orders totaled $249.8 million due within 12 months. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for more information regarding lease commitments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We believe the following critical
accounting policies describe the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out basis) or net realizable value as determined by the retail inventory method for store inventory and the average cost method for distribution center inventory. Under the retail inventory method, the cost of inventory is determined by calculating a cost-to-retail ratio and applying it to the retail value of inventory. Inherent in the retail inventory calculation are certain management judgments and estimates, including, among others, merchandise markups, markdowns and shrinkage, which impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as resulting cost of sales. Merchandise markdowns are reflected in the inventory valuation when the price of an item is lowered in the stores. As a result, we believe the retail inventory method results in a more conservative inventory valuation than other accounting methods. We estimate and record an allowance for shrinkage for the period between the last physical count and the balance sheet date. The estimate of shrinkage can be affected by changes in actual shrinkage trends. Inventory shrinkage as a percentage of sales in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 was 0.4%, 0.8% and 1.2%, respectively. The allowance for inventory shrinkage was $4.4 million as of January 29, 2022 and $5.2 million as of January 30, 2021. As a measure of sensitivity, a ten percent change in our estimated shrinkage rates as of January 29, 2022, would not have materially impacted our cost of goods sold in fiscal 2021. Many retailers have arrangements with vendors that provide for rebates and allowances under certain conditions, which ultimately affect the value of the inventory. We do not generally enter into such arrangements with our vendors. There were no material changes in the estimates or assumptions related to the valuation of inventory during fiscal 2021.
Operating Leases
We lease all of our retail store locations and certain office space and equipment. All leases are classified as operating leases. We record right-of-use assets and lease liabilities based on the present value of future minimum lease payments over the lease term. In determining the present value of lease payments, we use an incremental borrowing rate that approximates the rate of interest the Company would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term. Our lessors do not provide an implicit rate, nor is one readily available, therefore we determine an incremental borrowing rate based on a buildup approach which utilizes rates and terms from the Company’s existing borrowing facility with adjustments to bridge for impacts to the rate due to differences in collateral, terms and payments. We record operating lease cost over the estimated term of the lease, which includes options to extend lease terms that are reasonably certain of being exercised, starting when possession of the property is taken from the landlord. Lease expense for fixed lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. In addition, certain leases provide for contingent rents that are not measurable at inception. These contingent rents are primarily based on a percentage of net sales that are in excess of a predetermined level. These amounts are excluded from minimum rent and are included in the determination of total rent expense when it is probable that the expense has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If an operating lease asset is impaired, the remaining operating lease asset will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining lease term.
The above listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all our accounting policies. In many cases the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not expect that any recently issued accounting pronouncements will have a material effect on our financial statements.