Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes of Innovid included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” “Financial Statements and Supplemental Data”. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections in this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Company Overview
We are a leading independent software platform that provides critical technology infrastructure for the creation, delivery, and measurement of TV ads across CTV, mobile TV and desktop TV environments. As of December 31, 2021, over 50% of the top 200 brands by TV US advertising spend according to Kantar Media and Winmo are utilizing our platform in their advertisement delivery infrastructure. Innovid’s revenue has grown alongside the growth of CTV advertising. We believe our open platform and purpose-built technology for CTV, combined with our position as a media-independent provider, has allowed us to win a large and growing market share, while the growth of CTV combined with our usage-based revenue model has further contributed to our rapid growth. CTV accounted for 46%, 40% and 31% of all video impressions served by Innovid Corp. and its subsidiaries during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2021, this represented a year-over-year increase of 47%. The balance of video impressions served by Innovid during such periods were attributable to Mobile, 39%, 43% and 48%, respectively, and PC, 15%, 16% and 21%, respectively. In 2021, the year-over-year change in video impressions was an increase of 16% for mobile TV and 14% for desktop TV. An impression is the metric used to quantify the number of views of an advertisement. Impressions are measured by cost per mile (CPM), where mile refers to 1,000 impressions (or cost per thousand). For example, a CTV ad might have a CPM of $25, meaning that the content owner, receives $25 every time an ad is displayed 1,000 times within a designated program. Ad servers, such as Innovid, provide a pixel that is implemented within an ad. When an ad with that pixel loads, an impression is counted. Counting impressions is essential to how digital advertising is measured, accounted and paid for. We serve many of the top TV advertisers, including Anheuser-Busch InBev, Kellogg’s, Volvo and many more, with such clients representing key verticals we serve and Anheuser-Busch InBev, Kellogg’s and Volvo each a core client.
A key driver of CTV growth has been the evolving preferences of consumers. Consumers are increasingly cutting the cord and streaming OTT content through internet-connected devices rather than traditional broadcast, satellite, or cable TV. We believe OTT content, which is typically delivered on-demand, seeks to provide a better user experience, and often saves the consumer money over traditional paid TV services. Advertisers seeking to engage these audiences are rapidly shifting dollars away from traditional TV mediums towards increasing budgets for CTV. Advertisers also can benefit from the shift to CTV as the digitally delivered ads can be personalized and measured in real time, similar to other digital advertising mediums such as internet browser-based formats. As a result, TV advertisers have better transparency, control and ultimately potential return on investment from their CTV advertising.
Innovid’s purpose-built CTV infrastructure platform is comprised of three key offerings: Ad Serving Solutions, Creative Personalization Solutions and Measurement Solutions. Our software-based platform provides an open technology infrastructure that tightly integrates with the highly fragmented advertising technology and media ecosystem including demand side platforms such as The Trade Desk and Amobee; supply side platforms such as Magnite and Verizon Media; publishers such as Hulu and Peacock; and end user devices such as Amazon Fire and Samsung Smart TV. Our offering encompasses independent global ad serving, data-driven personalization, and new forms of measurement designed to connect all channels in a clean, comparable, and privacy-compliant manner. Although we work closely with the vendors who buy and sell media, our platform only facilitates the creation, delivery and measurement of advertisements and campaigns and we do not make purchasing decisions or facilitate the purchasing of advertisement inventory. Because we do not make ad buying or selling decisions we are able to maintain our independence and remain free of potential buying conflicts.
We target clients comprised of the largest global TV advertisers. In 2021, our blue-chip advertiser client base included nearly a third of the top 200 brands by TV US advertising spend according to Kantar Media and Winmo. In addition we work closely with the top advertising agency holding companies such as WPP, Publicis Groupe, Omnicom, Interpublic Group of Cos., and Dentsu. Our clients are diversified across all major industry verticals, including consumer packaged goods, pharmaceutical and healthcare, financial services, automotive, and technology. We believe Innovid’s independence is critical to advertisers seeking an interoperable and open partner that is primarily focused on technology infrastructure. We define a core client as an advertiser that generates at least $100,000 of annual revenue. We have a history of strong growth in our core client base, with 109 core clients as of December 31, 2021. No individual core client (brand/advertiser) represented more than 14% of 2021 revenue. Together our core clients have typically generated more than 84% of our annual revenue from 2019 through 2021 demonstrating our continued focus on large enterprise customers. In the years 2019, 2020 and 2021 we had 85, 95, and 109 “core clients,” that generated 85%, 89%, and 91% of the total company revenue in the corresponding periods.
Innovid serves customers globally through a delivery footprint covering over 75 countries, including the United States (US), United Kingdom (UK), Mexico, Argentina, Colombia, Singapore, Japan and Australia. Approximately 8% of Innovid’s revenue was generated by our customers outside of the US for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our non-US customers generated approximately 9% of the total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our revenue model is based on impressions volume and the cost per impression for our various ad serving services. For our core ad serving platform, we generate revenue from our advertising customers based on the volume of advertising impressions delivered, enabling us to grow as our customers increase their digital ad spend and corresponding ad impressions. Additionally, we generate revenue from creative services based on flat fee per projects and measurement solutions based on the volume of advertising impressions measured. As we introduce new products such as advanced measurement and creative capabilities including personalization and interactivity, we expect to be able to charge higher prices per impression volume.
The Transaction
Innovid Corp. was originally incorporated as ION Acquisition Corp. 2 Ltd., a special purpose acquisition company, in Cayman Islands on November 23, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities.
On November 30, 2021 ION and Innovid Inc. closed the transaction as described below. Through several mergers and a name change, Innovid Corp. was formed. ION entered into certain subscription agreements in June and October 2021 (“PIPE Investment”). The Mergers and PIPE Investment are collectively referred to as “the Transaction”. Innovid Corp. is the public company entity which continues Legacy Innovid’s operating activity.
The Company common stock and warrants commenced trading on the NYSE under the symbols “CTV” and “CTVWS,” respectively, on December 1, 2021.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has created, and may continue to create significant uncertainty in macroeconomic conditions, and the extent of its impact on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak and the impact on our customers. Based on public reporting and our observations, some advertisers in certain industries, such as the automotive industry, decreased and may continue to decrease their short-term advertising spending in light of supply chain disruptions and/or labor shortage they may be experiencing. This in turn could negatively impact our revenues from such advertisers.
We have considered the impact of COVID-19 on our estimates and assumptions and determined that there were no material adverse impacts on the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates and assumptions may change materially in future periods.
We obtained an unsecured loan of $3.5 million in April 2020 due to uncertainties related to COVID-19. The loan was obtained through SVB under the PPP Loan pursuant to the CARES Act and the Flexibility Act. In May 2020, we received $0.5 million from SSIG, a related party of one of our investors, for the purpose of a partial repayment of the PPP Loan. We have since repaid the PPP Loan in the amount of $3 million in June 2021. For more detail refer to our audited consolidated financial statement presented in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
There are a number of factors that have impacted, and we believe will continue to impact, our results of operations and growth. These factors include:
Continued market demand. Our performance is dependent on continued global demand across the advertising ecosystem for independent third-party ad serving and measurement of digital ads. Advertisers, programmatic platforms, social media channels and digital publishers are collectively placing increased emphasis on the quality and effectiveness of digital ad spend across all channels, formats and devices.
Our growth is primarily driven by the fastest growing segments of digital ad spend, mostly CTV, and our results depend on our ability to capture continued market growth.
Growth of volume of CTV ad impressions of existing customers. Our results also depend on our ability to retain our existing customers and on our customers’ continued investment in CTV advertising. Customer retention will continue to impact our results as TV investment continues to shift from linear to CTV and the volume of CTV impressions grows.
Upsell of additional services. An additional contributor to our efforts in expanding revenue generated by our customers is our investment in cross-selling our solutions. We cross-sell our personalized creative solutions to primary ad serving customers, who, for example, begin using our services with standard TV ads and then introduce personalized formats over time. We also have cross-selling efforts related to our advanced measurement solutions, which provide real-time metrics to inform optimization of TV campaigns while in market. The success of these efforts will impact our results of operations.
Global expansion
The majority of our clients are global advertisers and operate at a significant scale. Innovid serves customers globally through a delivery footprint covering over 70 countries, including the US, the UK, Mexico, Argentina, Colombia, Israel, Singapore, Japan, Australia, and China. In 2021, approximately 8% of Innovid’s revenue was generated outside of the US.
We intend to continue to grow our footprint in international markets in order to meet the needs of our global customer base and to accelerate new customer acquisition in key geographies outside of North America. Our results of operations will be impacted by the success of our geographic expansion, and whether the expected ad spend growth in these markets materializes.
New client accounts: We intend to continue targeting new brand, media agency and digital publisher customers who are currently utilizing solutions provided by our competitors or point solutions. Our results of operations will be impacted by our ability to attract new customers.
Seasonality: We experience fluctuations in revenues that coincide with seasonal fluctuations in the digital ad spending of our customers, in particular television ad spending patterns. Advertisers often allocate the largest portion of their media budgets to the fourth quarter of the calendar year in order to coincide with increased holiday purchasing. As a result, the fourth quarter of the year typically reflects our highest level of revenues while the first quarter typically reflects our lowest level of revenues. We expect our revenues to continue to fluctuate based on seasonal factors that affect the advertising industry as a whole and for these seasonal fluctuations in ad spend to impact quarter-over-quarter results. We believe that the year-over-year comparison of results more appropriately reflects the overall performance of our business. However, this traditional seasonality may also be impacted by certain external factors or major events that impact traditional television advertising patterns, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. In the year ended December 31, 2021 we observed more traditional seasonality in television advertising spend relative to the corresponding period of 2020.
Public company costs: We are incurring additional legal, accounting and other expenses that we did not previously incur, including costs associated with SEC reporting and corporate governance requirements. These requirements include compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act as well as other rules implemented by the SEC and the NYSE. Our financial statements reflect the impact of these expenses.
Components of Results of Operations
The period to period comparisons of our results of operations have been prepared using the historical periods included in our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Revenues
We generate revenues from providing Advertising Services to our customers: advertisers, media agencies and publishers. We focus on standard, interactive and data driven digital video advertising. Our major revenue streams are ad serving and creative services.
Ad serving services relate to utilizing Innovid’s platform to serve advertising impressions to various digital publishers across CTV, mobile TV, desktop TV, display, and other channels. Creative services relate to the design and development of interactive data-driven and dynamic ad formats by adding data, interactivity and dynamic features to standard ad units. We also have a new offering, which is focused on measurement of the efficiency of CTV advertising and in-flight optimizations for TV marketers. We are planning to further develop and scale it in the future.
We generate the majority of our revenues from the sale and delivery of our products within the US. For information with respect to sales by geographic markets, refer to Note 15, “Segment Reporting” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. Our chief operating decision maker (our CEO) does not evaluate the profit or loss from any separate geography.
We anticipate that revenues from our US sales will continue to constitute a substantial portion of our revenues in future periods.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of costs to run our ad serving, creative and measurement services. These costs include hosting fees, personnel costs including stock-based compensation, professional services costs and facility related costs. We allocate overhead, including rent and other facility related costs, communication costs and depreciation expense, based on headcount.
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, professional services costs, hosting and facility related costs. We allocate overhead including rent and other facility related costs, communication costs and depreciation expenses based on headcount. We expect research and development expenses to increase in future periods to support our growth, including continuing to invest in optimization, accuracy and reliability of our platform and other technology improvements to support and drive efficiency in our operations. These expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue, depending primarily upon when we choose to make more significant investments.
Research and development costs are charged to the statements of comprehensive loss as incurred. ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software (“ASC 350-40”), requires the capitalization of certain costs incurred only during the application development stage.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including commissions, stock-based compensation, professional services costs and facility related costs, as well as costs related to advertising, promotional materials, public relations, other sales and marketing programs. We allocate overhead, including rent and other facility related costs, communication costs and depreciation expense, based on headcount.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, for executive management, finance, accounting, human capital, legal and other administrative functions as well as professional services costs and facility related costs. We allocate overhead, including rent and other facility related costs, communication costs and depreciation expense, based on headcount.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The period to period comparisons of our results of operations have been prepared using the historical periods included in our audited consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We have derived this data from our annual audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Revenues
The growth and scaling of CTV was the key driver of Innovid’s revenue growth. As TV ad spend continues to shift from linear to CTV, we continue to benefit from the natural volume growth of CTV impressions we delivered for our existing and new customers. We have driven consistent positive net revenue retention of our core client base, largely through increased CTV advertising volume, as legacy TV budgets migrate from linear TV to CTV.
Total revenue increased by $21.5 million, or 31%, from $68.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $90.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, driven primarily by growth in ad impressions delivered on our platform for both existing and new clients. A significant contributor to our revenue growth is the ongoing conversion of advertising investment from linear TV to CTV, both in the market and among our clients. There was no meaningful impact of changes in average cost per impression on total revenue.
For each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, we generated 99% and 98% of our revenues, respectively, from ad serving and creative services. Our customers use our platform and ad serving services to deliver advertising content across various device types and digital formats across various geographic regions.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenue increased by $5.4 million, or 44%, from $12.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $17.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by a $2.3 million increase in serving and hosting fees and a $2.5 million increase in personnel costs due to a higher headcount, both to support our increased volumes.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased by $6.3 million, or 35%, from $18.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $24.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $4.9 million in personnel costs and an increase of $0.6 million in technology infrastructure and hosting fees, both to support our platform enhancement and maintenance work as well as our product research efforts. There was also a one-time, non-recurring $2 million Transaction bonus expense for a certain member of management. In addition, there was a $0.4 million increase in share-based compensation due to increase in headcount, value of our underlying common stock, vesting acceleration for several awards and an additional expense related to forgiveness of the loans given to founders of the Company. The increases were partially offset by a $2.6 million capitalization of research and development expenses.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $4.2 million, or 15%, from $28.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $33.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was driven primarily by a $1.7 million increase in commission costs due to higher revenues and an increase in personnel costs of $1.0 million, an increase in marketing costs of $0.6 million and a $0.5 million increase in professional fees, all to support our long-term growth strategy.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $12.5 million, or 152%, from $8.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $20.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to a one-time, non-recurring $4.1 million Transaction bonus expense for certain members of management, an increase in professional fees of $2.8 million related to the Transaction, and an increase in personnel costs of $2 million related to the expansion of our operations. There was also a $1.9 million increase in share-based compensation due to increase in headcount, value of our underlying common stock, vesting acceleration for several awards and an additional expense related to forgiveness of the loans given to founders of Legacy Innovid.
Finance expenses, net
Finance expenses increased by $3.7 million, or 498%, from $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $4.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was driven primarily by an allocation of transaction costs associated with the warrants of $2.8 million and $0.8 million warrants valuation as a result of increased valuation of the Company mainly due to the Transaction that closed on November 30, 2021.
Taxes on income
Tax expense increased by $0.04 million, or 3%, from $1.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily due to changes in US state and foreign income taxes and changes in uncertain tax positions related to our Israel subsidiary.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
The growth and scaling of CTV, as described in the analysis of our quarter results was the main driver of an increase in revenues.
Total revenue increased by $12.5 million, or 22%, from $56.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $68.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, driven primarily by growth in ad impressions delivered on our platform for both existing and new clients. A significant contributor to our revenue growth is the ongoing conversion of advertising investment from linear TV to CTV, both in the market and among our clients. There was no meaningful impact of changes in average cost per impression on total revenue.
For each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020, we generated 97% of our revenues from ad serving services. Our customers use our platform and ad serving services to deliver advertising content across various device types and digital formats across various geographic regions.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenue increased by $1.8 million, or 17%, from $10.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $12.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased personnel costs and serving and hosting costs to support our increased volumes.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $3.5 million, or 24%, from $14.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $18.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in personnel , which reflects our continued hiring of resources to support our platform enhancement and maintenance efforts.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $0.6 million, or 2%, from $29.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $28.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $1.2 million reduction in travel and entertainment as well as a reduction of marketing expenses of $0.8 million, both primarily as a result of the COVID-19 environment. These reductions were partially offset by increases in personnel costs of $1.4 million to support our long-term growth strategy.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $0.6 million, or 8%, from $7.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $8.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased personnel costs of $0.6 million due to hiring related to expansion of our operations.
Finance expenses, net
Finance expenses increased by $0.3 million, or 90%, from $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increase in bank fees and charges, as well as decrease in interest income.
Taxes on income
Tax expense increased by $0.3 million, or 33%, from $0.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to changes in US state and foreign income taxes and changes in uncertain tax positions related to our Israel subsidiary. The changes in US state and foreign income taxes are attributable to an increase in pre-tax booked income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through utilization of cash generated from operations, as well as borrowings under our credit facilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $157.2 million and net working capital, consisting of current assets less current liabilities, of $173.4 million. We received approximately $149.3 million of net proceeds in cash from the Transaction. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $132.5 million, $76 million thereof results from accretion of preferred stock to redemption value by an increase of our common stock value due to the Transaction.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with anticipated net cash provided by operating activities and available borrowings under our credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our cash needs and working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, if our operating performance during the next 12 months is below our expectations, our liquidity and ability to operate our business could be adversely affected. We are closely monitoring the effect that current economic conditions may have on our working capital requirements. To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material negative impact on our cash flow or liquidity. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth under Item 1A, “Risk Factors”.
In the future, we may attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities or through equity-linked or debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we raise additional financing by the incurrence of additional indebtedness, we may be subject to increased fixed payment obligations and could also be subject to additional restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any future indebtedness we incur may result in terms that are unfavorable to equity investors. We cannot guarantee that we will be able to raise additional capital in the future on favorable terms, or at all. Any inability to raise capital could adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives.
Revolving Line of Credit
In 2016, we entered into additional modifications to the credit line agreement dated 2012 , pursuant to which certain conditions were amended, the Maturity Date was extended to October 21, 2018 and the line of credit was increased from $6.5 million to $10 million.
On April 7, 2017 we utilized $5 million of the line of credit. The credit installments bear US dollar denominated interest at an annual rate equal to 0.75% to 1% plus a prime rate on the outstanding principal of each credit installment. The balance owing as of December 31, 2017 was $5 million.
On October 20, 2018, we entered into additional modifications to the credit agreement, pursuant to which certain conditions were amended and the Maturity Date was extended to December 31, 2018.
On December 26, 2018, we entered into an amended and restated Agreement (the “A&R Agreement”), pursuant to which certain conditions were amended, the Maturity Date was extended to December 26, 2020 and the line of credit was increased to from $10 million to $12 million.
On September 1, 2018 we utilized an additional $1 million of the line of credit. The credit installments bore US dollar denominated interest at an annual rate equal to 0.75% to 1% plus a prime rate on the outstanding principal of each credit installment. The Maturity Date was December 26, 2020. The balance owing as of December 31, 2018 was $6 million.
On November 30, 2019, we fully repaid the outstanding balance of the credit line in the amount of $6 million.
During 2020, we fully drew down on our $12 million credit line. As of December 31, 2020, we had repaid $6 million, leaving a balance of $6 million. On December 29, 2020, we entered into additional modifications to the A&R Agreement, pursuant to which certain conditions were amended and the Maturity Date was extended to December 29, 2022, and the line of credit increased to $15 million.
As of December 31, 2021 the outstanding balance of the credit line was in the amount of $6 million. The credit installments bear US dollar denominated interest at an annual rate equal to 0.75% to 1% plus a prime rate on the outstanding principal of each credit installment. We were in compliance with all the covenants, including by maintaining an adjusted quick ratio of at least 1.20:1.00. As defined in the A&R Agreement “adjusted quick ratio” is the ratio of (a) quick assets to (b) current liabilities minus the current portion of deferred revenue. “Quick assets” determines as our unrestricted cash plus accounts receivable, net, determined according to US GAAP.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we continued utilizing $6 million of a $15 million credit line which was drawn during 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the covenants under the Agreement were not changed from the amended Agreement. We are in compliance with all the covenants.
PPP Loan
In April 2020, we obtained an unsecured loan of $3.5 million through SVB under the PPP Loan.
In May 2020, we entered into a grant agreement (the “Grant Agreement”) to receive a grant of $0.5 million from SSIG, a related party of one of our investors, for the purpose of a partial repayment of the PPP Loan. The PPP loan was partially repaid in May 2020, according to the Grant Agreement.
In June 2021, we repaid the outstanding balance of the PPP Loan of $3 million
Interest expenses for the Credit Line and PPP Loan for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $0.3 million, $0.3 million and $0.3 million, respectively. They were recorded in finance expenses, net in the consolidated statements of operations.
Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by growth in our operations, increases or decreases in collections from our customers and payments to our vendors, as well as increases in personnel related expenses as we scale up our business. The timing of cash receipts from customers and payments to vendors and providers can significantly impact our cash flows from operating activities. In addition, we expect seasonality to impact quarterly cash flows from operating activities.
Cash used in operating activities is calculated by adjusting our net loss for changes in working capital, as well as by excluding non-cash items such as depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and changes in fair value of warrants.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $2.4 million compared to net cash used of $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities during 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase in net loss resulting from increased professional fees and personnel costs related to the expansion of our operations and non-recurring transaction costs related to the Transaction, partially offset by improvement in working capital management and non-cash adjustments. Our non-cash adjustments increased by $6.4 million mostly driven by an allocation of transaction costs associated with the warrants, valuation of warrants and stock options granted in 2021 as a result of significantly increased valuation of the Company due to the Transaction, improved market conditions and growth projections, together with vesting acceleration for several awards. The increase in non-cash adjustments was also due to forgiveness of founders loans during the year.
The change in our working capital in the amount of $6.0 million was primarily the result of increases in trade receivables and trade payables related to increased revenue and operating activities, however, the working capital level excluding cash balance was lower than the prior year due to improvement in customer collection period. The change in working capital was also related to increase in accrued liabilities due to timing of payment for personnel cost, increased insurance premium after the Company has become a public company and increased expenses related to preparation of public filings and business combination activities.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $3.7 million of net cash in investing activities, primarily driven by the investment in software development work of $2.6 million, purchase of information technology related equipment in the amount of $0.5 million and loan in the amount of $0.5 million issued to the founder.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $0.9 million of net cash in investing activities, primarily consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $147.2 million was primarily due to $149.3 million of net cash proceeds in connection with the Closing of the Transaction. The increase in financing cashflow was also due to proceeds received for exercises of options in the amount of $1.1 million, and partially offset by repayment of PPP loan in the amount of $3.0 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $9 million was primarily due to proceeds received under the A&R Agreement in the net amount of $6 million and the PPP Loan in the net amount of $3 million.
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are primarily influenced by growth in our operations, increases or decreases in collections from our customers and payments to our vendors, as well as increases in personnel related expenses as we scale up our business. The timing of cash receipts from customers and payments to vendors and providers can significantly impact our cash flows from operating activities. In addition, we expect seasonality to impact quarterly cash flows from operating activities.
Cash used in operating activities is calculated by adjusting our net loss for changes in working capital, as well as by excluding non-cash items such as depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and changes in fair value of warrants.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $4.2 million compared to net cash used of $9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash used in operating activities during 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to a decrease in net loss. Our non-cash adjustments increased by $0.7 million due to an increase in stock-based compensation related to an increase in headcount as well as increase in amortization related to intangible assets acquired as a part of our business combination related to our Argentinian subsidiary.
The change in our working capital in the amount of $2.4 million was primarily driven by an increase in trade receivables related to an increase in our revenues. This was partially offset by decrease in trade payables.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities primarily included investments in leasehold improvements and the acquisition of our Argentinian subsidiary conducted in September 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $0.9 million of net cash in investing activities, primarily consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we used $6.2 million of net cash in investing activities, consisting of $1.7 million in purchases of property and equipment, $4.2 million related to the acquisition of our Argentinian subsidiary.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $9 million was primarily due to proceeds received under the A&R Agreement in the net amount of $6 million and the PPP Loan in the net amount of $3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities of $23.8 million was primarily due to proceeds of $30 million related to issuance of preferred stock, offset by repayment of a $6 million loan.
Contractual Obligations and Known Future Cash Requirements
Lease Commitments
We rent our facilities and certain motor vehicles under operating lease agreements that expire on various dates, the latest of which is in 2025. The minimum rental payments under operating leases for rental of premises as of December 31, 2021 for the next five years totaled $5.9 million, which is comprised of $2.5 million and $3.4 million in the next 12 months and more than 12 months, respectively. Other operating leases are immaterial.
Pledges and Bank Guarantees
In connection with the Agreement, we pledged 65,000 shares of common stock of our Israeli subsidiary, NIS 0.01 par value each.
We have a total of $0.7 million of pledged bank deposits as of December 31, 2021. We obtained bank guarantees in an aggregate amount of $0.3 million in connection with our office lease agreements in the US as of December 31, 2021.
Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to our results determined in accordance with US GAAP, we believe that certain non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, are useful in evaluating our business. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by total revenue. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, to the most directly comparable financial measure prepared in accordance with GAAP.
(a) Finance expense, net consists mostly of remeasurement expense related to our Argentinian subsidiary’s monetary assets, liabilities and operating results, our interest expense, revaluation of our warrants and transaction costs allocated to warrants.
(b) Transaction related expenses consist of one-time, non-recurring bonus payments to certain members of management, professional fees associated with the SPAC merger transaction and SEC filings.
(c) Acquisition related expenses consists of professional fees associated with the acquisition of TVSquared.
(d) Other consists predominantly of the loss related to a one-time loss from sale of fixed assets in our Israel subsidiary.
We use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin as measures of operational efficiency to understand and evaluate our core business operations. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors for period to period comparisons of our core business and for understanding and evaluating trends in our operating results on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance.
These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of the limitations of these measures are:
•they do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our capital expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•they do not reflect costs of acquiring and integrating businesses, which will continue to be a part of our growth strategy;
•they do not reflect one-time, non-recurring bonus costs and third party costs associated with the SPAC merger transaction and regulatory filings;
•they do not reflect income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay income taxes;
•they do not reflect our interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt; and
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges related mainly to intangible assets, certain assets being depreciated and amortized will have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
In addition, other companies in our industry may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as a comparative measure. You should compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our US GAAP results and using the non-GAAP financial measures only supplementally. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by total revenue.
Operational Metrics
In addition, Innovid’s management considers Net Revenue Retention and Core Client Retention in evaluating the performance of the business. Net Revenue Retention is defined as the percentage of revenue retained from existing core platform customers (core customers that use our platform as an ad server of record) as compared to the prior year period. Innovid’s management believes that Net Revenue Retention is a useful metric for management and investors in evaluating Innovid’s value proposition to customers and its ability to retain customers. For the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, Innovid’s Net Revenue Retention was 114%, 121% and 127%, respectively. Core Client Retention is defined as the percentage of core platform clients retained by Innovid compared to the prior year period. Innovid’s management believes that Core Client Retention is a useful metric for management and investors in evaluating the strength of core customer relationships. For the years ended December 31, 2019, 2020 and 2021, Innovid’s Core Client Retention was 88%, 94% and 97%, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, including the ongoing and potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government mandates and restrictions. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, we believe the following accounting policies to be the most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates revenues from providing Advertising Services to advertisers, publishers and media agencies. The services focus on standard, interactive and data driven digital video advertising. The Company major revenue streams are ad serving and creative services. Ad Serving services relate to utilizing Innovid’s platform to serve advertising impressions to various digital publishers across CTV, mobile TV, desktop TV, display, and other channels. Creative services relate to the creation of interactive or dynamic ad units by adding interactivity and dynamic features to standard ad units. The Company also provides measurement services which relate to analytics of advertisements and campaigns.
The Company adopted ASC, Revenue from Contracts with Customers Topic 606 (“ASC 606”) with a date of initial application of January 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective transition method, applied to all open contracts.
The Company recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised services in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for those services. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606 and determines revenue recognition through the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, which represent promises within an arrangement that are capable of being distinct and are separately identifiable, the Company allocates the contract consideration to all distinct performance obligations based on their relative SSP. SSP is determined using adjusted market assessment approach and expected cost plus a margin approach.
Revenues related to ad serving services are recognized at a point in time. The Company recognizes revenue from the display of impression-based ads in the contracted period in which the impressions are delivered. Impressions are considered delivered when an ad is displayed to users.
Revenues related to creative services are recognized at a point in time, when the Company delivers an ad unit, since the Company does not have an enforceable right to payment before delivery. Creative services projects are usually delivered within a week.
Revenues related to measurement services are recognized at a point in time, when the Company delivers the measurement report.
The Company’s accounts receivable, consist primarily of receivables related to providing ad serving and creative services, in which the Company’s contracted performance obligations have been satisfied, amount billed and the Company has an unconditional right to payment. The Company typically bills customers on a monthly basis based on actual delivery. The payment terms vary, mainly with terms of net 60 days or less.
The typical contract term is 12 months or less for ASC 606 purposes. Some of the Company’s contracts can be cancelled without a cause. The Company has the unconditional right to payment for the services provided as of the date of the termination of the contracts.
The Company applies the practical expedient in ASC 606 and does not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component if the Company expects, at contract inception, that the period between when the Company transfers a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less.
Costs to obtain a contract
Contract costs include commission programs to compensate sales employees for generating sales orders with new customers or for new services with existing customers. The Company elected to apply the practical expedient and recognize incremental costs of obtaining a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset that the Company otherwise would have recognized is one year or less.
Warrants
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance. The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments, meet the definition of a liability under ASC 480, and meet all of the requirements for equity classification, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent reporting period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Warrants that meet all the criteria for equity classification, are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital. Warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, are required to be recorded as liabilities at their initial fair value on the date of issuance and remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date thereafter. The liability-classified warrants are recorded under non-current liabilities. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized in “Financial expenses, net” in the consolidated statements of operations.
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company applies a fair value framework in order to measure and disclose its financial assets and liabilities. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. The fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs, where available, and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
Level 2 - Includes other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activity.
The Company’s financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, restricted deposits, trade receivables, net, trade payables, employees and payroll accruals, accrued expenses and other current liabilities and current portion of long term debts. . Their historical carrying amounts are approximate fair values due to the short-term maturities of these instruments.
The Company measures its investments in money market funds classified as cash equivalents and warrants liability at fair value.
The Private Placement Warrants are classified as level 3 in the fair value hierarchy because some of the inputs used in the valuation including expected volatility were determined based on management’s assumptions. The Company estimates the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants liability using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Gains and losses from the remeasurement of the warrants liability are recognized in finance expenses, net in the consolidated statements of operations.
Fair value estimates are made at a specific point in time, based on relevant market information and information about the financial instruments. These estimates are subjective in nature and involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment and, therefore, cannot be determined with precision. Changes in assumptions could significantly affect these estimates.
Stock-based compensation
The Company estimates the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options with only service conditions is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards with graded vesting is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. The determination of the fair value of the Company’s stock option awards is based on a variety of factors including the Company’s common stock price, risk-free interest rate, expected volatility, expected life of awards and dividend yield. The Company has limited option exercise history and has elected to estimate the expected life of the stock option awards using the “simplified method” with the continued use of this method extended until such time that the Company has sufficient exercise history. The expected volatility of the price of such stocks is based on volatility of similar companies whose stock prices are publicly available over a historical period equivalent to the option’s expected term. The expected term of options granted represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding, and is determined based on the simplified method, as adequate historical experience is not available to provide a reasonable estimate. The dividend yield is based on the Company’s historical and future expectation of dividends payouts. Historically, the Company has not paid cash dividends. Risk-free interest rates are based on the yield from US Treasury zero-coupon bonds with a term equivalent to the expected term of the options.
The Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur.
Goodwill and intangible assets
Goodwill and certain other purchased intangible assets have been recorded in the Company’s consolidated financial statements as a result of the acquisition of the Argentinian subsidiary. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
The Company allocates goodwill to reporting units based on the expected benefit from the business combination. Reporting units are evaluated when changes in the Company’s operating structure occur, and if necessary, goodwill is reassigned using a relative fair value allocation approach. The Company currently has one reporting unit.
ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and other (“ASC 350”) requires goodwill to be tested for impairment at least annually and, in certain circumstances, between annual tests. The accounting guidance gives the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. The qualitative assessment considers events and circumstances that might indicate that a reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount. If it is determined, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative test is performed. The Company operates as one reporting unit. The Company elects to perform an annual impairment test of goodwill as of October 1 of each year, or more frequently if impairment indicators are present.
Capitalized software development costs
Software development costs, which are included in property and equipment, net, consists of capitalized costs related to purchase and develop internal-use software. The Company uses it to provide services to its customers. The costs to purchase and develop internal-use software are capitalized from the time that the preliminary project stage is completed, and it is considered probable that the software will be used to perform the function intended. These costs include personnel and related employee benefits for employees directly associated with the software development and external costs of the materials or services consumed in developing or obtaining the software. Any costs incurred for upgrades and functionality enhancements of the software are also capitalized. Once this software is ready for use in providing the Company's services, these costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the software, which is 3 years. The amortization will be presented within cost of revenues in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income taxes and tax contingencies
Income taxes are computed using a balance sheet approach reflecting both current and deferred taxes. Current and deferred taxes reflect the tax impact of all of the events included in the financial statements. The basic principles employed in the balance sheet approach are to reflect a current tax liability or asset that is recognized for the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current and prior years, a deferred tax liability or asset that is recognized for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards, the measurement of current and deferred tax liabilities and assets is based on provisions of the enacted tax law of which the effects of future changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated, and the measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced, if necessary, by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence, are not expected to be realized. There are certain situations in which deferred taxes are not provided. Some basis differences are not temporary differences because their reversals are not expected to result in taxable or deductible amounts.
The Company regularly evaluates deferred tax assets for future realization and establishes a valuation allowance to the extent that a portion is not more likely than not to be realized. The Company considers whether it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized, including existing cumulative losses in recent years, expectations of future taxable income, carryforward periods, and other relevant quantitative and qualitative factors. The recoverability of the deferred tax assets is evaluated by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income rely on estimates.
ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”) contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring a liability for uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, on an evaluation of the technical merits, the tax position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% (cumulative basis) likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company classifies interest related to unrecognized tax benefits in taxes on income.
On December 20, 2017, Congress passed the “US Tax Act”. The US Tax Act requires complex computations to be performed that were not previously required by US tax law, significant judgments to be made in interpretation of the provisions of the US Tax Act, significant estimates in calculations, and the preparation and analysis of information not previously relevant or regularly produced the Act provides that a person who is a US shareholder of any CFC is required to include its GILTI in gross income for the tax year in a manner generally similar to that for Subpart F inclusions. The term “global intangible low-taxed income” is defined as the excess (if any) of the US shareholder’s net CFC tested income for that tax year, over the US shareholder’s net deemed tangible income return for that tax year. The Company’s policy is to treat GILTI as a period expense in the provision for income taxes.
Functional currency
A majority of the Company’s revenues are generated in US dollars. In addition, a substantial portion of the Company’s costs are incurred in US dollars. The Company’s management believes that the US dollar is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the Company and each of its subsidiaries operate. Thus, the functional and reporting currency of the Company and its subsidiaries is the US dollar. Accordingly, accounts maintained in currencies other than the US dollar are re-measured into US dollars. All translation gains and losses resulting from the re-measurement of monetary assets and liabilities that are not denominated in the functional currency are recorded in Financial expenses, net on the consolidated statements of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K, for recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.