Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management's Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with "Business - Summary" and the Bancorp’s consolidated financial statements and related notes for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2021.
Overview
Like most financial institutions, Customers derives the majority of its income from interest it receives on its interest-earning assets, such as loans, leases and investments. Customers' primary source of funds for making these loans, leases and investments are its deposits and borrowings, on which it pays interest. Consequently, one of the key measures of Customers' success is the amount of its net interest income, or the difference between the income on its interest-earning assets and the expense on its interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. Another key measure is the difference between the interest income generated by interest-earning assets and the interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, relative to the amount of average interest-earning assets, which is referred to as net interest margin.
BankMobile, previously a division of Customers Bank, derived a majority of its revenue from interest income on installment loans, interchange and card revenue and deposit fees. On January 4, 2021, Customers Bancorp completed the divestiture of BankMobile Technologies, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Customers Bank and a component of BankMobile, through a merger with Megalith Financial Acquisition Corp. In connection with the closing of the divestiture, MFAC changed its name to “BM Technologies, Inc.” All of BankMobile’s serviced deposits and loans including the related net interest income remained with Customers Bank after the divestiture. Beginning in first quarter 2021, BMT's historical financial results for periods prior to the divestiture are reflected in Customers Bancorp’s results of operations as discontinued operations. As a result of the divestiture, Customers' interchange income, deposit account fees and subscription fees decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, Customers' non-interest expenses, such as salaries and employee benefits, technology, professional services, merger and acquisition related expenses and other non-interest expenses, including reimbursements from the white label relationship associated with BMT decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021. In connection with the divestiture, Customers entered into various agreements with BM Technologies, including a transition services agreement, software license agreement, deposit servicing agreement, non-competition agreement and loan agreement for periods ranging from one to ten years. Customers incurred expenses of $59.5 million to BM Technologies under the deposit servicing agreement, included within the technology, communication and bank operations expense in the income from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021. The deposit service agreement is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2022 and will not be renewed. As of December 31, 2021, Customers held $1.8 billion of deposits serviced by BM Technologies, which are expected to leave Customers Bank by December 31, 2022. The loan agreement with BM Technologies was terminated early in November 2021. The transition services agreement with BM Technologies, as amended, expires on March 31, 2022, except for accounting services which expired on February 15, 2022. For additional information, refer to "NOTE 3 - DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS" to Customers' audited financial statements.
In October 2021, Customers Bank launched CBIT on the TassatPay blockchain-based instant B2B payments platform, which serves a growing array of B2B clients who want the benefit of instant payments: including key over-the-counter desks, exchanges, liquidity providers, market makers, funds, and B2B verticals such as trading operations, real estate, manufacturing, and logistics. CBIT may only be created by, transferred to and redeemed by commercial customers of Customers Bank on the real time B2B payments platform by maintaining U.S. dollars in non-interest bearing deposits at Customers Bank. CBIT is not listed or traded on any digital currency exchange. As of December 31, 2021, Customers Bank held $1.9 billion of deposits from new customers participating in CBIT.
To further build its franchise and support the growth of its commercial lending initiatives, Customers added three new commercial verticals during 2021 within its specialty banking business. These three new verticals included fund finance, technology and venture capital banking and financial institutions group that provide financing to the private equity industry and cash management services to the alternative investment industry. Customers also launched a pilot digital small balance 7(a) lending within its existing SBA lending business in 2021.
There is credit risk inherent in all loans requiring Customers to maintain an ACL to absorb credit losses on existing loans and leases that may become uncollectible. Customers maintains this allowance by charging a provision for credit losses against its operating earnings. Customers has included a detailed discussion of this process, as well as several tables describing its ACL, in "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" and "NOTE 8 - LOANS AND LEASES RECEIVABLE AND ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES ON LOANS AND LEASES" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The spread of COVID-19 and its variants has created a global public health crisis that has resulted in unprecedented uncertainty, volatility and disruption in financial markets and in governmental, commercial and consumer activity in the United States and globally, including the markets that Customers serves. Governmental responses during the pandemic have included orders closing businesses not deemed essential and directing individuals to restrict their movements, observe social distancing and shelter in place. These actions, together with responses to the pandemic by businesses and individuals, resulted in rapid decreases in commercial and consumer activity, temporary closures of many businesses that have led to a loss of revenues and a rapid increase in unemployment, material decreases in oil and gas prices and in business valuations, disrupted global supply chains, market downturns and volatility, changes in consumer behavior related to pandemic fears, related emergency response legislation and the Federal Reserve maintaining a low interest rate environment.
Customers has taken deliberate actions to ensure that it has the necessary balance sheet strength to serve its clients and communities, including increases in liquidity and reserves supported by a strong capital position. Customers' business and consumer customers continue to experience varying degrees of financial distress. In order to protect the health of its customers and team members, and to comply with applicable government directives, Customers had modified its business practices, including directing team members to work remotely insofar as it is possible and implementing its business continuity plans and protocols to the extent necessary. Since that time, Customers has launched the “Return to Workplace” initiative, and communicated a goal of having more team members return to the workplace. In that communication, Customers announced the following steps along with a continuing commitment to remain empathetic and cognizant of balancing company principles, customer support, support and remaining vigilant on tracking and preventing COVID-19 exposures to protect our team members and customers. Customers implemented a “ hybrid model” encouraging and tracking the movement of more team members returning to the office, released a communication requiring all team members to read, sign and acknowledge a Code of Commitment to reveal exposures to COVID-19, thereby allowing Customers to manage the possible impact with 100 percent participation of our team members. Customers has started tracking vaccination rates and less than 10 percent of our team members are not vaccinated or not planning to be vaccinated.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. It contained substantial tax and spending provisions intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act included the SBA's PPP, a nearly $350 billion program designed to aid small- and medium-sized businesses through federally guaranteed loans distributed through banks. These loans were intended to guarantee an eight-week or 24-week period of payroll and other costs to help those businesses remain viable and allow their workers to pay their bills. On April 16, 2020, the SBA announced that all available funds had been exhausted and applications were no longer being accepted. On April 22, 2020, an additional $310 billion of funds for the PPP was signed into law. On August 8, 2020, the SBA announced that the PPP was closed and no longer accepting PPP applications from participating lenders. On December 27, 2020, the CAA was signed into law, including Division N, Title III, the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act, which provided $284 billion in additional funding for the SBA's PPP for small businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The CAA provided small businesses who received an initial PPP loan and experienced a 25% reduction in gross receipts to request a second PPP loan of up to $2.0 million. On January 11, 2021, the SBA reopened the PPP program to small business and non-profit organizations that did not receive a loan through the initial PPP phase. On March 11, 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 was enacted expanding eligibility for first and second round of PPP loans and revising the exclusions from payroll costs for purposes of loan forgiveness. The PPP ended on May 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, Customers has helped thousands of small businesses by funding over $10 billion in PPP loans directly or through partnerships.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Customers also implemented a short-term loan modification program to provide temporary payment relief to certain of its borrowers who met the program's qualifications. This program allowed for a deferral of payments for a maximum of 90 days at a time. The deferred payments along with interest accrued during the deferral period are due and payable on the maturity date of the existing loan. On December 27, 2020, the CAA was signed into law, which extended and expanded various relief provisions of the CARES Act including the temporary relief from the accounting and disclosure requirements for TDRs until January 1, 2022. All commercial loans previously on deferments became current by December 31, 2021 from a peak of $1.2 billion. Customers had no pending commercial loan deferment requests as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, total commercial deferments were $202.1 million, or 1.8% of total loans and leases, excluding PPP loans. Total consumer deferments declined to $6.1 million, or 0.1% of total loans and leases, excluding PPP loans at December 31, 2021, from a peak of $108 million. As of December 31, 2020, total consumer deferments were $16.4 million, or 0.1% of total loans and leases, excluding PPP loans. Excluding loans receivable, PPP from total loans and leases receivable is a non-GAAP measure. Management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers' financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities. Please refer to the following reconciliation schedule.
The FRB has taken a range of actions to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. For example, on March 15, 2020, the FRB reduced the target range for the federal funds rate to 0% to 0.25% and announced that it would increase its holdings of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities and begin purchasing agency commercial mortgage-backed securities. The FRB has also encouraged depository institutions to borrow from the discount window and has lowered the primary credit rate for such borrowing by 150 basis points while extending the term of such loans up to 90 days. Reserve requirements have been reduced to zero as of March 26, 2020. The FRB also established a range of facilities and programs to support the U.S. economy and U.S. marketplace participants in response to economic disruptions associated with COVID-19, including among others, Main Street Lending facilities to purchase loan participations, under specified conditions, from banks lending to small and medium U.S. businesses and the PPPLF, which was created to bolster the effectiveness of the PPP by taking loans as collateral at face value. Customers participated in some of these facilities or programs to date, primarily the PPPLF. Customers fully repaid the borrowing from the PPPLF during the year ended December 31, 2021. No new advances are available from the PPPLF after July 30, 2021. The economy has since strengthened despite the spread of COVID-19 variants, with higher inflation, stock prices and housing values. In response, the FRB has begun normalizing monetary policy with its decision to taper its quantitative easing in late 2021 and signaled raising the federal funds rate in 2022.
Significant uncertainties as to future economic conditions continue to exist, and Customers has taken deliberate actions in response, including higher levels of on-balance sheet liquidity and maintaining strong capital ratios. The economic pressures, coupled with the implementation of an expected lifetime loss methodology for determining our provision for credit losses as required by CECL contributed to an increased provision for credit losses on loans and leases and off-balance sheet credit exposures in first quarter 2020. The expected lifetime loss methodology incorporates current economic conditions and forecasts for macroeconomic variables over its reasonable and supportable forecast period as required by CECL. Customers has also shifted the mix of its loan portfolio towards commercial loans with floating or adjustable interest rates and increased its non-interest bearing and interest-bearing deposits to position the Bank for future interest rate hikes. Customers continues to monitor the impact of COVID-19 and its variants closely, as well as any effects that may result from the federal government's responses; however, the extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will impact Customers' operations and financial results during 2022 is highly uncertain.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information about the impact that recently adopted or issued accounting guidance will have on us, refer to "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Customers has adopted various accounting policies that govern the application of U.S. GAAP and that are consistent with general practices within the banking industry in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements. Customers' significant accounting policies are described in "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by Customers that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets. Customers considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The judgments and assumptions used are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the nature of the judgments and assumptions management makes, actual results could differ from these judgments and estimates, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of Customers' assets.
The critical accounting policy that is both important to the portrayal of Customers' financial condition and results of operations and require complex, subjective judgments is the ACL. This critical accounting policy and material estimate, along with the related disclosures, are reviewed by Customers' Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Customers' ACL at December 31, 2021 represents Customers' current estimate of the lifetime credit losses expected from its loan and lease portfolio and its unfunded lending-related commitments that are not unconditionally cancellable. Management estimates the ACL by projecting a lifetime loss rate conditional on a forecast of economic parameters and other qualitative adjustments, for the loans and leases' expected remaining term.
Customers uses external sources in the creation of its forecasts, including current economic conditions and forecasts for macroeconomic variables over its reasonable and supportable forecast period (e.g., GDP growth rate, unemployment rate, BBB spread, commercial real estate and home price index). After the reasonable and supportable forecast period, which ranges from two to five years, the models revert the forecasted macroeconomic variables to their historical long-term trends, without specific predictions for the economy, over the expected life of the pool, while also incorporating prepayment assumptions into its lifetime loss rates. Internal factors that impact the quarterly allowance estimate include the level of outstanding balances, portfolio performance and assigned risk ratings. Significant loan/borrower attributes utilized in the models include property type, initial loan to value, assigned risk ratings, delinquency status, origination date, maturity date, initial FICO scores, and borrower state.
The ACL may be affected materially by a variety of qualitative factors that Customers considers to reflect its current judgement of various events and risks that are not measured in our statistical procedures, including uncertainty related to the economic forecasts used in the modeled credit loss estimates, nature and volume of the loan and lease portfolio, credit underwriting policy exceptions, peer comparison, industry data, and model and data limitations. The qualitative allowance for economic forecast risk is further informed by multiple alternative scenarios to arrive at a scenario or a composite of scenarios supporting the period-end ACL balance. The evaluation process is inherently imprecise and subjective as it requires significant management judgment based on underlying factors that are susceptible to changes, sometimes materially and rapidly. Customers recognizes that this approach may not be suitable in certain economic environments such that additional analysis may be performed at management's discretion. Due in part to its subjectivity, the qualitative evaluation may be materially impacted during periods of economic uncertainty and late breaking events that could lead to revision of reserves to reflect management's best estimate of expected credit losses.
The ACL is established in accordance with our ACL policy. The ACL Committee, which includes the Bank's Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Accounting Officer, Chief Lending Officer, and Chief Credit Officer, among others, reviews the adequacy of the ACL each quarter, together with Customers' risk management team. The ACL policy, significant judgements and the related disclosures are reviewed by Customers' Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
The net decrease in our estimated ACL as of December 31, 2021 as compared to our December 31, 2020 estimate was primarily attributable to the continued improvement in macroeconomic forecasts since the significant economic impact of COVID-19 in early 2020, partially offset by loan growth primarily in Customers' consumer installment loan portfolio. The provision for credit losses on loans and leases for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $27.4 million, for an ending ACL balance of $139.9 million ($137.8 million for loans and leases and $2.1 million for unfunded lending-related commitments) as of December 31, 2021.
To determine the ACL as of December 31, 2021, Customers utilized the Moody's December 2021 Baseline forecast to generate its modelled expected losses by loan portfolio in order to reflect management's reasonable expectations of current and future economic conditions. The Baseline forecast at December 31, 2021 assumed continued improvement in forecasts of macroeconomic conditions compared to the forecasts of macroeconomic conditions used by Customers in 2020; the Federal Reserve has accelerated its tapering process in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the first rate hike is assumed to occur in 2022; a continuing U.S. economic recovery from federal spending and abatement of the COVID-19 pandemic, notwithstanding the impact of the Omicron variant; and the acceleration in consumer prices is expected to peak and moderate in the near-term as the supply chain issues subside. Customers continues to monitor the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and monetary policy measures on the economy and, if the pace of the expected recovery is worse than expected, further meaningful provisions for credit losses could be required.
The net increase in our estimated ACL as of December 31, 2020 as compared to January 1, 2020, upon adoption of the CECL standard, was primarily attributable to the significant economic impact of COVID-19 and the related stimulus from the federal government, along with loan growth in Customers' commercial and consumer loan portfolios. The total reserve build for the ACL for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.9 million, for an ending balance of $146.5 million ($144.2 million for loans and leases and $2.3 million for unfunded lending-related commitments) as of December 31, 2020. To determine the ACL as of December 31, 2020, Customers utilized the Moody's December 2020 Baseline forecast to generate its modelled expected losses and considered Moody's other alternative economic forecast scenarios to qualitatively adjust the modelled ACL by loan portfolio in order to reflect management's reasonable expectations of current and future economic conditions. The Moody's Baseline forecast at December 31, 2020 assumed continued improvement in forecasts of macroeconomic conditions compared to the previous forecasts of macroeconomic conditions used by Customers in early 2020; the Federal Reserve maintaining a target range for the fed funds rate at 0% to 0.25% until the second half of 2023; and an additional $908 billion of stimulus from the federal government.
One of the most significant judgments influencing the ACL is the macroeconomic forecasts from Moody's. Changes in the economic forecasts could significantly affect the estimated credit losses which could potentially lead to materially different allowance levels from one reporting period to the next. Given the dynamic relationship between macroeconomic variables within Customers' modelling framework, it is difficult to estimate the impact of a change in any one individual variable on the ACL. However, to illustrate a hypothetical sensitivity analysis, management calculated a quantitative allowance using a 100% weighting applied to an adverse scenario. This scenario includes assumptions around new infections, hospitalizations and COVID-19 deaths rising sharply once again as compared to the Baseline projections, leading to lower consumer spending, worsening supply chain issues and rising unemployment. Under this scenario, as an example, the unemployment rate is estimated at 7.7% and 8.2% at the end of 2022 and 2023, respectively. These numbers represent a 4.1% and 4.7% higher unemployment estimate than Baseline scenario projections of 3.6% and 3.5%, respectively for the same time periods. To demonstrate the sensitivity to key economic parameters, management calculated the difference between a 100% Baseline weighting and a 100% adverse scenario weighting for modelled results. This would result in an incremental quantitative impact to the ACL of approximately $44.4 million at December 31, 2021. This resulting difference is not intended to represent an expected increase in ACL levels since (i) Customers may use a weighted approach applied to multiple economic scenarios for its ACL process, (ii) the highly uncertain economic environment, (iii) the difficulty in predicting inter-relationships between macroeconomic variables used in various economic scenarios, and (iv) the sensitivity analysis does not account for any qualitative adjustments incorporated by Customers as part of its overall ACL framework.
There is no certainty that Customers' ACL will be appropriate over time to cover losses in our portfolio as economic and market conditions may ultimately differ from our reasonable and supportable forecast. Additionally, events adversely affecting specific customers, industries, or Customers' markets, such as the current COVID-19 pandemic, could severely impact our current expectations. If the credit quality of Customers' customer base materially deteriorates or the risk profile of a market, industry, or group of customers changes materially, Customers' net income and capital could be materially adversely affected which, in turn could have a material adverse effect on Customers' financial condition and results of operations. The extent to which the current COVID-19 pandemic has and will continue to negatively impact Customers' businesses, financial condition, liquidity and results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be forecasted with precision at this time.
For more information, see "NOTE 8 - LOANS AND LEASES RECEIVABLE AND ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES ON LOANS AND LEASES" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Results of Operations
The following discussion of Customers Bancorp’s consolidated results of operations should be read in conjunction with its consolidated financial statements, including the accompanying notes. Please refer to Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates in this Management's Discussion and Analysis and "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" to Customers' audited financial statements for information concerning certain significant accounting policies and estimates applied in determining reported results of operations.
The following table sets forth the condensed statements of income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Customers reported net income available to common shareholders of $300.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $118.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Factors contributing to the change in net income available to common shareholders for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Net interest income
Net interest income increased $281.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as average interest-earning assets increased by $3.6 billion, and NIM increased by 99 basis points to 3.70% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 2.71% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest-earning assets was primarily driven by increases in the origination and purchases of the latest round of PPP loans, investment securities, commercial and industrial loans and leases, commercial loans to mortgage companies and consumer installment loans, offset in part by decreases in multi-family loans. The PPP loan forgiveness from the first two rounds and the latest round, which accelerated the recognition of net deferred loan origination fees, drove a 92 basis points increase in the yield on total loans and leases and contributed to the NIM increase. The shift in the mix of interest-earning assets included $3.3 billion ($5.1 billion average balance) of PPP loans yielding 5.46%. The shift in the mix of interest-bearing liabilities in a lower interest rate environment drove a 45 basis point decline in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The shift in the mix of interest-bearing liabilities included interest-bearing deposits of $12.3 billion ($10.9 billion average balance) costing 0.57%. Customers' total cost of deposits, including interest-bearing and non-interest bearing deposits) were 0.44% and 0.89% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. PPPLF borrowings with $2.6 billion average balance costing 0.35% were fully repaid during the year ended December 31, 2021. Customers' total cost of funds, including non-interest bearing deposits and borrowings, was 0.54% and 0.97% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Provision for credit losses on loans and leases
The $35.3 million decrease in the provision for loan and lease losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, reflects the continuing improvement in macroeconomic forecasts since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in first quarter 2020, partially offset by the growth in loans and leases, primarily in consumer installment loans. Upon adoption of the CECL standard on January 1, 2020, the ACL for loans and leases and off-balance sheet credit exposures increased by $79.8 million and $3.4 million, respectively. The ACL on off-balance sheet credit exposures is presented within accrued interest payable and other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and the related provision is presented as part of other non-interest expense on the consolidated income statement. The ACL on loans and leases held for investment, represented 1.53% of total loans and leases receivable, excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP measure, please refer to the non-GAAP reconciliation within Loans and Leases, Credit Risk), at December 31, 2021, compared to 1.90% at December 31, 2020.
Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $33.8 million, or 22 basis points of average total loans and leases, compared to $54.8 million, or 41 basis points of average total loans and leases for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net charge-offs was primarily due to an increase in charge-offs of consumer installment loans coinciding with the growth of the portfolio year-over-year, offset by partial charge-offs of $25.2 million for two commercial real estate collateral dependent loans during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-interest income
The $14.0 million increase in non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from increases of $11.3 million in gains realized from the sale of AFS debt securities, $9.3 million in gains from the sale of SBA and other loans, $7.2 million in unrealized gain (loss) on derivatives, $3.0 million in commercial lease income, $1.4 million in bank-owned life insurance income, $1.3 million in unrealized gain (loss) on investment securities, $1.3 million in mortgage warehouse transactional fees, $1.2 million in deposit fees, and $3.9 million in other non-interest income. These increases were offset in part by losses of $24.5 million on cash flow hedge derivative terminations and $2.8 million on sale of foreign subsidiaries for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-interest expense
The $79.3 million increase in non-interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from increases of $32.9 million in technology, communication, and bank operations, $14.1 million in salaries and employee benefits, $13.1 million in professional services, $7.3 million in loan servicing, $6.2 million in deposit relationship adjustment fees, $3.1 million in commercial lease depreciation and $7.5 million in other non-interest expense. These increases were offset in part by decreases of $2.9 million in loan workout costs, $1.6 million in FDIC assessments, non-income taxes, and regulatory fees and $0.9 million in merger and acquisition related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income tax expense
Customers' effective tax rate was 19.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 24.6% for the year the ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in investment tax credits, the recognition of a deferred tax asset related to the outside basis difference of foreign subsidiaries, excess tax benefits from stock option exercises and state apportionment rates, partially offset by the dilution of the permanent tax differences and other tax benefits as a result of higher pre-tax income from continuing operations and an increase in compensation expense associated with an executive's retirement that exceeded the limit for tax deduction purposes.
Net loss from discontinued operations
On January 4, 2021, Customers Bancorp completed the previously announced divestiture of BMT, the technology arm of its BankMobile segment, to MFAC Merger Sub Inc., an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of MFAC, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated August 6, 2020, by and among MFAC, MFAC Merger Sub Inc., BMT, Customers Bank, the sole stockholder of BMT, and Customers Bancorp, the parent bank holding company for Customers Bank (as amended on November 2, 2020 and December 8, 2020). In connection with the closing of the divestiture, MFAC changed its name to “BM Technologies, Inc.” Following the completion of the divestiture of BMT, BankMobile's serviced deposits and loans and the related net interest income have been combined with Customers' financial condition and the results of operations as a single reportable segment.
BMT's historical financial results for periods prior to the divestiture are reflected in Customers Bancorp’s consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations. The assets and liabilities of BMT have been presented as "Assets of discontinued operations" and "Liabilities of discontinued operations" on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. BMT's operating results and associated cash flows have been presented as "Discontinued operations" within the accompanying audited financial statements and prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
Customers' loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes was $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $29.2 million increase primarily resulted from restricted stock awards of BM Technologies' common stock granted to certain team members of BMT and the effect of the divestiture being treated as a taxable asset sale for tax purposes, offset in part by a tax benefit related to the restricted stock awards in 2021. See "NOTE 3 - DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information.
Preferred stock dividends and loss on redemption of preferred stock
Preferred stock dividends were $11.7 million and $14.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Customers redeemed all of the outstanding shares of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock for an aggregate payment of $82.5 million, at a redemption price of $25.00 per share. The redemption price paid in excess of the carrying value of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock of $2.8 million is included as a loss on redemption of preferred stock in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2021. After giving effect to the redemption, no shares of the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock remained outstanding. There were no changes to the amount of preferred stock outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020. See "NOTE 13 - SHAREHOLDERS EQUITY" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information.
On June 15, 2020, the Series C preferred stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 5.30% compared to a fixed rate of 7.00%. On March 15, 2021, the Series D preferred stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 5.09%, compared to a fixed rate of 6.50%. On June 15, 2021, the Series E Preferred Stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 5.14%, compared to a fixed rate of 6.45%. On December 15, 2021, the Series F Preferred Stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 4.762%, compared to a fixed rate of 6.00%.
NET INTEREST INCOME
Net interest income (the difference between the interest earned on loans and leases, investments and interest-earning deposits with banks, and interest paid on deposits, borrowed funds and subordinated debt) is the primary source of Customers' earnings. The following table summarizes Customers' net interest income, related interest spread, net interest margin and the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the major categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Information is provided for each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities with respect to (i) changes attributable to volume (i.e., changes in average balances multiplied by the prior-period average rate) and (ii) changes attributable to rate (i.e., changes in average rate multiplied by prior-period average balances). For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume which cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
(1)For presentation in this table, average balances and the corresponding average yields for investment securities are based upon historical cost, adjusted for amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts.
(2)Includes owner occupied commercial real estate loans.
(3)Includes non-accrual loans, the effect of which is to reduce the yield earned on loans and leases, and deferred loan fees.
(4)Total costs of deposits (including interest bearing and non-interest-bearing) were 0.44% and 0.89% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(5)Non-GAAP tax-equivalent basis, using an estimated marginal tax rate of 26% for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, presented to approximate interest income as a taxable asset. Management uses non-GAAP measures to present historical periods comparable to the current period presentation. In addition, management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers’ financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities. Please refer to the reconciliation schedule that follows this table.
(6)Non-GAAP tax-equivalent basis, as described in note (5) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, excluding net interest income from PPP loans and related borrowings, along with the related PPP loan balances and PPP fees receivable from interest-earning assets. Management uses non-GAAP measures to present historical periods comparable to the current period presentation. In addition, management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers’ financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities. Please refer to the reconciliation schedule that follows this table.
Net interest income increased $281.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as average interest-earning assets increased by $$3.6 billion, primarily related to PPP loan originations and purchases of the latest round of PPP loans, increases in investment securities, interest-earning deposits, commercial and industrial loans, installment loans and commercial loans to mortgage companies, partially offset by decreases in multi-family loans as the loan mix improved year-over-year. The overall average loans and leases receivable balance fluctuations were the result of Customers' strategic efforts to reduce the lower-yielding loans in the multi-family portfolio and replace them with higher-yielding commercial and industrial and installment loans. Customers plans to grow the multi-family loan portfolio in future periods. The commercial loans to mortgage companies trend has been a function of greater refinance activity due to sharply lower interest rates, an increase in home purchase volumes and market share gains from other banks since early 2020. The refinancing activity has slowed since reaching its high level in early 2021.
The NIM increased by 99 basis points to 3.70% for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 2.71% for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting primarily from the PPP loan forgiveness from the first two rounds and the latest round, as well as a shift in the mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities in a lower interest rate environment with the Federal Reserve interest rate cuts of 225 basis points beginning in August 2019. The PPP loan forgiveness from the first two rounds and the latest round, which accelerated the recognition of net deferred loan origination fees, drove a 92 basis points increase in the yield on total loans and leases and contributed to the NIM increase. The increase in interest-earning assets was primarily driven by increases in the origination and purchases of the latest round of PPP loans, investment securities, commercial and industrial loans and leases, commercial loans to mortgage companies and consumer installment loans, offset in part by decreases in multi-family loans. The shift in the mix of interest-earnings assets included $3.3 billion ($5.1 billion average balance) of PPP loans yielding 5.46%. The shift in the mix of interest-bearing liabilities in a lower interest rate environment drove a 45 basis point decline in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The shift in interest-bearing liabilities included interest-bearing deposits of $12.3 billion ($10.9 billion average balance) costing 0.57%. Customers' total cost of deposits, including interest-bearing and non-interest bearing deposits) were 0.44% and 0.89% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. PPPLF borrowings with $2.6 billion average balance costing 0.35% were fully repaid during the year ended December 31, 2021. Customers' total cost of funds, including non-interest bearing deposits and borrowings was 0.54% and 0.97% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Customers’ net interest margin tables contain non-GAAP financial measures calculated using non-GAAP amounts. These measures include net interest margin tax equivalent and net interest margin tax equivalent, excluding PPP loans. Management uses these non-GAAP measures to compare the current period presentation to historical periods in prior filings. In addition, management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers' financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities.
A reconciliation of net interest margin tax equivalent and net interest margin tax equivalent, excluding PPP loans for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is set forth below.
PROVISION FOR CREDIT LOSSES
For more information about the provision and Customers' ACL methodology and loss experience, see Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates and "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" and "NOTE 8 - LOANS AND LEASES RECEIVABLE AND ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES ON LOANS AND LEASES" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Customers maintains an ACL to cover current expected credit losses as of the balance sheet date on loans and leases held for investment that are not reported at their fair value on a recurring basis. The ACL is increased through periodic provisions for credit losses on loans and leases that are charged as an expense on the consolidated statements of income and is reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries. The loan and lease portfolio is reviewed quarterly to evaluate the performance of the portfolio and the adequacy of the ACL. The ACL is estimated as of the end of each quarter and compared to the balance recorded in the general ledger, net of charge-offs and recoveries. The allowance is adjusted to the estimated ACL balance with a corresponding charge (or debit) to the provision for credit losses on loans and leases.
The provision for credit losses is a charge to earnings to maintain the ACL at a level consistent with management’s assessment of expected lifetime losses in the loan and lease portfolio at the balance sheet date. Customers recorded provision for credit losses for loans and leases of $27.4 million and $62.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, utilizing the CECL methodology under ASC 326. Customers recorded a benefit to provision of $0.2 million and $1.1 million of lending-related commitments for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, utilizing the CECL methodology. The $35.3 million decrease in the provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the continuing improvement in macroeconomic forecasts since the beginning of COVID-19 pandemic in first quarter 2020, partially offset by the growth in loans and leases, primarily in consumer installment loans. Customers adopted ASC 326 on January 1, 2020. Upon adoption, the ACL for loans and leases and lending-related unfunded commitments increased by $79.8 million and $3.4 million, respectively, with the after-tax cumulative effect recorded to retained earnings.
Net charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $33.8 million, or 22 basis points of average total loans and leases, compared to $54.8 million, or 41 basis points of average total loans and leases for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net charge-offs primarily relate to the charge-offs in consumer installment loans, partially offset by partial charge-offs of two commercial real estate collateral dependent loans in 2020. The two commercial real estate collateral dependent loans were sold in August 2020 and January 2021.
NON-INTEREST INCOME
The table below presents the components of non-interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Deposit fees
The $1.2 million increase in deposit fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from an increase in account analysis fees from mortgage finance companies due to higher deposit volume. There can be no assurance that Customers will earn deposit fees from mortgage finance companies in 2022 comparable to 2021, given lower refinancing activity in a higher interest rate environment.
Commercial lease income
Commercial lease income represents income earned on commercial operating leases generated by Customers' Equipment Finance Group in which Customers is the lessor. The $3.0 million increase in commercial lease income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from the continued growth of Customers' equipment finance business.
Bank-owned life insurance
Bank-owned life insurance income represents income earned on life insurance policies owned by Customers including an increase in cash surrender value of the policies and any benefits paid by insurance carriers under the policies. The $1.4 million increase in bank-owned life insurance income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the increase in cash surrender value of existing and new policies purchased and benefits paid by insurance carriers under the policies.
Mortgage warehouse transactional fees
The $1.3 million increase in mortgage warehouse transactional fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from an increase in refinancing activity driven by the decline in market interest rates that began in March 2020. There can be no assurance that Customers will earn mortgage warehouse transactional fees in 2022 comparable to 2021, given lower refinancing activity in a higher interest rate environment.
Gain (loss) on sale of SBA and other loans
The $9.3 million increase in gain (loss) on sale of SBA and other loans for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from a strategic initiative to sell SBA and consumer installment loans beginning in 2021. There can be no assurance that Customers will realize gains on the sale of loans in 2022 comparable to 2021, given significant uncertainty in the capital markets.
Loan fees
The $1.9 million increase in loan fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from an increase in fees earned on unused lines of credit and other fees from commercial borrowers.
Gain (loss) on sale of investment securities
The $11.3 million increase in gain (loss) on sale of investment securities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the gains realized from the sale of $689.9 million in AFS debt securities for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $387.8 million in AFS debt securities for the year ended December 31, 2020. There can be no assurance that Customers will realize gains on the sale of investment securities in 2022 comparable to 2021, given significant uncertainty in the capital markets which may impact Customers’ investment strategy.
Unrealized gain (loss) on investment securities
The $1.3 million increase in unrealized gain (loss) on investment securities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects an increase in the unrealized gain of equity securities issued by a foreign entity that were held by CB Green Ventures Pte Ltd. and CUBI India Ventures Pte Ltd. Customers sold all outstanding shares in CB Green Ventures Pte Ltd. and CUBI India Ventures Pte Ltd. for $3.8 million in June 2021.
Loss on sale of foreign subsidiaries
The $2.8 million increase in loss on sale of foreign subsidiaries for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the realized loss from the sale of CB Green Ventures Pte Ltd. and CUBI India Ventures Pte Ltd., which held the equity securities issued by a foreign entity in June 2021. Customers sold all outstanding shares in CB Green Ventures Pte Ltd. and CUBI India Ventures Pte Ltd. for $3.8 million in June 2021.
Unrealized gain (loss) on derivatives
The $7.2 million increase in unrealized gain (loss) on derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from increases of $7.6 million in credit valuation adjustment and credit derivatives due to changes in market interest rates, partially offset by $0.5 million decrease in interest rate swap fees.
Loss on cash flow hedge derivative terminations
The $24.5 million increase in loss on cash flow hedge derivative terminations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the early terminations of derivatives designated in cash flow hedging relationships and reclassification of the realized losses from accumulated other comprehensive income to earnings because the hedged forecasted transactions were no longer probable of occurring.
Other non-interest income
The $3.9 million increase in other non-interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from a market value adjustment loss on two commercial real estate collateral dependent loans held for sale of $2.6 million in 2020, and increases of $0.8 million in gain from the sales of commercial lease assets and $0.2 million in SERP income.
On January 4, 2021, Customers completed the divestiture of BMT through a merger with MFAC. Accordingly, BMT's operating results have been presented as "Discontinued operations" within the accompanying consolidated financial statements and prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
NON-INTEREST EXPENSE
The table below presents the components of non-interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Salaries and employee benefits
The $14.1 million increase in salaries and employee benefits for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from an increase in average full-time equivalent team members needed for future growth, annual merit increases, and an increase in incentive accruals tied to Customers' overall performance, increase in stock-based compensation related to new awards and compensation expense associated with an executive's retirement and other one-time benefits.
Technology, communications, and bank operations
The $32.9 million increase in technology, communications, and bank operations expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from the continued investment in the digital transformation efforts, increases in deposit servicing fees from higher deposits and interchange maintenance fees from higher debit card spend, that were paid to BM Technologies, the successor entity to BMT that was divested on January 4, 2021.
On January 4, 2021, Customers completed the divestiture of BMT through a merger with MFAC. Accordingly, BMT's operating results have been presented as "Discontinued operations" within the accompanying consolidated financial statements and prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation. In connection with the divestiture, we have entered into various agreements with BM Technologies, including a transition services agreement, software license agreement, deposit servicing agreement, non-competition agreement and loan agreement for periods ranging from one to ten years. Customers incurred expenses of $59.5 million to BM Technologies under the deposit servicing agreement, included within the technology, communication and bank operations expense in the income from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021. The deposit service agreement is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2022 and will not be renewed. As of December 31, 2021, Customers held $1.8 billion of deposits serviced by BM Technologies, which are expected to leave Customers Bank by December 31, 2022. The loan agreement with BM Technologies was terminated early in November 2021. The transition services agreement with BM Technologies, as amended, expires on March 31, 2022, except for accounting services which expired on February 15, 2022. For additional information, refer to "NOTE 3 - DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Professional services
The $13.1 million increase in professional services for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from outside professional services used to support the PPP forgiveness process and our participation in the latest round of PPP.
Commercial lease depreciation
The $3.1 million increase in commercial lease depreciation for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the continued growth of the operating lease arrangements originated by Customers' Equipment Finance Group in which Customers is the lessor.
FDIC assessments, non-income taxes, and regulatory fees
The $1.6 million decrease in FDIC assessments, non-income taxes, and regulatory fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from a decrease in FDIC assessment rates resulting from lower premiums from Customers' improved performance rating.
Loan servicing
The $7.3 million increase in loan servicing for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from servicing fees paid to third party servicers associated with the participation in the latest round of PPP, the PPP forgiveness process, and the growth in consumer installment loans.
Merger and acquisition related expenses
The $0.9 million decrease in merger and acquisition related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the merger of BankMobile Technologies, Inc. and Megalith Financial Acquisition Corp. completed on January 4, 2021.
Loan workout
The $2.9 million decrease in loan workout for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from the workout of two commercial relationships in 2020.
Deposit relationship adjustment fees
The $6.2 million increase in deposit relationship adjustment fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from a make-whole fee paid to a single high-cost deposit customer to amend a long-term deposit contract as a part of Customers' ongoing initiative to lower its cost of funds.
Other non-interest expenses
The $7.5 million increase in other non-interest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from increases in provision for operating expenses of $1.6 million, expenses related to the participation in the latest round of PPP of $1.4 million, litigation settlement of $1.2 million, $1.0 million in charitable contributions and corporate sponsorships, $0.9 million in provision for credit losses on lending-related unfunded commitments and $0.9 million in directors fees, partially offset by a legal contingency accrual of $1.0 million related to the settlement of the previously disclosed matter with the ED in 2020.
INCOME TAXES
The table below presents income tax expense from continuing operations and the effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The $40.2 million increase in income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from an increase in pre-tax income from continuing operations. The decrease in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from an increase in investment tax credits, the recognition of a deferred tax asset related to the outside basis difference of foreign subsidiaries, excess tax benefits from stock option exercises and state apportionment rates, partially offset by the dilution of the permanent tax differences and other tax benefits as a result of higher pre-tax income from continuing operations and an increase in compensation expense associated with an executive's retirement that exceeded the limit for tax deduction purposes. For the reconciliation of the effective tax rate and the statutory federal tax rate, refer to "NOTE 16 - INCOME TAXES" to Customers' audited financial statements.
NET LOSS FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
On January 4, 2021, Customers Bancorp completed the previously announced divestiture of BMT, the technology arm of its BankMobile segment, to MFAC Merger Sub Inc., an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of MFAC, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated August 6, 2020, by and among MFAC, MFAC Merger Sub Inc., BMT, Customers Bank, the sole stockholder of BMT, and Customers Bancorp, the parent bank holding company for Customers Bank (as amended on November 2, 2020 and December 8, 2020). In connection with the closing of the divestiture, MFAC changed its name to “BM Technologies, Inc.” Following the completion of the divestiture of BMT, BankMobile's serviced deposits and loans and the related net interest income have been combined with Customers' financial condition and the results of operations as a single reportable segment.
The assets and liabilities of BMT have been presented as "Assets of discontinued operations" and "Liabilities of discontinued operations" on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. BMT's operating results and associated cash flows have been presented as "Discontinued operations" within the accompanying audited financial statements and prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
The table below presents the loss from discontinued operations, net of income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Customers' loss from discontinued operations of $20 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to loss from discontinued operations of $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted of restricted stock awards in BM Technologies' common stock distributed to certain team members of BMT in the form of severance payments and compensation costs for the restricted stock units of Customers Bancorp previously granted to certain team members of BMT that vested upon completion of the divestiture on January 4, 2021.
Income tax expense from discontinued operations of $19.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an income tax benefit of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulted from the effect of the divestiture being treated as a taxable asset sale for tax purposes, offset in part by the reversal of a valuation allowance on certain state deferred tax assets which can be realized as a result of the gain from the divestiture and the tax benefits related to the restricted stock awards in BM Technologies's common stock and vesting of restricted stock units of Customers Bancorp to certain team members of BMT.
In connection with the divestiture, Customers has also entered into various agreements with BM Technologies, including a transition services agreement, software license agreement, deposit servicing agreement, non-competition agreement and loan agreement for periods ranging from one to ten years. Customers incurred expenses of $59.5 million to BM Technologies under the deposit servicing agreement included in technology, communication and bank operations within the income from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021. The deposit service agreement is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2022 and will not be renewed. As of December 31, 2021, Customers held $1.8 billion of deposits serviced by BM Technologies, which are expected to leave Customers Bank by December 31, 2022. The loan agreement with BM Technologies was terminated early in November 2021. The transition services agreement with BM Technologies, as amended, expires on March 31, 2022, except for accounting services which expired on February 15, 2022. Refer to "NOTE 3 - DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information.
PREFERRED STOCK DIVIDENDS AND LOSS ON REDEMPTION OF PREFERRED STOCK
Preferred stock dividends were $11.7 million and $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. On September 15, 2021, Customers redeemed all of the outstanding shares of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock for an aggregate payment of $82.5 million, at a redemption price of $25.00 per share. The redemption price paid in excess of the carrying value of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock of $2.8 million is included as a loss on redemption of preferred stock in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2021. After giving effect to the redemption, no shares of the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock remained outstanding. There were no changes to the amount of preferred stock outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to "NOTE 13 - SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information.
On June 15, 2020, the Series C preferred stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 5.30% compared to a fixed rate of 7.00%. On March 15, 2021, Series D Preferred Stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 5.09%, compared to a fixed rate of 6.50%. On June 15, 2021, the Series E Preferred Stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 5.14%, compared to a fixed rate of 6.45%. On December 15, 2021, the Series F Preferred Stock became floating at three-month LIBOR plus 4.762%, compared to a fixed rate of 6.00%.
Financial Condition
General
Customers' total assets were $19.6 billion at December 31, 2021. This represented a $1.1 billion increase from total assets of $18.4 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets was primarily driven by increases of $2.6 billion in investment securities and $1.4 billion in loans and leases receivable and a decrease in ACL of $6.4 million., partially offset by decreases of $1.3 billion in loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value, $1.3 billion in loans receivable, PPP, $175.3 million in cash and cash equivalents and $62.8 million in loans held for sale.
Total liabilities were $18.2 billion at December 31, 2021. This represented a $0.9 billion increase from $17.3 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total liabilities primarily resulted from increases in total deposits of $5.5 billion and other borrowings of $99.0 million, offset in part by decreases in the PPPLF of $4.4 billion, federal funds purchased of $175.0 million and FHLB advances of $150.0 million.
On January 4, 2021, Customers Bancorp completed the previously announced divestiture of BMT, the technology arm of its BankMobile segment, to MFAC Merger Sub Inc., an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of MFAC, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated August 6, 2020, by and among MFAC, MFAC Merger Sub Inc., BMT, Customers Bank, the sole stockholder of BMT, and Customers Bancorp, the parent bank holding company for Customers Bank (as amended on November 2, 2020 and December 8, 2020). In connection with the closing of the divestiture, MFAC changed its name to “BM Technologies, Inc.” Following the completion of the divestiture of BMT, BankMobile's serviced deposits and loans and the related net interest income have been combined with Customers' financial condition and the results of operations as a single reportable segment.
BMT's historical financial results for periods prior to the divestiture are reflected in Customers Bancorp’s consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations. The assets and liabilities of BMT have been presented as "Assets of discontinued operations" and "Liabilities of discontinued operations" on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020. BMT's operating results and associated cash flows have been presented as "Discontinued operations" within the accompanying audited financial statements and prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
The following table sets forth certain key condensed balance sheet data:
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash and due from banks and interest-earning deposits. Cash and due from banks consists mainly of vault cash and cash items in the process of collection. Cash and due from banks were $35.2 million and $78.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash and cash due from banks balances vary from day to day, primarily due to variations in customers’ deposit activities with the Bank.
Interest-earning deposits consist of cash deposited at other banks, primarily the FRB. Interest-earning deposits were $482.8 million and $615.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The balance of interest-earning deposits varies from day to day, depending on several factors, such as fluctuations in customers’ deposits with Customers, payment of checks drawn on customers’ accounts and strategic investment decisions made to maximize Customers' net interest income, while effectively managing interest-rate risk and liquidity. The decrease in interest-earning deposits since December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from managing liquidity as excess funds from the forgiveness of PPP loans and customers' deposits have been invested in higher interest-earning assets.
Investment Securities
The investment securities portfolio is an important source of interest income and liquidity. It consists of mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States government, U.S. government agency securities, asset-backed securities, collateralized loan obligations, commercial mortgage-backed securities, private label collateralized mortgage obligations, state and political subdivision debt securities, corporate notes and equity securities. In addition to generating revenue, the investment portfolio is maintained to manage interest-rate risk, provide liquidity, serve as collateral for other borrowings, and diversify the credit risk of interest-earning assets. The portfolio is structured to optimize net interest income given the changes in the economic environment, liquidity position and balance sheet mix.
At December 31, 2021, investment securities totaled $3.8 billion compared to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase primarily resulted from the purchases of asset-backed securities, collateralized loan obligations, agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities, agency-guaranteed collateralized mortgage obligations, private label collateralized mortgage obligations, commercial mortgage-backed securities, corporate notes and equity securities totaling $3.6 billion, partially offset by the sale of $689.9 million of asset-backed securities, U.S. government agencies securities, agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities, agency-guaranteed collateralized mortgage obligations and corporate notes and maturities, calls and principal repayments totaling $317.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
For financial reporting purposes, AFS debt securities are carried at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses on AFS debt securities, other than credit losses, are included in other comprehensive income (loss) and reported as a separate component of shareholders’ equity, net of the related tax effect. Changes in the fair value of equity securities with a readily determinable fair value and securities reported at fair value based on a fair value option election are recorded in non-interest income in the period in which they occur.
The following table sets forth information about the maturities and weighted-average yield of the investment securities portfolio. The weighted-average yield is computed based on a constant effective interest rate over the contractual life of each security adjusted for prepayment estimates, and considers the contractual coupon, amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts. Yields are not reported on a tax-equivalent basis. Yields exclude the impact of related hedging derivatives.
The agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations in the portfolio were issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae and contain guarantees for the collection of principal and interest on the underlying mortgages.
LOANS AND LEASES
Existing lending relationships are primarily with small and middle market businesses and individual consumers primarily in Southeastern Pennsylvania (Bucks, Berks, Chester, Philadelphia and Delaware Counties); Harrisburg, Pennsylvania (Dauphin County); Rye Brook, New York (Westchester County); Hamilton, New Jersey (Mercer County); Boston, Massachusetts; Providence, Rhode Island; Portsmouth, New Hampshire (Rockingham County); Manhattan and Melville, New York; Washington, D.C.; Chicago, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; Orlando, Florida and Wilmington, North Carolina. The portfolios of loans to mortgage banking businesses is nationwide. The loan portfolio consists primarily of loans to support mortgage banking companies’ funding needs, multi-family/commercial real estate, and commercial and industrial loans. Customers continues to focus on small and middle market business loans to grow its commercial lending efforts, particularly its commercial and industrial loan and lease portfolio and its specialty mortgage lending business. Customers also focuses its lending efforts on local-market mortgage and home equity lending and the origination and purchase of unsecured consumer loans (installment loans), including personal, student loan refinancing, and home improvement loans through arrangements with fintech companies and other market place lenders nationwide. Following the completion of the divestiture of BMT, BankMobile's loans and serviced deposits and the related net interest income were combined with Customers' financial condition and the results of operations as a single reportable segment.
Commercial Lending
Customers' commercial lending is divided into six groups: Business Banking, Small and Middle Market Business Banking, Specialty Banking, Multi-Family and Commercial Real Estate Lending, Mortgage Banking Lending, and SBA Lending. This grouping is designed to allow for greater resource deployment, higher standards of risk management, strong asset quality, lower interest-rate risk and higher productivity levels. The commercial lending group focuses primarily on companies with annual revenues ranging from $1 million to $100 million, which typically have credit requirements between $0.5 million and $10 million. To further build its franchise and support the growth of its commercial lending initiatives, Customers' added three new verticals during 2021 within its Specialty Banking business which included fund finance, technology and venture capital banking and financial institutions group. These three new verticals provide financing to the private equity industry and cash management services to the alternative investment industry. Prior to adding these new verticals, its Specialty Banking business included lending to mortgage banking companies, equipment finance, warehouse lending, healthcare lending and real estate specialty finance. Customers also launched a pilot digital small balance 7(a) lending within its existing SBA Lending business in 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, Customers had $12.4 billion in commercial loans outstanding, totaling approximately 85.3% of its total loan and lease portfolio, which includes loans held for sale, loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value and PPP loans, compared to commercial loans outstanding of $14.2 billion, comprising approximately 89.8% of its total loan and lease portfolio, at December 31, 2020. Included in the $12.4 billion and $14.2 billion in commercial loans outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were $3.3 billion and $4.6 billion of PPP loans, respectively. The PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA, provided that the SBA's eligibility criteria are met and earn a fixed interest rate of 1.00%.
The small and middle market business banking platform originates loans, including SBA loans, through the branch network sales force and a team of dedicated relationship managers. The support administration of this platform is centralized including technology, risk management, product management, marketing, performance tracking and overall strategy. Credit and sales training has been established for Customers' sales force, ensuring that it has small business experts in place providing appropriate financial solutions to the small business owners in its communities. The division approach focuses on industries that offer high asset quality and are deposit rich to drive profitability.
Customers' lending to mortgage banking businesses primarily provides financing to mortgage bankers for residential mortgage originations from loan closing until sale in the secondary market. Many providers of liquidity in this segment exited the business in 2009 during a period of market turmoil. Customers saw an opportunity to provide liquidity to this business segment at attractive spreads, generate fee income and attract escrow deposits. The underlying residential loans are taken as collateral for Customers' commercial loans to the mortgage companies. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, commercial loans to mortgage banking businesses totaled $2.3 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively, and are reported as loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value on the consolidated balance sheet.
Customers has been deemphasizing its multi-family loan portfolio, and investing in high credit quality higher-yielding commercial and industrial loans with the multi-family run-off. Customers plans to grow the multi-family loan portfolio in future periods. Customers' multi-family lending group is focused on retaining a portfolio of high-quality multi-family loans within Customers' covered markets. These lending activities primarily target the refinancing of loans with other banks using conservative underwriting standards and provide purchase money for new acquisitions by borrowers. The primary collateral for these loans is a first lien mortgage on the multi-family property, plus an assignment of all leases related to such property. As of December 31, 2021, Customers had multi-family loans of $1.5 billion outstanding, comprising approximately 10.2% of the total loan and lease portfolio, compared to $1.8 billion, or approximately 11.1% of the total loan and lease portfolio, at December 31, 2020.
The Equipment Finance Group offers equipment financing and leasing products and services for a broad range of asset classes. It services vendors, dealers, independent finance companies, bank-owned leasing companies and strategic direct customers in the plastics, packaging, machine tool, construction, transportation and franchise markets. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Customers had $378.7 million and $288.4 million, respectively, of equipment finance loans outstanding. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Customers had $146.5 million and $108.0 million of equipment finance leases outstanding, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Customers had $117.4 million and $102.9 million, respectively, of operating leases entered into under this program, net of accumulated depreciation of $40.7 million and $28.9 million, respectively.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law and created funding for a new product called the PPP. The PPP is administered by the SBA and is intended to assist organizations with payroll related expenses. Customers, directly or through fintech partnerships and acquisitions, had $3.3 billion and $4.6 billion of PPP loans outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are fully guaranteed by the SBA, provided that the SBA's eligibility criteria are met and earn a fixed interest rate of 1.00%. The average loan size of the PPP portfolio from the first two rounds is approximately $50 thousand and approximately $20 thousand from the latest round.
Consumer Lending
Customers provides unsecured consumer loans, residential mortgage, and home equity loans to customers nationwide primarily through relationships with fintech companies. The installment loan portfolio consists largely of originated and purchased personal, student loan refinancing and home improvement loans. None of the loans are considered sub-prime at the time of origination. Customers has executed digitally over $1 billion in direct personal loan originations. Customers considers sub-prime borrowers to be those with FICO scores below 660. Customers has been selective in the consumer loans it has been purchasing. Home equity lending is offered to solidify customer relationships and grow relationship revenues in the long term. This lending is important in Customers' efforts to grow total relationship revenues for its consumer households. As of December 31, 2021, Customers had $2.1 billion in consumer loans outstanding, or 14.7% of the total loan and lease portfolio, compared to $1.6 billion, or 10.3% of the total loan and lease portfolio, as of December 31, 2020.
Purchases and sales of loans were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Amounts reported represent the unpaid principal balance at time of purchase. The purchase price was 100.8%, 100.3% and 100.3% of the loans' unpaid principal balance during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)Installment loan purchases for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consist of third-party originated unsecured consumer loans. None of the loans are considered sub-prime at the time of origination. Customers considers sub-prime borrowers to be those with FICO scores below 660.
(3)For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, loan sales resulted in net gains of $12.9 million, $2.0 million and $2.8 million, respectively, included in gain (loss) on sale of SBA and other loans and mortgage banking income in the consolidated statements of income.
(4)Primarily sales of SBA loans.
Loans Held for Sale
The composition of loans held for sale as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
At December 31, 2021, loans held for sale totaled $16.3 million, or 0.1% of the total loan and lease portfolio, and $79.1 million, or 0.5% of the total loan and lease portfolio, at December 31, 2020. During 2020, Customers transferred $401.1 million of multi-family loans from loans held for sale to loans receivable (held for investment) because it no longer had the intent to sell these loans. Customers transferred these loans at their carrying value, which approximated their fair value at the time of transfer.
Loans held for sale are carried on the balance sheet at either fair value (due to the election of the fair value option) or at the lower of cost or fair value. An ACL is not recorded on loans that are classified as held for sale.
Total Loans and Leases Receivable
The composition of total loans and leases receivable (excluding loans held for sale) was as follows:
(1)Includes direct finance leases of $146.5 million and $108.0 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(2)Includes deferred (fees) costs and unamortized (discounts) premiums, net of $(52.0) million and $(54.6) million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans receivable, PPP
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law and created funding for a new product called the PPP. The PPP is administered by the SBA and is intended to assist organizations with payroll related expenses. Customers had $3.3 billion and $4.6 billion of PPP loans outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which are fully guaranteed by the SBA, provided that the SBA's eligibility criteria are met and earn a fixed interest rate of 1.00%. Customers recognized interest income, including origination fees, of $279.2 million and $65.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value
The mortgage warehouse product line primarily provides financing to mortgage companies nationwide from the time of origination of the underlying mortgage loans until the mortgage loans are sold into the secondary market. As a mortgage warehouse lender, Customers provides a form of financing to mortgage bankers by purchasing for resale the underlying residential mortgages on a short-term basis under a master repurchase agreement. These loans are reported as loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value on the consolidated balance sheets. Because these loans are reported at their fair value, they do not have an ACL and are therefore excluded from ACL related disclosures. At December 31, 2021, all of Customers' commercial mortgage warehouse loans were current in terms of payment.
Customers is subject to the risks associated with such lending, including, but not limited to, the risks of fraud, bankruptcy and default of the mortgage banker or of the underlying residential borrower, any of which could result in credit losses. Customers' mortgage warehouse lending team members monitor these mortgage originators by obtaining financial and other relevant information to reduce these risks during the lending period. Loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value totaled $2.3 billion and $3.6 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loans and leases receivable
Loans and leases receivable (excluding loans held for sale, loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value, and loans receivable, PPP), net of the ACL, increased by $1.4 billion to $8.9 billion at December 31, 2021, from $7.4 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in loans and leases receivable, net of the ACL, was attributable to $6.4 million decrease in ACL, as further described below, and higher balances in the commercial and industrial, owner occupied commercial real estate, construction, consumer installment and residential real estate loan portfolios, with each portfolio increasing by $1.1 billion, $82.6 million, $58.1 million, $509.1 million, and $17.6 million respectively, from December 31, 2020. These increases were partially offset by reductions in the multi-family, non-owner occupied commercial real estate and manufactured housing loan portfolios, with each portfolio decreasing by $275.0 million, $75.3 million and $9.4 million, respectively, from December 31, 2020. The overall loans and leases receivable fluctuations were the result of Customers' strategic efforts to reduce the lower-yielding loans in the multi-family portfolio and replace them with higher-yielding commercial and industrial and installment loans. Customers plans to grow the multi-family loan portfolio in future periods.
The following table presents Customers' loans receivable (excluding loans held for sale, loans receivable, at fair value, and loans receivable, PPP) as of December 31, 2021 based on the remaining term to contractual maturity:
The following table presents the distribution of those loans that mature in more than one year between predetermined rates and floating or adjustable rates as of December 31, 2021:
Credit Risk
Customers manages credit risk by maintaining diversification in its loan and lease portfolio, establishing and enforcing prudent underwriting standards and collection efforts and continuous and periodic loan and lease classification reviews. Management also considers the effect of credit risk on financial performance by reviewing quarterly and maintaining an adequate ACL. Credit losses are charged-off when they are identified, and provisions are added for current expected credit losses, to the ACL at least quarterly. The ACL is estimated at least quarterly.
The provision for credit losses on loans and leases was $27.4 million and $62.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The ACL maintained for loans and leases receivable (excluding loans held for sale and loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value and PPP loans) was $137.8 million, or 1.53% of loans and leases receivable at December 31, 2021, and $144.2 million, or 1.90% of loans receivable, at December 31, 2020. Excluding loans receivable, PPP from total loans and leases receivable is a non-GAAP measure. Management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers' financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities. Please refer to the reconciliation schedule below.
The decrease in the ACL resulted primarily from lower ACL for the commercial loan portfolio due to continued improvement in macroeconomic forecasts at December 31, 2021, as compared to the impact of reserve build for the COVID-19 pandemic at December 31, 2020, offset in part by the increase in ACL for the consumer installment loan portfolio due to loan growth. Net charge-offs were $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $21.0 million compared to $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Commercial real estate non-owner occupied charge-offs in 2020 were attributable to the partial charge-off of two collateral dependent loans, which are not indicative of the overall commercial real estate portfolio. Installment charge-offs were attributable to originated and purchased unsecured consumer loans through arrangements with fintech companies and other market place lenders, which increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 consistent with the loan growth. Please refer to the table of changes in Customers' ACL for net-charge offs to average loans by loan type for the periods indicated.
A reconciliation of the coverage of ACL for loans and leases held for investment to the ACL for loans and leases held for investment, excluding PPP loans as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is set forth below.
The table below presents changes in Customers' ACL for the periods indicated.
(1) Charge-offs and recoveries on PCD and PCI loans that are accounted for in pools are recognized on a net basis when the pool matures.
The ACL is based on a quarterly evaluation of the loan and lease portfolio and is maintained at a level that management considers adequate to absorb expected losses as of the balance sheet date. All commercial loans, with the exception of PPP loans and commercial mortgage warehouse loans, which are reported at fair value, are assigned internal credit-risk ratings, based upon an assessment of the borrower, the structure of the transaction and the available collateral and/or guarantees. All loans and leases are monitored regularly by the responsible officer, and the risk ratings are adjusted when considered appropriate. The risk assessment allows management to identify problem loans and leases timely. Management considers a variety of factors and recognizes the inherent risk of loss that always exists in the lending process. Management uses a disciplined methodology to estimate an appropriate level of ACL. Refer to Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates herein and "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" to Customers' audited financial statements for Customers' adoption of CECL and management's methodology for estimating the ACL.
Approximately 50% of Customers’ commercial real estate, commercial and residential construction, consumer residential and commercial and industrial loan types have real estate as collateral (collectively, “the real estate portfolio”), primarily in the form of a first lien position. Current appraisals providing current value estimates of the property are received when Customers' credit group determines that the facts and circumstances have significantly changed since the date of the last appraisal, including that real estate values have deteriorated. The credit committee and loan officers review loans that are 15 or more days delinquent and all non-accrual loans on a periodic basis. In addition, loans where the loan officers have identified a “borrower of interest” are discussed to determine if additional analysis is necessary to apply the risk-rating criteria properly. The risk ratings for the real estate loan portfolio are determined based upon the current information available, including but not limited to discussions with the borrower, updated financial information, economic conditions within the geographic area and other factors that may affect the cash flow of the loan. If a loan is individually evaluated for impairment, the collateral value or discounted cash flow analysis is generally used to determine the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral, net of estimated selling costs, and compared to the outstanding loan balance to determine the amount of reserve necessary, if any. Appraisals used in this evaluation process are typically less than two years aged. For loans where real estate is not the primary source of collateral, updated financial information is obtained, including accounts receivable and inventory aging reports and relevant supplemental financial data to estimate the fair value of the loan, net of estimated selling costs, and compared to the outstanding loan balance to estimate the required reserve.
These impairment measurements are inherently subjective as they require material estimates, including, among others, estimates of property values in appraisals, the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows on individual loans, and general considerations for historical loss experience, economic conditions, uncertainties in estimating losses and inherent risks in the various credit portfolios, all of which require judgment and may be susceptible to significant change over time and as a result of changing economic conditions or other factors. Pursuant to ASC 326, individually assessed loans, consisting primarily of non-accrual and restructured loans, are considered in the methodology for determining the ACL. Individually assessed loans are generally evaluated based on the expected future cash flows or the fair value of the underlying collateral (less estimated costs to sell) if principal repayment is expected to come from the operation or sale of such collateral. Shortfalls in the underlying collateral value for loans or leases determined to be collateral dependent are charged off immediately. Subsequent to an appraisal or other fair value estimate, management will assess whether there was a further decline in the value of the collateral based on changes in market conditions or property use that would require additional impairment to be recorded to reflect the particular situation, thereby increasing the ACL on loans and leases.
The following table shows the ACL by various portfolios as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Asset Quality
Customers segments the loan and lease receivables by product or other characteristic generally defining a shared characteristic with other loans or leases in the same group. Charge-offs from originated and acquired loans and leases are absorbed by the ACL. Section 4013 of the CARES Act, as amended by the CAA, gives entities temporary relief from the accounting and disclosure requirements for TDRs. In addition, on April 7, 2020, certain regulatory banking agencies issued an interagency statement that offers practical expedients for evaluating whether loan modifications in response to the COVID-19 pandemic are TDRs. For COVID-19 related loan modifications which met the loan modification criteria under either the CARES Act, as amended, or the criteria specified by the regulatory agencies, Customers elected to suspend TDR accounting for such loan modifications. At December 31, 2021, there were no commercial deferments related to COVID-19. At December 31, 2021, consumer deferments related to COVID-19 were $6.1 million. At December 31, 2020, commercial and consumer deferments related to COVID-19 were $202.1 million and $16.4 million, respectively. The schedule that follows includes both loans held for sale and loans held for investment. Customers had no pending commercial loan deferment requests as of December 31, 2021.
Asset Quality at December 31, 2021
Asset Quality at December 31, 2021 (continued)
(1)Excluding loans receivable, PPP from total loans and leases receivable is a non-GAAP measure. Management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers' financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities. Please refer to the reconciliation schedules that follow this table.
(2)The tables exclude PPP loans of $3.3 billion, of which $6.3 million were 30-59 days past due and $21.8 million were 60 days or more past due as of December 31, 2021. PPP loans of $4.6 billion, were all current as of December 31, 2020. Claims for guarantee payments are submitted to the SBA for eligible PPP loans more than 60 days past due.
Customers’ asset quality table contains non-GAAP financial measures which exclude loans receivable, PPP from their calculations. Management uses these non-GAAP measures to compare the current period presentation to historical periods in prior filings. In addition, management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers’ financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities.
A reconciliation of loans and leases receivable, excluding loans receivable, PPP and other related amounts, at December 31, 2021, is set forth below.
(1)Loans and leases receivable include PPP loans that are past due, as claims for guarantee payments are submitted to the SBA for eligible PPP loans more than 60 days past due.
The total loan and lease portfolio was $14.6 billion at December 31, 2021 compared to $15.8 billion at December 31, 2020 and $49.6 million, or 0.34% of loans and leases, were non-performing at December 31, 2021 compared to $70.5 million, or 0.45% of loans and leases, at December 31, 2020. The loan and lease portfolio was supported by an ACL of $137.8 million (277.72% of NPLs and 0.95% of total loans and leases) and $144.2 million (204.48% of NPLs and 0.91% of total loans and leases), at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The tables below set forth non-accrual loans, NPAs and asset quality ratios:
(1)Excludes PCD loans at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(1)Excludes loans held for sale, loans receivable, mortgage warehouse, at fair value, and loans receivable, PPP. Excluding loans receivable, PPP from total loans and leases receivable is a non-GAAP measure. Management believes the use of these non-GAAP measures provides additional clarity when assessing Customers' financial results. These disclosures should not be viewed as substitutes for results determined to be in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures that may be presented by other entities. Please refer to the reconciliation schedules above that precedes this table.
The asset quality ratios related to NPAs, including non-accrual loans improved at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 primarily due to the sale of a multi-family loan in 2021, which was classified as held for sale at December 31, 2020. Please refer to Credit Risk above for information about the decrease in ACL affecting the related asset quality ratios at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020.
The table below sets forth loans that were non-performing at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Asset quality assurance activities include careful monitoring of borrower payment status and the periodic review of borrower current financial information to ensure ongoing financial strength and borrower cash flow viability. Customers has established credit policies and procedures, seeks the consistent application of those policies and procedures across the organization and adjusts policies as appropriate for changes in market conditions and applicable regulations.
Problem Loan Identification and Management
To facilitate the monitoring of credit quality within the commercial and industrial, multi-family, commercial real estate and construction portfolios and for purposes of analyzing historical loss rates used in the determination of the ACL for individually assessed loans, Customers utilizes the following categories of risk ratings: pass (there are six risk ratings for pass loans), special mention, substandard, doubtful or loss. The risk-rating categories, which are derived from standard regulatory rating definitions, are assigned upon initial approval of credit to borrowers and updated regularly thereafter. Pass ratings, which are assigned to those borrowers who do not have identified potential or well-defined weaknesses and for whom there is a high likelihood of orderly repayment, are updated periodically based on the size and credit characteristics of the borrower. All other categories are updated on a quarterly basis, generally during the month preceding the end of the calendar quarter. While assigning risk ratings involves judgment, the risk-rating process allows management to identify riskier credits in a timely manner and allocate the appropriate resources to manage the loans and leases. PPP loans are excluded as these loans are fully guaranteed by the SBA.
Customers assigns a special mention rating to loans and leases that have potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If not addressed, these potential weaknesses may, at some future date, result in the deterioration of the repayment prospects for the loan and lease and Customers' financial position. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, special mention loans and leases were $230.1 million and $250.6 million, respectively, and are considered performing loans and are therefore not included in the tables above.
Risk ratings are not established for residential real estate, home equity loans, and installment loans mainly because these portfolios consist of a larger number of homogeneous loans with smaller balances. Instead, these portfolios are evaluated for risk mainly based on aggregate payment history through the monitoring of delinquency levels and trends.
A regular reporting and review process is in place to provide for proper portfolio oversight and control and to monitor those loans and leases identified as problem credits by management. This process is designed to assess Customers' progress in working toward a solution and to assist in determining an appropriate ACL. All loan work-out situations involve the active participation of management and are reported regularly to the Board of Directors. When a loan or lease becomes delinquent for 90 days or more, or earlier if considered appropriate, the loan is assigned to SAG for workout or other resolution.
Loan and lease charge-offs are determined on a case-by-case basis. Loans and leases are generally charged-off when principal is likely to be unrecoverable and after appropriate collection steps have been taken. Loan and lease charge-offs are proposed by the SAG and approved by the Board of Directors.
Loan and lease policies and procedures are reviewed internally for possible revisions and changes on a regular basis. In addition, these policies and procedures, together with the loan and lease portfolio, are reviewed on a periodic basis by various regulatory agencies and by our internal, external and loan review auditors, as part of their examination and audit procedures.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
At December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, there were $16.5 million, $16.1 million and $13.3 million, respectively, in loans categorized as a TDR. TDRs are reported as impaired loans in the period of their restructuring and are evaluated to determine whether they should be placed on non-accrual status. In subsequent years, a TDR may be returned to accrual status if the borrower satisfies a minimum six-month performance requirement; however, it will remain classified as impaired. Generally, Customers requires sustained performance for nine months before returning a TDR to accrual status.
Modification of PCD loans that are accounted for within loan pools in accordance with the accounting standards for PCD loans does not result in the removal of these loans from the pool even if the modification would otherwise be considered a TDR. Accordingly, as each pool is accounted for as a single asset with a single composite interest rate and an expectation of cash flows, modifications of loans within such pools are not reported as TDRs.
TDR modifications primarily involve interest-rate concessions, extensions of term, deferrals of principal and other modifications. Other modifications typically reflect other nonstandard terms which Customers would not offer in non-troubled situations. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, loans aggregating $3.5 million, $3.7 million and $1.4 million, respectively, were modified in TDRs. TDR modifications of loans within the commercial and industrial category were primarily extensions of term, deferrals of principal and other modifications; modifications of residential real estate loans were primarily extensions of term and deferrals of principal; and modifications of manufactured housing loans were primarily interest rate concessions, extensions of term and deferrals of principal. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, there were no commitments to lend additional funds to debtors whose loans have been modified in TDRs.
As of December 31, 2021, 21 installment loans totaling $263 thousand, two manufactured housing loans totaling $71 thousand and one residential real estate loan for $121 thousand that were modified in TDRs within the past twelve months defaulted on payments. As of December 31, 2020, 15 installment loans totaling $226 thousand, six manufactured housing loans totaling $236 thousand and three residential real estate loans totaling $152 thousand that were modified in TDRs within the past twelve months defaulted on payments. As of December 31, 2019, three manufactured housing loans totaling $73 thousand and one residential real estate loan for $81 thousand that were modified in TDRs within the past twelve months defaulted on payments.
Loans modified in TDRs are evaluated for impairment. The nature and extent of impairment of TDRs, including those that have experienced a subsequent default, is considered in the determination of an appropriate level of ACL.
ACCRUED INTEREST RECEIVABLE
At December 31, 2021, accrued interest receivable totaled $92.2 million compared to $80.4 million at December 31, 2020. The increase primarily resulted from an increase in outstanding balances of interest-earning assets.
BANK PREMISES AND EQUIPMENT AND OTHER ASSETS
At December 31, 2021, bank premises and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization, totaled $8.9 million compared to $11.2 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease primarily resulted from purchases of bank premises and equipment of $0.6 million, partially offset by depreciation and amortization expenses of $2.3 million.
At December 31, 2021, Customers Bank’s restricted stock holdings totaled $64.6 million compared to $71.4 million at December 31, 2020. These holdings consist of stock of the FRB, the FHLB and Atlantic Community Bankers Bank and are required as part of our relationship with these banks.
At December 31, 2021, the cash surrender value of BOLI totaled $333.7 million compared to $280.1 million at December 31, 2020. Presented within BOLI on the consolidated balance sheet is the cash surrender value of the SERP balances of $11.5 million and $4.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Customers purchased additional BOLI and entered into the 2021 SERPs during the year ended December 31, 2021. For additional information, see "NOTE 14 - EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS" to Customers' audited financial statements.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, other assets totaled $305.6 million and $338.4 million, respectively. Other assets consist primarily of cash pledged for swaps, ROU lease assets, operating leases through Customers' Equipment Finance Group (net investment in operating leases of $118.3 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $103.9 million at December 31, 2020), mark-to-market adjustments for interest-rate swaps, investments in affordable housing projects, deferred tax assets, net, origination fees receivable from the SBA on certain PPP loans and prepaid expenses.
DEPOSITS
Customers offers a variety of deposit accounts, including checking, savings, MMDA and time deposits. Deposits are primarily obtained from Customers' geographic service area and nationwide through branchless digital banking, our white label relationship, deposit brokers, listing services and other relationships. In 2021, Customers began accepting non-interest bearing demand deposits from new customers on the TassatPay instant blockchain payments platform which launched in October 2021. Customers Bank provides blockchain-based digital payments via CBIT, which allows clients to make instant payments in U.S. dollars. CBIT may only be created by, transferred to and redeemed by commercial customers of Customers Bank on the instant B2B payments platform by maintaining U.S. dollars in non-interest bearing deposits at Customers Bank. As of December 31, 2021, Customers Bank held $1.9 billion of deposits from new customers participating in CBIT. For additional information, see "NOTE 11 - DEPOSITS" to Customers' audited financial statements.
The components of deposits at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Total deposits were $16.8 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $5.5 billion, or 48.3%, from $11.3 billion at December 31, 2020. Non-time deposits increased by $5.6 billion, or 52.7%, to $16.3 billion at December 31, 2021, from $10.7 billion at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by Customers' initiative to improve its net interest margin by expanding its sources of lower-cost funding. These efforts led to increases in non-interest bearing demand deposits of $2.1 billion and interest bearing demand deposits of $4.1 billion. These increases were offset in part by decreases in savings, including MMDA, of $593.9 million, or 10.0% and time deposits of $144.6 million, or 22.2%.
At December 31, 2021 the Bank had $480.5 million in state and municipal deposits to which it had pledged $475.3 million of available borrowing capacity through the FHLB to the depositors through a letter of credit arrangement.
The total amount of estimated uninsured deposits totaled $12.1 billion and $7.3 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Time deposits greater than the FDIC limit of $250,000 totaled $259.0 million and $297.7 million at December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021, the scheduled maturities of uninsured time deposits were as follows:
Average deposit balances by type and the associated average rate paid are summarized below:
FHLB ADVANCES AND OTHER BORROWINGS
Borrowed funds from various sources are generally used to supplement deposit growth and meet other operating needs. Customers' borrowings generally include short-term and long-term advances from the FHLB, FRB, including from the PPPLF, federal funds purchased, senior unsecured notes and subordinated debt. Subordinated debt is also considered as Tier 2 capital for certain regulatory calculations. See "NOTE 12 - BORROWINGS" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information on Customers' borrowings.
Short-term debt
Short-term debt at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was as follows:
Long-term debt
FHLB and FRB Advances
Long-term FHLB and FRB advances at December 31, 2021 and 2020, were as follows:
There were no long-term advances outstanding with the FHLB or FRB at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Beginning in second quarter 2020, Customers began participating in the PPPLF, in which Federal Reserve Banks extend non-recourse loans to institutions that are eligible to make PPP loans. Only PPP loans that are guaranteed by the SBA under the PPP, with respect to both principal and interest that are originated or purchased by an eligible institution, may pledge as collateral to the Federal Reserve Banks. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Customers repaid the PPPLF advances. No new advances are available from the PPPLF after July 30, 2021.
The maximum borrowing capacity with the FHLB and FRB at December 31, 2021 and 2020, was as follows:
(1)Amounts reported in the above table exclude borrowings under the PPPLF, which are limited to the unpaid principal balance of the loans originated under the PPP. At December 31, 2021, Customers had no borrowings under the PPPLF. At December 31, 2020, Customers had $4.4 billion of borrowings under the PPPLF.
Senior Notes and Subordinated Debt
Long-term senior notes and subordinated debt at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
(1)The senior notes will bear an annual fixed rate of 2.875% until August 15, 2026. From August 15, 2026 until maturity, the notes will bear an annual interest rate equal to a benchmark rate. which is expected to be the three-month term SOFR, plus 0.0235 basis points. Customers Bancorp has the ability to call the senior notes, in whole, or in part, at a redemption price equal to100% of the principal balance at certain times on or after August 15, 2026.
(2)The subordinated notes qualify as Tier 2 capital for regulatory capital purposes.
(3)Customers Bancorp has the ability to call the subordinated notes, in whole, or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal balance at certain times on or after December 30, 2029.
(4)The subordinated notes will bear an annual fixed rate of 6.125% until June 26, 2024. From June 26, 2024 until maturity, the notes will bear an annual interest rate equal to the three-month LIBOR plus 344.3 basis points. Customers Bank has the ability to call the subordinated notes, in whole, or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal balance at certain times on or after June 26, 2024.
SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The components of shareholders’ equity were as follows at the dates indicated:
Shareholders' equity increased by $249.1 million, or 22.3%, to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2021, when compared to shareholders' equity of $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase primarily resulted from increases in retained earnings of $267.2 million, additional paid in capital of $86.8 million and accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net of $0.8 million, offset by a decrease in preferred stock of $79.7 million and an increase in treasury stock of $27.7 million.
The decrease in preferred stock resulted from redemption of all of the outstanding shares of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock for an aggregate payment of $82.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to "NOTE 13 - SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information on the redemption of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock.
The increase in additional paid in capital primarily resulted from the sale of BMT that was accounted for as a sale of non-controlling interest and the merger between BMT and MFAC was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization of $31.9 million, merger related expense of $19.6 million in the form of restricted stock awards in BM Technologies' common stock to certain team members of BMT, $13.9 million from share-based compensation expense and $21.5 million from the issuance of common stock under share-based compensation arrangements for the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to "NOTE 3 - DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information on the divestiture of BMT.
The increase in retained earnings primarily resulted from net income of $314.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by $33.0 million of special dividends in connection with the divestiture of BMT, preferred stock dividends of $11.7 million and a loss of $2.8 million for the redemption price paid in excess of the carrying value of all of the outstanding shares of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock and for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The increase in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), net primarily resulted from an increase of $12.3 million and income tax effect of $3.2 million in the fair value of cash flow hedges due to changes in market interest rates and reclassification of $27.0 million in losses and income tax effect of $7.0 million from the termination of derivatives designated as cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions that are deemed no longer probable of occurring during the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by unrealized losses of $6.8 million on AFS debt securities and income tax effect of $1.8 million and reclassification of $31.4 million in gains and income tax effect of $8.2 million resulting from the sales of AFS debt securities during the year ended December 31, 2021. Refer to "NOTE 21 - DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS AND HEDGING ACTIVITIES" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information on the termination of cash flow hedges.
The increase treasury stock resulted from repurchase of 527,789 shares of common stock for $27.7 million pursuant to the Share Repurchase Program during the year ended December 31, 2021. On August 25, 2021, the Board of Directors of Customers Bancorp authorized the Share Repurchase Program to repurchase up to 3,235,326 shares of the Company's common stock (representing 10% of the Company’s outstanding shares of common stock on June 30, 2021). The term of the Share Repurchase Program will extend for one year from September 27, 2021, unless earlier terminated. Purchases of shares under the Share Repurchase Program may be executed through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, through the use of Rule 10b5-1 plans, or otherwise. The exact number of shares, timing for such purchases, and the price and terms at and on which such purchases are to be made will be at the discretion of the Company and will comply with all applicable regulatory limitations. Refer to "NOTE 13 - SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information on the repurchase of common shares.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity for a financial institution is a measure of that institution’s ability to meet depositors’ needs for funds, to satisfy or fund loan commitments and for other operating purposes. Ensuring adequate liquidity is an objective of the asset/liability management process. Customers coordinates its management of liquidity with its interest-rate sensitivity and capital position, and strives to maintain a strong liquidity position that is sufficient to meet Customers' short-term and long-term needs, commitments and contractual obligations.
Customers is involved with financial instruments and other commitments with off-balance sheet risks. Financial instruments with off-balance sheet risks are incurred in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of the Bank's customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, including unused portions of lines of credit and standby letters of credit. Those instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk in excess of the amount recognized on the balance sheet.
With commitments to extend credit, exposure to credit loss in the event of non-performance by the other party to the financial instrument is represented by the contractual amount of those instruments. The same credit policies are used in making commitments and conditional obligations as for on-balance-sheet instruments. Because they involve credit risk similar to extending a loan and lease, these financial instruments are subject to the Bank’s credit policy and other underwriting standards. See "NOTE 18 - FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS WITH OFF-BALANCE-SHEET RISK" to Customers' audited financial statements.As described in "NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION" to Customers' audited financial statements, ACL on lending related commitments is a liability account, calculated in accordance with ASC 326, representing expected credit losses over the contractual period for which Customers is exposed to credit risk resulting from a contractual obligation to extend credit. No ACL is recognized if Customers have the unconditional right to cancel the obligation. Off-balance-sheet credit commitments primarily consist of amounts available under outstanding lines of credit and letters of credit disclosed above. For the period of exposure, the estimate of expected credit losses considers both the likelihood that funding will occur and the amount expected to be funded over the estimated remaining life of the commitment or other off-balance-sheet exposure. Customers estimates the expected credit losses for undrawn or unfunded commitments using a usage given default calculation. The lifetime loss rates for off-balance sheet credit exposures are calculated in the same manner as on-balance sheet credit exposures, using the same models and economic forecasts, adjusted for the estimated likelihood that funding will occur. Customers recorded $3.4 million of ACL for lending related commitments upon its adoption of ASC 326 and recognized a benefit to credit losses of $1.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting in an ACL of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2020. Customers recognized a benefit to credit losses of $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 resulting in an ACL of $2.1 million as of December 31, 2021. The ACL on lending-related commitments is recorded in accrued interest payable and other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and the credit loss expense is recorded as a provision for credit losses within other non-interest expense in the consolidated income statement.
Customers' contractual obligations and other commitments representing required and potential cash outflows include operating leases, demand deposits, time deposits, federal funds purchased, short-term advances from FHLB, unsecured senior notes, subordinated debt, loan and other commitments as of December 31, 2021. See "NOTE 9 - LEASES", "NOTE 11 - DEPOSITS", "NOTE 12 - BORROWINGS" and "NOTE 18 - FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS WITH OFF-BALANCE-SHEET RISK" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional information.
Customers' investment portfolio provides periodic cash flows through regular maturities and amortization and can be used as collateral to secure additional funding. Customers' principal sources of funds are deposits, borrowings, principal and interest payments on loans and leases, other funds from operations, and proceeds from common and preferred stock issuances. Borrowing arrangements are maintained with the FHLB and the FRB to meet short-term liquidity needs. Longer-term borrowing arrangements are also maintained with the FHLB and FRB. As of December 31, 2021, Customers' borrowing capacity with the FHLB was $3.0 billion, of which $700.0 million was utilized in borrowings and commitments and $475.3 million of available capacity was utilized to collateralize state and municipal deposits. As of December 31, 2020, Customers' borrowing capacity with the FHLB was $2.7 billion, of which $854.2 million was utilized in borrowings and commitments; and $1.2 billion of available capacity was used to collateralize state and municipal deposits. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Customers' borrowing capacity with the FRB was $183.1 million and $223.3 million, respectively.
Beginning in second quarter 2020, Customers began participating in the PPPLF, in which Federal Reserve Banks extend non-recourse loans to institutions that are eligible to make PPP loans. Only PPP loans that are guaranteed by the SBA under the PPP, with respect to both principal and interest that are originated or purchased by an eligible institution, may be pledged as collateral to the Federal Reserve Banks. As of December 31, 2021, Customers had no borrowings under the PPPLF. As of December 31, 2020, Customers had $4.4 billion in borrowings under the PPPLF. No new advances are available from the PPPLF after July 30, 2021.
In October 2021, Customers Bank launched CBIT on the TassatPay blockchain-based instant B2B payments platform, which serves a growing array of B2B clients who want the benefit of instant payments: including key over-the-counter desks, exchanges, liquidity providers, market makers, funds, and B2B verticals such as trading operations, real estate, manufacturing, and logistics. CBIT may only be created by, transferred to and redeemed by commercial customers of Customers Bank on the instant B2B payments platform by maintaining U.S. dollars in non-interest bearing deposits at Customers Bank. CBIT is not listed or traded on any digital currency exchange. As of December 31, 2021, Customers Bank held $1.9 billion of deposits from new customers participating in CBIT.
The principal source of the Bancorp's liquidity is the dividends it receives from the Bank, which may be impacted by the following: bank-level capital needs, laws and regulations, corporate policies, contractual restrictions and other factors. The Bank has generated sufficient positive cash flows from operations to pay dividends to the Bancorp. However, there are statutory and regulatory limitations on the ability of the Bank to pay dividends or make other capital distributions or to extend credit to the Bancorp or its non-bank subsidiaries.
The table below summarizes Customers' cash flows from continuing operations for the years indicated:
Cash flows provided by (used in) continuing operating activities
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $295.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from net income of $354.3 million, an increase of $103.0 million in accrued interest payable and other liabilities and a decrease of $46.7 million in accrued interest receivable and other assets, partially offset by non-cash operating adjustments of $208.4 million.
Cash provided by continuing operating activities of $133.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from net income of $143.0 million, non-cash operating adjustments of $48.1 million and an increase of $50.4 million in accrued interest payable and other liabilities, partially offset by an increase of $108.1 million in accrued interest receivable and other assets.
Cash flows provided by (used in) continuing investing activities
Cash used in continuing investing activities of $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from purchases of investment securities available for sale of $3.6 billion and purchases of loans of $1.9 billion, partially offset by a net decrease in loans and leases, excluding mortgage warehouse loans, of $1.7 billion, primarily from the forgiveness of PPP loans, net of originations and
purchases, net repayments of mortgage warehouse loans of $1.3 billion, proceeds from sales of investment securities available for sale of $689.9 million, proceeds from sales of loans of $398.0 million and proceeds from maturities, calls and principal repayments on investment securities of $317.0 million.
Cash used in continuing investing activities of $6.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from a net increase in loans and leases, excluding mortgage warehouse loans of $4.2 billion primarily related to PPP loan originations, net originations of mortgage warehouse loans of $1.4 billion, purchases of investment securities available for sale of $1.2 billion and purchases of loans of $271.0 million, partially offset by proceeds from sales of investment securities available for sale of $387.8 million, proceeds from maturities, calls and principal repayments on investment securities of $236.1 million and proceeds from sales of loans of $26.4 million.
Cash flows provided by (used in) continuing financing activities
Cash provided by continuing financing activities of $754.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from net increase of $5.5 billion in deposits and $98.8 million from issuance of 2.875% fixed-to-floating rate senior notes, partially offset by net decreases in long-term borrowed funds from the PPPLF of $4.4 billion, net federal funds purchased of $175.0 million, net short-term borrowed funds from the FHLB of $150.0 million, redemption of the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock of $82.5 million and purchases of treasury stock of $27.7 million. Customers fully repaid the borrowings from the PPPLF during the year ended December 31, 2021 due to increased PPP loan forgiveness and funding from deposits. For additional information on the redemption of preferred stock and purchases of treasury stock, refer to "NOTE 11 - SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY" to Customers' unaudited consolidated financial statements.
Cash provided by continuing financing activities of $6.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from increases in borrowed funds from the PPPLF of $4.4 billion primarily to finance the PPP loan originations and deposits of $2.7 billion, partially offset by an decrease in net federal funds purchased of $288.0 million.
Cash flows from discontinued operations
On January 4, 2021, Customers Bancorp completed the previously announced divestiture of BMT. BMT's operating results and associated cash flows have been presented as "Discontinued operations" within the consolidated financial statements and prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation. In connection with the divestiture, Customers entered into various agreements with BM Technologies, including a transition services agreement, software license agreement, deposit servicing agreement, non-competition agreement and loan agreement for periods ranging from one to ten years. The deposit service agreement is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2022 and will not be renewed. As of December 31, 2021, Customers held $1.8 billion of deposits serviced by BM Technologies, which are expected to leave Customers Bank by December 31, 2022. The loan agreement with BM Technologies was terminated early in November 2021. For additional information, refer to "NOTE 3 - DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS" to Customers' audited financial statements.
The table below summarizes Customers' cash flows from discontinued operations for the years indicated:
Cash flows provided by (used in) discontinued operating activities
Cash used in discontinued operating activities of $24.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from a net loss of $39.6 million and a decrease in accrued interest payable and other liabilities of $40.7 million, offset in part by non-cash operating adjustments of $20.3 million and a decrease in other assets of $35.6 million.
Cash provided by discontinued operating activities of $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from a net loss of $10.5 million, offset in part by a decrease in other assets of $21.1 million an increase in accrued interest payable and other liabilities of $7.0 million and non-cash operating adjustments of $1.0 million.
Cash flows provided by (used in) discontinued financing activities
Cash used in discontinued financing activities of $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from partial repayment of $40.0 million in borrowings from the Bank in 2019. The remaining balance of $21.0 million in borrowings from the Bank was fully repaid by BM Technologies in 2021.
CAPITAL ADEQUACY
The Bank and Bancorp are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet the minimum capital requirements can result in certain mandatory, and possibly additional discretionary, actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on Customers' financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Bank and Bancorp must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of their assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items, as calculated under the regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. Prompt corrective action provisions are not applicable to bank holding companies.
In first quarter 2020, U.S federal banking regulatory agencies permitted banking organizations to phase-in, for regulatory capital purposes, the day-one impact of the new CECL accounting rule on retained earnings over a period of three years. As part of its response to the impact of COVID-19, on March 31, 2020, the U.S. federal banking regulatory agencies issued an interim final rule that provided the option to temporarily delay certain effects of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year transition period. The interim final rule allows banking organizations to delay for two years 100% of the day-one impact of adopting CECL and 25% of the cumulative change in the reported allowance for credit losses since adopting CECL. Customers has elected to adopt the interim final rule, which is reflected in the regulatory capital data presented below.
In April 2020, the U.S. federal banking regulatory agencies issued an interim final rule that permits banks to exclude the impact of participating in the SBA PPP program in their regulatory capital ratios. Specifically, PPP loans are zero percent risk weighted and a bank can exclude all PPP loans pledged as collateral to the PPPLF from its average total consolidated assets for purposes of calculating the Tier 1 capital to average assets ratio (i.e. leverage ratio). Customers applied this regulatory guidance in the calculation of its regulatory capital ratios presented below.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require the Bank and the Bancorp to maintain minimum amounts and ratios (set forth in the following table) of common equity Tier 1, Tier 1, and total capital to risk-weighted assets, and Tier 1 capital to average assets (as defined in the regulations). At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Bank and the Bancorp met all capital adequacy requirements to which they were subject.
Generally, to comply with the regulatory definition of adequately capitalized, or well capitalized, respectively, or to comply with the Basel III capital requirements, an institution must at least maintain the common equity Tier 1, Tier 1 and total risk-based capital ratios and the Tier 1 leverage ratio in excess of the related minimum ratios set forth in the following table.
The Basel III Capital Rules require that we maintain a 2.500% capital conservation buffer with respect to each of CET1, Tier 1 and total capital to risk-weighted assets, which provides for capital levels that exceed the minimum risk-based capital adequacy requirements. A financial institution with a conservation buffer of less than the required amount is subject to limitations on capital distributions, including dividend payments and stock repurchases, and certain discretionary bonus payments to executive officers. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank and Customers Bancorp were in compliance with the Basel III requirements. See "NOTE 19 - REGULATORY CAPITAL" to Customers' audited financial statements for additional discussion regarding regulatory capital requirements.
Capital Ratios
Customers continued to build capital during 2021 and 2020. In 2019, Customers decided to cross the $10.0 billion asset threshold at year-end, with total assets of $11.5 billion at December 31, 2019, resulted in lower capital ratios when compared to December 31, 2018. In general, for the past few years, Customers Bancorp capital growth has been achieved by retained earnings and issuances of common stock under share-based compensation arrangements, offset in part by the repurchase of common shares. Customers Bancorp did not repurchase any common shares under a stock repurchase plan in 2020. In 2021, Customers repurchased 527,789 shares of common stock for $27.7 million pursuant to the Share Repurchase Program. During 2021 and 2020, Customers Bancorp did not issue any preferred stock or common stock other than in connection with share-based compensation agreements. In 2021, Customers Bancorp issued $100 million in fixed-to-floating rate senior notes, and utilized the proceeds to redeem all of the outstanding shares of Series C and Series D Preferred Stock. Customers Bank capital growth for the past few years has been achieved primarily by retained earnings and capital contributions from Customers Bancorp from proceeds received from issuances of senior and subordinated notes. For more information relating to preferred and common stock, see "NOTE 13 - SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY" to Customers' audited financial statements.
Customers is unaware of any current recommendations by the regulatory authorities which, if they were to be implemented, would have a material effect on its liquidity, capital resources, or operations.
The maintenance of appropriate levels of capital is an important objective of Customers' asset and liability management process. Through its initial capitalization and subsequent offerings, Customers believes it has continued to maintain a strong capital position. Since first quarter 2015, Customers Bank's board of directors has declared a quarterly cash dividend to the Bank's sole shareholder, Customers Bancorp. Cash dividends declared by the Bank and paid to Customers Bancorp during 2021 and 2020, include the following:
•$20.0 million declared on January 22, 2020, and paid on March 10, 2020;
•$20.0 million declared on April 22, 2020, and paid on June 10, 2020;
•$5.0 million declared on July 22, 2020, and paid on September 10, 2020;
•$20.0 million declared and paid on December 31, 2020;
•$30.0 million declared on June 23, 2021, and paid on June 24, 2021;
•$55.0 million declared on September 22, 2021, and paid on September 23, 2021; and
•$55.0 million declared and paid on December 21, 2021.
Effect of Government Monetary Policies
Our earnings are and will be affected by domestic economic conditions and the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government and its agencies. An important function of the Federal Reserve Board is to regulate the money supply and interest rates. Among the instruments used to implement those objectives are open market operations in United States government securities and changes in reserve requirements against member bank deposits. These instruments are used in varying combinations to influence overall growth and distribution of bank loans and leases, investments, and deposits, and their use may also affect rates charged on loans and leases or paid for deposits.