Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company engineering a novel class of injectable biologics to selectively engage and modulate targeted T cells directly within the patient’s body. We believe our proprietary Immuno-STAT™ (Selective Targeting and Alteration of T Cells) platform, as described below, will allow us to harness the potential of the patient’s intrinsic immune repertoire to fully exploit its potential to fight cancer and restore health while avoiding the deleterious side effects of broad immune activation. In addition to the highly selective modulation of T cell activity, we believe the core features of Immuno-STATs offer competitive differentiation, including modularity, manufacturability, and convenient administration that allows for versatility to treat a broad range of disease.
While we have demonstrated the potential application of our protein designed Immuno-STAT platform in preclinical studies in cancer, chronic infectious disease, and autoimmune disease, we are currently prioritizing and strategically focusing on drug product candidates for treating cancer in our CUE-100 series, which exploits rationally engineered interleukin 2, or IL-2, in context of the core Immuno-STAT framework for selective activation of targeted tumor-specific T cells. We are actively seeking third party support through partnerships and collaborations, or alternative funding structures, to further develop our programs outside of oncology, including our CUE-200, CUE-300 and CUE-400 series.
Our drug product candidates are in various stages of clinical and preclinical development, and while we believe that these candidates hold significant potential value, our activities are also subject to significant risks and uncertainties. We have not yet commenced any commercial revenue-generating operations, have limited cash flows from operations, and will need to access additional capital to fund our growth and ongoing business operations.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The continuing COVID-19 pandemic has prompted governments and regulatory bodies throughout the world to issue “stay-at-home” or similar orders, and enact restrictions on the performance of “non-essential” services, public gatherings and travel. Beginning in March 2020, we undertook precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of virus transmission to our employees, including the establishment of remote working standards, pausing all non-essential travel worldwide for our employees, and limiting employee attendance at industry events and in-person work-related meetings, to the extent those events and meetings are continuing. We also established policies and procedures for all personnel who enter our company premises. The policies and procedures we implemented are consistent with the rules and guidelines recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the City of Cambridge. However, these actions or additional measures we may undertake may ultimately delay progress of our developmental goals or otherwise negatively affect our business. In addition, third-party actions taken to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, and mitigate public health effects may negatively affect our business. We do not believe any of these actions or disruptions have had a significant impact on our productivity or our operations. We continue to have many of these policies and procedures in place in 2021.
To date, we have experienced supply chain disruptions for lab supplies used in our preclinical research. In addition, January 2021, we were notified by our contract manufacturing organization, or CMO, that the manufacture of our GMP material for the CUE-102 drug product candidate would be delayed by approximately six weeks due to the invocation of the Defense Production Act, or DPA, which gives priority to the manufacture of vaccines and other drug products used to prevent or treat COVID-19. The delay in the manufacturing of our CUE-102 GMP batch has impacted the expected filing date of the CUE-102 IND that was planned for the fourth quarter of 2021. The CUE-102 IND is now expected to be filed by the end of the first quarter of 2022 based on the revised CUE-102 GMP manufacturing date provided by our CMO.
Plan of Operation
Our technology is in the development phase. We believe that our licensed platforms have the potential for creating a diverse pipeline of promising drug product candidates addressing multiple medical indications. We intend to maximize the value and probability of commercialization of our Immuno-STAT drug product candidates by focusing on researching, testing, optimizing, conducting pilot studies, performing early stage clinical development and potentially partnering, where appropriate, for more extensive, later stages of clinical development, as well as seeking extensive patent protection and intellectual property development.
Since we are a development-stage company, the majority of our business activities to date and our planned future activities will be devoted to furthering research and development.
A fundamental part of our corporate development strategy is to establish one or more strategic partnerships with leading pharmaceutical or biotechnology organizations that will allow us to more fully exploit the potential of our technology platform, such as those described below under the headings “Collaboration Agreement with Merck” and “Collaboration Agreement with LG Chem”.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the reported revenue and expenses during the reported periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below, on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While the Company’s significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the following accounting policies may have the greatest potential impact on the financial statements, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. There were no material changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates as of December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
We follow the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We generate revenue solely through collaboration arrangements with strategic partners for the development and commercialization of drug product candidates. The core principle of ASC 606 is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods and/or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and/or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with the customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
We recognize collaboration revenue under certain of our license or collaboration agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606. Our contracts with customers typically include promises related to licenses to intellectual property and research and development services. If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgement to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. Accordingly, the transaction price is generally comprised of a fixed fee due at contract inception and variable consideration in the form of milestone payments due upon the achievement of specified events and tiered royalties earned when customers recognize net sales of licensed products. We measure the transaction price based on the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods and/or services to the customer. We utilize the “most likely amount” method to estimate the amount of variable consideration, to predict the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled for our two open contracts. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. At the inception of each arrangement that includes development and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the associated event is considered probable of achievement and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Currently, we have one contract with an option to acquire additional goods and/or services in the form of additional research and development services for additional drug product candidates.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development expenses consist primarily of compensation costs, fees paid to consultants, outside service providers and organizations (including research institutes at universities), facility costs, and development and clinical trial costs with respect to our drug product candidates.
Research and development expenses incurred under contracts are expensed ratably over the life of the underlying contracts, unless the achievement of milestones, the completion of contracted work, or other information indicates that a different pattern of expense recognition is more appropriate. Other research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred. Payments made pursuant to research and development contracts are initially recorded as research and development contract advances in our balance sheet and then charged to research and development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as those contract services are performed. Expenses incurred under research and development contracts in excess of amounts advanced are recorded as research and development contract liabilities in our balance sheet, with a corresponding charge to research and development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Nonrefundable advance payments for future research and development activities pursuant to an executory contractual arrangement are recorded as advances as described above. Nonrefundable advance payments are recognized as an expense as the related services are performed. We evaluate whether we expect the services to be rendered at each quarter end and year end reporting date. If we do not expect the services to be rendered, the advance payment is charged to expense. To the extent that a nonrefundable advance payment is for contracted services to be performed within 12 months from the reporting date, such advance is included in current assets; otherwise, such advance is included in non-current assets.
We evaluate the status of our research and development agreements and contracts, and the carrying amount of the related assets and liabilities, at each quarter end and year end reporting date, and adjusts the carrying amounts and their classification on the balance sheet as appropriate.
Stock-Based Compensation
We periodically issue stock-based awards to officers, directors, employees, Scientific and Clinical Advisory Board members, non-employees and consultants for services rendered. Such issuances vest and expire according to terms established at the issuance date.
Stock-based payments to officers, directors, members of our Scientific and Clinical Advisory Board, non-employees and outside consultants and employees, including grants of employee stock options, are recognized in the financial statements based on their grant date fair values. Stock option grants, which are generally time-vested, are measured at the grant date fair value and charged to operations on a straight-line basis over the service period, which generally approximates the vesting term. We also grant performance-based awards periodically to our officers. We recognize compensation costs related to performance awards over the requisite service period if and when we conclude that it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved.
The fair value of stock options and restricted stock units is determined utilizing the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which is affected by several variables, including the risk-free interest rate, the expected dividend yield, the life of the equity award, the exercise price of the stock option as compared to the fair value of the common stock on the grant date, and the estimated volatility of the common stock over the term of the equity award.
The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant. Until we have established a trading history for our common stock that approximates the expected term of the options, estimated volatility is based on the average historical volatilities of comparable public companies in a similar industry. The expected dividend yield is based on the current yield at the grant date; we have never declared or paid dividends and have no plans to do so for the foreseeable future. As permitted by Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, due to our lack of history and option activity, we utilize the simplified method to estimate the expected term of options at the date of grant. The fair value of common stock is determined by reference to either recent or anticipated cash transactions involving the sale of our common stock.
We recognize the fair value of stock-based compensation in general and administrative expenses and in research and development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, depending on the type of services provided by the recipient of the equity award. We issue new shares of common stock to satisfy stock option exercises.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Accordingly, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected impact of differences between the financial statements and the tax basis of assets and liabilities.
We account for uncertainties in income tax law under a comprehensive model for the financial statement recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns as prescribed by GAAP. The tax effects of a position are recognized only if it is “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained by the taxing authority as of the reporting date. If the tax position is not considered “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained, then no benefits of the position are recognized.
We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In the event we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of its recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be credited to operations in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to operations in the period such determination was made.
We are subject to U.S. federal and Massachusetts state income taxes. As our net operating losses have yet to be utilized, all previous tax years remain open to examination by federal and state taxing authorities in which we currently operate.
We recognize interest accrued relative to unrecognized tax benefits in interest expense and penalties in operating expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Significant Contracts and Agreements Related to Research and Development Activities
Einstein License Agreement
On January 14, 2015, we entered into a license agreement, as amended and restated on July 31, 2017, and as amended on October 30, 2018, or the Einstein License, with Albert Einstein College of Medicine, or Einstein, for certain patent rights relating to our core technology platform for the engineering of biologics to control T cell activity, precision, immune-modulatory drug product candidates, and two supporting technologies that enable the discovery of costimulatory signaling molecules (ligands) and T cell targeting peptides.
We hold an exclusive worldwide license, with the right to sublicense, import, make, have made, use, provide, offer to sell, and sell all products, processes and services that use the patents covered by the Einstein License, including certain technology received from Einstein related thereto, or the Licensed Products. Under the Einstein License, we are required to:
•Pay royalties and amounts based on certain percentage of proceeds, as defined in the Einstein License, from sales of Licensed Products and sublicense agreements.
•Pay escalating annual maintenance fees, which are non-refundable, but are creditable against the amount due to Einstein for royalties.
•Make significant payments based upon the achievement of certain milestones, as defined in the Einstein License. At December 31, 2021, two of these milestones had been achieved, as we had filed an investigational new drug application, or IND, in 2019, and initiated the investigator sponsored Phase 1b neoadjuvant clinical trial for CUE-101 in 2021.
•Incur minimum product development costs per year until the first commercial sale of the first Licensed Product.
We were in compliance with our obligations under the Einstein License at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Einstein License expires upon the expiration of the last obligation to make royalty payments to Einstein which may be due with respect to certain Licensed Products, unless terminated earlier under the provisions thereof. The Einstein License includes certain termination provisions if we fail to meet our obligations thereunder.
We account for the costs incurred in connection with the Einstein License in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, costs incurred with respect to the Einstein License aggregated $619,000 and $75,000, respectively. Such costs are included in research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Pursuant to the Einstein License, we issued to Einstein 671,572 shares of our common stock in connection with the consummation of the initial public offering of our common stock on December 27, 2017.
See “Our License Agreement with Einstein” under Part I, Item 1 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the Einstein License.
Collaboration Agreement with Merck
On November 14, 2017, we entered into an Exclusive Patent License and Research Collaboration Agreement, or the Merck Collaboration Agreement, with Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., or Merck, for a partnership to research and develop certain of our proprietary biologics that target certain autoimmune disease indications, or the Initial Indications. We view the Merck Collaboration Agreement as a component of our development strategy since it will allow us to advance our autoimmune programs in partnership with a world class pharmaceutical company, while also continuing our focus on our more advanced cancer programs. The research program outlined in the Merck Collaboration Agreement entails (1) our research, discovery and development of certain Immuno-STAT drug product candidates up to the point of demonstration of certain biologically relevant effects, or Proof of Mechanism, and (2) the further development by Merck of the Immuno-STAT drug product candidates that have demonstrated Proof of Mechanism, or the Proposed Product Candidates, up to the point of demonstration of all or substantially all of the properties outlined in such Proposed Product Candidates’ profiles as described in the Merck Collaboration Agreement.
For the purposes of this collaboration, we granted to Merck under the Merck Collaboration Agreement an exclusive license under certain of our patent rights, including a sublicense of patent rights licensed from Einstein, to the extent applicable to the specific Immuno-STAT that are elected to be developed by Merck. So long as Merck continues product development on a Proposed Product Candidate, we are restricted from conducting any development activities within the Initial Indication covered by such Proposed Product Candidate other than pursuant to the Merck Collaboration Agreement.
In exchange for the licenses and other rights granted to Merck under the Merck Collaboration Agreement, Merck paid to us a $2.5 million nonrefundable up-front payment. Additionally, we may be eligible to receive funding in developmental milestone payments, as well as tiered royalties, if all research, development, regulatory and commercial milestones agreed upon by both parties are successfully achieved. Excluding the $2.5 million up-front payment described above, we are eligible to earn up to $101.0 million for the achievement of certain research and development milestones, $120.0 million for the achievement of certain regulatory milestones and $150.0 million for the achievement of certain commercial milestones, in addition to tiered royalties on sales, if all pre-specified milestones associated with multiple products across the primary disease indication areas are achieved. The Merck Collaboration Agreement requires us to use the first $2.5 million of milestone payments we receive under the agreement to fund contract research. The amount of the royalty payments is a percentage of product sales ranging in the single digits based on the amount of such sales. We recorded approximately $2,155,000 in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the Merck Collaboration Agreement, compared to $177,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The term of the Merck Collaboration Agreement extends until the expiration of all royalty obligations following a product candidate’s receipt of marketing authorization, at which point Merck’s licenses and sublicenses granted under the agreement shall become fully paid-up, perpetual licenses and sublicenses, as applicable. Royalties on each product subject to the Merck Collaboration Agreement shall continue on a country-by-country basis until the expiration of the later of: (1) the last-to-expire patent claiming the compound on which such product is based and (2) a period of ten years after the first commercial sale of such product in such country.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Merck may terminate the Merck Collaboration Agreement at any time upon 30 days’ notice to us. The Merck Collaboration Agreement may also be terminated by either party if the other party is in breach of its obligations thereunder and fails to cure such breach within 90 days after notice or by either party if the other party files for bankruptcy or other similar insolvency proceedings.
On November 18, 2020, we entered into a First Amendment to the Merck Collaboration Agreement, or the Amendment, with Merck. Pursuant to rights granted to Merck under the Merck Collaboration Agreement, the Amendment extended the term of the research program under the Merck Collaboration Agreement for an additional year until December 31, 2021. Under the terms of the Amendment, Merck reimbursed us for specified expenses and provided additional financial
research support to further study and develop preclinical biologics with the objective of identifying clinical candidates subject, in each case, to specified maximum amounts, with any amounts in excess of such maximum amounts to be borne by us. On November 18, 2020, we earned a milestone payment related to this Amendment in the amount of $300,000. The $300,000 milestone payment was recorded as a contract liability upon receipt. We recognized revenue for this milestone payment pursuant to our revenue recognition policy in relation to the performance of our obligations to develop Immuno-STAT drug product candidates under the arrangement. The term of the research program under the Merck Collaboration Agreement expired on December 31, 2021.
See “Our Collaboration Agreement with Merck” under Part I, Item 1 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the Merck Collaboration Agreement.
Collaboration Agreement with LG Chem
Effective November 6, 2018, we entered into a collaboration agreement with LG Chem, Ltd., or LG Chem, which we refer to as the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement, related to the development of Immuno-STATs focused in the field of oncology.
Pursuant to the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement, we granted LG Chem an exclusive license to develop, manufacture and commercialize our lead product, CUE-101, as well as Immuno-STATs that target T cells against two additional cancer antigens, or Product Candidates, in Australia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, Philippines, Indonesia, China (including Macau and Hong Kong) and Taiwan, which we refer to collectively as the LG Chem Territory. On December 20, 2018, we reported the selection of Wilm’s Tumor 1, or WT1, as the first target antigen for a Product Candidate under the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement. In June 2021, after ongoing discussions regarding the selection of the second of the two additional cancer antigens, we agreed with LG Chem to let the selection period expire without a second antigen being selected. We retain rights to develop and commercialize all assets included in the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement in the United States and in global markets outside of the LG Chem Territory. Under the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement, we will engineer the selected Immuno-STATs for up to three alleles, which are expected to include the predominant alleles in the LG Chem Territory, thereby enhancing our market reach by providing for greater patient coverage of populations in global markets, while LG Chem will establish a chemistry, manufacturing and controls, or CMC, process for the development and commercialization of selected Product Candidates. The LG Chem Collaboration Agreement provided LG Chem with the option to select one additional Immuno-STAT for an oncology target, or an Additional Immuno-STAT, for an exclusive worldwide development and commercialization license. On December 18, 2019, we and LG Chem entered into a global license and collaboration agreement, which was amended on November 5, 2020. We refer to such agreement, as amended, as the Global License and Collaboration Agreement. The Global License and Collaboration Agreement supersedes the provisions of the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement related to LG Chem’s option for an Additional Immuno-STAT but generally does not become effective unless and until LG Chem exercises its option, other than certain select provisions including the length of the option period and representations, warranties and covenants of the parties. On April 30, 2021, LG Chem’s option pursuant to the Global License and Collaboration Agreement expired. We will retain an option to co-develop and co-commercialize the additional program worldwide.
Under the terms of the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement, LG Chem paid us a $5.8 million non-refundable, non-creditable up-front payment and purchased approximately $5.0 million of shares of our common stock at a price per share equal to a 20% premium to the volume weighted-average closing price per share over the thirty (30) trading day period immediately prior to the effective date of the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement. We are also eligible to receive additional aggregate payments of up to approximately $400.0 million if certain research, development, regulatory and commercial milestones are successfully achieved. On May 16, 2019, we earned a $2.5 million milestone payment for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s, or FDA’s, acceptance of the IND for our lead drug product candidate, CUE-101, pursuant to the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement. On December 7, 2020, we earned a $1.25 million milestone payment on the selection of a preclinical candidate pursuant to the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement. On November 23, 2021, we earned a $3.0 million milestone on the confirmation of Collaboration Product Candidate. In addition, the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement also provides that LG Chem will pay us tiered single-digit royalties on net sales of commercialized Product Candidates, or Collaboration Products, in the LG Chem Territory on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, until the later of expiration of patent rights in a country, the expiration of regulatory exclusivity in such country, or ten years after the first commercial sale of a Collaboration Product in such country, subject to certain royalty step-down provisions set forth in the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement.
Pursuant to the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement, the parties will share research costs related to Collaboration Products, and LG Chem will provide CMC process development for selected Product Candidates and potentially additional downstream manufacturing capabilities, including clinical and commercial supply for Collaboration Products. In return for performing CMC process development, LG Chem is eligible to receive low-single digit royalty payments on the sales of
Collaboration Products sold in all countries outside the LG Chem Territory. The amount of fees and milestone payments, as well as whether we receive royalty payments, will depend on the number of alleles selected by LG Chem and whether we exercise our option to co-develop and co-commercialize the additional program worldwide, in which case we would share costs and profits instead of receiving royalties and post-option-exercise milestones. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized approximately $12,786,000 and $2,978,000, respectively, in collaboration revenue related to this agreement.
See “Our Collaboration Agreement with LG Chem” under Part I, Item 1 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of the LG Chem Agreement.
Results of Operations
Collaboration Revenue
We have not generated commercial revenue from product sales. To date, we have generated collaboration revenue from the Merck Collaboration Agreement and the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement. Collaboration revenue may vary from period to period depending on the progress of our work in connection with either or both of our collaboration agreements.
Operating Expenses
We generally recognize operating expenses as they are incurred in two general categories, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses. Our operating expenses also include non-cash components related to depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and stock-based compensation, which are allocated, as appropriate, to general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses.
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries and related expenses for executive, legal, finance, human resources, information technology and administrative personnel, as well as professional fees, insurance costs, and other general corporate expenses. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods as we incur additional expenses related to our operation as a public company, including higher legal, accounting, insurance, compliance, compensation and other expenses.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of compensation expenses, fees paid to consultants, outside service providers and organizations (including research institutes at universities), facility expenses, and development and clinical trial expenses with respect to our product candidates. We charge research and development expenses to operations as they are incurred. We expect research and development expenses to increase in the future as we increase our efforts to advance the clinical development of CUE-101 and CUE-102, including our ongoing and planned clinical trials, and develop technology for potential future products based on our technology and research.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as discussed herein are presented below.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue totaled approximately $14,941,000 and $3,154,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase of approximately $11,787,000 was due primarily to cost sharing earned from the performance of collaboration services under the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement during 2021, the $3,000,000 milestone achieved in November 2021 for the selection of a clinical product candidate under the LG Chem Collaboration Agreement, and revenue related to the Merck Collaboration Agreement. All collaboration revenue recognized was related to the performance of services under our collaboration agreements with Merck and LG Chem.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses totaled approximately $17,307,000 and $14,651,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase of approximately $2,656,000 was due primarily to higher stock-based compensation related to executive management, professional and consulting fees, employee and board compensation and other business expenses related to the ongoing management of the company. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase as we are required to comply with certain regulatory and legal requirements.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included expenses related to professional and consulting fees of approximately $5,564,000, stock-based compensation of $5,308,000, employee and board compensation of $4,182,000, rent of $1,082,000 and other general and administrative expenses totaling $1,171,000.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included expenses related to professional and consulting fees of approximately $4,483,000, stock-based compensation of $4,094,000, employee and board compensation of $3,875,000, rent of $1,082,000, and other general and administrative expenses totaling $1,117,000.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses totaled approximately $41,347,000 and $33,546,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase of approximately $7,801,000 was due primarily to higher laboratory and drug substance manufacturing costs, employee and Scientific and Clinical advisory board compensation, other professional fees, licensing fees and rent.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included expenses related to research and laboratory expenses of approximately $12,321,000, employee and Scientific and Clinical Advisory Board compensation of $9,634,000, stock-based compensation of $6,208,000, clinical expenses of $4,301,000, rent of $3,881,000, other professional fees of $1,400,000, depreciation and amortization of $1,154,000, and other research and development related expenses totaling $2,448,000.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included expenses related to research and laboratory expenses of approximately $8,420,000, employee and Scientific and Clinical Advisory Board compensation of $7,886,000, stock-based compensation of $6,387,000, clinical expenses of $4,264,000, rent of $3,511,000, depreciation and amortization of $960,000, and other research and development related expenses of  $2,118,000.
Interest Income
Interest income was approximately $46,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to approximately $464,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The majority of our marketable securities matured in early 2021 and we made no additional investment in marketable securities in 2021. The interest income earned from marketable securities in 2021 was immaterial. Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 included approximately $4,600 in expense resulting from amortization of discounts received on certain of our marketable securities, compared to approximately $80,000 of other income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Foreign Withholding Taxes
Provision for income tax for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was comprised of $495,000 and approximately $206,000, respectively, in foreign income tax expense on LG Chem milestone payments in each year.
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, our net loss was approximately $44,161,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to approximately $44,785,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our working capital requirements primarily through private and public offerings of equity securities, "at-the-market", or ATM, equity sales, cash received from Merck and LG Chem under their respective collaboration agreements and borrowing under the Loan and Security Agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaling approximately $64,400,000 and approximately $84,900,000, respectively, available to fund our ongoing business activities. Additional information concerning our financial condition and results of operations is provided in the financial statements included in this report.
The amounts that we actually spend for any specific purpose may vary significantly and will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, our research and development activities and programs, clinical testing, regulatory approval, market conditions, and changes in or revisions to our business strategy and technology development plans.	
In March 2020, we entered into an ATM, equity offering sales agreement, or the March 2020 Sales Agreement, with Stifel Nicolaus & Company, Inc., or Stifel, to sell shares of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of up to $35.0 million, from time to time, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program under which Stifel acts as sales agent. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold a total of 1,824,901 shares of common stock under the March 2020 Sales Agreement for proceeds of approximately $34.3 million, net of commissions paid, but excluding estimated transaction expenses. Due to the issuance and sale of all the shares of common stock subject thereto, the March 2020 Sales Agreement terminated in accordance with its terms.
On June 22, 2020, we filed a registration statement on Form S-3ASR, which became automatically effective upon filing with the SEC (File No. 333-239357), or the 2020 Shelf, to register for sale from time to time up to $300.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, rights and/or units in one or more offerings.
In June 2020, we entered into an ATM equity offering sales agreement, or the June 2020 Sales Agreement, with Stifel to sell shares of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of up to $40.0 million, from time to time, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program under which Stifel acts as sales agent. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 907,700 shares of common stock under the June 2020 ATM Agreement for proceeds of $10.4 million, net of commissions paid, but excluding transaction expenses. As of December 31, 2021, we sold 2,099,700 shares of common stock under the June 2020 Sales Agreement for proceeds of $32.7 million, net of commissions paid, but excluding estimated transaction expenses. The June 2020 Sales Agreement terminated in October 2021 prior to entering into the October 2021 ATM Agreement (as defined below).
In October 2021, we entered into an open market sale agreement, or the October 2021 ATM Agreement, with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies, to sell shares of our common stock for aggregate gross proceeds of up to $80.0 million, from time to time, through an ATM equity offering program under which Jefferies acts as sales agent. The October 2021 ATM Agreement will terminate upon the earliest of (a) the sale of $80.0 million of shares of our common stock pursuant to the October 2021 ATM
Agreement or (b) the termination of the October 2021 ATM Agreement by us or Jefferies LLC. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 476,187 shares of common stock under the October 2021 ATM Agreement for proceeds of $7 million, net of commissions paid, but excluding transaction expenses.
On February 15, 2022, we entered into the Loan Agreement, pursuant to which we have borrowed $10.0 million. We also may be able to borrow, at our option, an additional $10.0 million, if we reach certain milestone events. The term loans under the Loan Agreement, or the Term Loans, bear interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the greater of (A) the prime rate (as published in the money rates section of The Wall Street Journal) plus 2.25% and (B) 5.50%. On the first calendar day of each month, we will be required to make monthly interest payments and commencing on June 30, 2023 (extended to December 31, 2023 if the additional term loans are advanced), we will be required to repay the Term Loans in (i) 30 consecutive installments of principal plus monthly payments of accrued interest if the additional term loans are not advanced and (ii) 24 months if the additional term loans are advanced. All outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest under the Term Loans and all other outstanding obligations with respect to the Term Loans are due and payable in full on December 1, 2025.
The Loan Agreement permits voluntary prepayment of all, but not less than all, of the Term Loans, subject to a prepayment premium except if the facility is refinanced with another SVB facility. Such prepayment premium would be 3.00% of the principal amount of the Term Loans if prepaid prior to the first anniversary of the date on which we entered the Loan Agreement, 2.00% of the principal amount of the Term Loan if prepaid on or after the first anniversary of the date on which we entered the Loan Agreement but prior to the second anniversary of the date on which we entered the Loan Agreement, and 1.00% of the principal amount of the Term Loan if prepaid on or after the second anniversary of the date on which we entered the Loan Agreement. Upon repayment in full of the Term Loans, the Company will be required to pay a final payment fee equal to 5.00% of the original principal amount of any funded term loan being repaid.
If we issue additional equity securities to raise funds, the ownership percentage of our existing stockholders would be reduced. New investors may demand rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. If we issue debt securities, we may be required to grant security interests in our assets, could have substantial debt service obligations, and lenders may have a senior position (compared to stockholders) in any potential future bankruptcy or liquidation. Additionally, corporate collaboration and licensing arrangements may require us to incur non-recurring and other charges, give up certain rights relating to our intellectual property and research and development activities, increase our near and long-term expenditures, issue securities that dilute our existing stockholders, issue debt which may require liens on our assets and which will increase our monthly expense obligations, or disrupt our management and business.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our changes in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used cash of approximately $38,837,000 in operating activities, as compared to approximately $32,494,000 of cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our net loss of approximately $44,161,000, and increases of approximately $7,973,000 in research and development contract liabilities, $3,036,000 in operating lease right-of-use asset, $1,725,000 in accounts receivable, $200,000 in prepaid expense and deposits, $22,000 on gain on disposal of fixed asset, and $5,000 in amortization of premium/discount on purchased securities. Cash used was partially offset by increases of approximately $11,516,000 in stock-based compensation expense, $2,907,000 in operating lease liability, $1,833,000 in accrued expenses, approximately $1,258,000 in depreciation and amortization, $250,000 in other assets as well as $520,000 in accounts payable.
Cash used during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of our net loss of approximately $44,785,000, and increases of approximately $4,203,000 in operating lease right-of-use asset, $662,000 in accounts receivable, $563,000 in other non-cash charges, $381,000 in prepaid expenses, and $5,000 in other assets. Cash used was partially offset by increases of approximately $4,679,000 in operating lease liability, $741,000 in accounts payable, and $560,000 in accrued expenses, $503,000 in research and development contract liabilities, as well as non-cash charges of approximately $1,057,000 in depreciation and amortization, $10,481,000 in stock-based compensation expense, and $84,000 in amortization of premium/discount on purchased securities.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated cash of approximately $9,109,000 from investing activities, compared to approximately $4,456,000 generated by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash generated during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of approximately $10,000,000 for the redemption of short-term investments, cash received for sale of fixed assets of approximately $22,000, offset by the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $913,000. Cash generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of approximately $15,000,000 for the redemption of short-term investments offset by the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $595,000 and the purchase of marketable securities of $9,949,000.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated cash from financing activities of approximately $19,233,000, compared to approximately $58,614,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash generated during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of cash proceeds from the common stock sold through our ATM sales agreements with Stifel and Jefferies of approximately $17,385,000, net of underwriting commissions and fees, and the exercise of common stock options of approximately $2,599,000, offset by restricted stock awards net of taxes withheld of $750,000. Cash generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of cash proceeds from the common stock sold through our ATM sales agreements with Stifel of approximately $56,682,000, net of underwriting commissions and fees, and the exercise of common stock options of approximately $2,203,000, and restricted stock awards net of taxes withheld of $271,000.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of our Immuno-STAT platform, continue ongoing and initiate new clinical trials of and seek marketing approval for our drug product candidates. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Our expenses will also increase if, and as, we:
•continue the clinical development of our CUE-100 series, including CUE-101, CUE-102, CUE-103 and Neo-STAT;
•leverage our programs to advance our other drug product candidates into preclinical and clinical development;
•seek regulatory approvals for any drug product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•seek to develop additional drug product candidates in the CUE-100 series, including Neo-STATs;
•establish a sales, marketing, medical affairs and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any drug product candidates for which we may obtain marketing approval and intend to commercialize on our own or jointly;
•hire additional clinical, quality control and scientific personnel;
•expand our manufacturing, operational, financial and management systems;
•increase personnel, including personnel to support our clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•acquire or in-license other drug product candidates and technologies; and
•incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company.
In the first quarter of 2022, we determined to prioritize and strategically focus on our oncology programs in our CUE-100 series. We are actively seeking third party support through partnerships and collaborations, or alternative funding structures, to further develop our programs outside of oncology, including our CUE-200, CUE-300 and CUE-400 series.
We believe that our existing cash resources as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating requirements for at least the next 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
We will need to raise additional capital or incur indebtedness to continue to fund our operations in the future. Our ability to raise additional funds will depend on financial, economic and market conditions, many of which are outside of our control, and we may be unable to raise financing when needed, or on terms favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or eliminate our product development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market drug product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves, which could adversely affect our business prospects, and we may be unable to continue our operations. Because of numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of drug product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Factors that may affect our planned future capital requirements and accelerate our need for additional working capital include the following:
•the progress, timing, scope and costs of our clinical trials, including the ability to timely enroll patients in our planned and potential future clinical trials;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory approvals by the FDA and comparable regulatory authorities, including the potential that the FDA or comparable regulatory authorities may require that we perform more studies than those that we currently expect;
•the number and characteristics of drug product candidates that we may in-license and develop;
•our ability to successfully commercialize our drug product candidates;
•the amount of sales and other revenues from drug product candidates that we may commercialize, if any, including the selling prices for such potential products and the availability of adequate third-party reimbursement;
•selling and marketing costs associated with our potential products, including the cost and timing of expanding our marketing and sales capabilities;
•the terms and timing of any potential future collaborations, licensing or other arrangements that we may establish;
•cash requirements of any future acquisitions and/or the development of other drug product candidates;
•the costs of operating as a public company;
•the cost and timing of completion of commercial-scale, outsourced manufacturing activities;
•the time and cost necessary to respond to technological and market developments;
•any disputes which may occur between us and Einstein, employees, collaborators or other prospective business partners; and
•the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our drug product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Further, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic partnerships or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties and grants from organizations and foundations. If we raise additional
funds by selling shares of our common stock or other equity-linked securities, the ownership interest of our current stockholders will be diluted. We may seek to access the public or private capital markets whenever conditions are favorable, even if we do not have an immediate need for additional capital at that time. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or drug product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be acceptable to us. If we raise additional funds through debt financing, we may have to grant a security interest on our assets to the future lenders, our debt service costs may be substantial, and the lenders may have a preferential position in connection with any future bankruptcy or liquidation.
If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed, we may be required to curtail the development of our technology or materially curtail or reduce our operations. We could be forced to sell or dispose of our rights or assets. Any inability to raise adequate funds on commercially reasonable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operation and financial condition, including the possibility that a lack of funds could cause our business to fail, dissolve and liquidate with little or no return to investors.
Principal Commitments
Leased Facilities
On January 18, 2018, we entered into an operating lease agreement for our laboratory and office space in Cambridge, Massachusetts for the period from May 1, 2018 through April 30, 2021, or the Laboratory and Office Lease. The lease contains escalating payments during the lease period. Upon execution of this lease agreement, we prepaid three months of rent, two of which will be held in escrow and credited against future rent payments and the other of which was applied to the first month’s rent. We also prepaid seven and one half months’ rent pursuant to an amendment to the lease agreement executed on June 18, 2018. We record monthly rent expense on a straight-line basis, equal to the total of the lease payments over the lease term divided by the number of months of the lease term.
On June 18, 2018, we entered into an amendment to the Laboratory and Office Lease that provide us with a reduction in rental fees for our office and laboratory space in exchange for prepayment of a portion of the fees. This amendment was effective beginning on May 15, 2018 and expires on April 14, 2021. The monthly rent payment due under the Laboratory and Office Lease is currently approximately $331,000 until April 2021 and will increase to approximately $375,000 for the remainder of the term.
On September 20, 2018, we entered into an operating lease for additional laboratory space at 21 Erie Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts for the period from October 15, 2018 through April 14, 2021, or the Additional Laboratory Lease. The lease contains escalating payments during the lease period. The monthly rental rate under the Additional Laboratory Lease was approximately $73,000 for the first 12 months and approximately $79,000 for the remainder of the term. Upon execution of this lease agreement, we prepaid 12 months’ rent pursuant to the lease agreement executed on September 20, 2018.
On September 19, 2019, we entered into a second amendment to the Additional Laboratory Lease that removed one holding room from the additional laboratory space. The amendment was effective beginning on October 1, 2019 and expires on April 14, 2021. The monthly rental rate under the Additional Laboratory Lease decreased from approximately $79,000 to approximately $59,000 for the remainder of the lease term.
On June 24, 2020, we entered into a second amendment to the Laboratory and Office Lease. Pursuant to the amendment (1) the term of the lease was extended to June 14, 2022 and (2) the monthly rental rate for the last 14 months of the lease term was increased to approximately $375,000. We determined that the amendment should be accounted for as a lease modification under Accounting Standards Codification 842, Leases, or ASC 842, not as a separate contract, with an effective date of lease modification of May 14, 2020. At the effective date of modification, we recorded an adjustment to the right-of-use asset and lease liability in the amount of approximately $4,826,000.
On July 20, 2020, we entered into a third amendment to the Additional Laboratory Lease. Pursuant to the amendment the term of the lease was extended to June 14, 2022. We determined that the amendment should be accounted for as a lease modification under ASC 842, not as a separate contract, with an effective date of lease modification of August 4, 2020, when the agreement was fully executed. At the effective date of modification, we recorded an adjustment to the right-of-use asset and lease liability in the amount of approximately $813,000.
On October 22, 2021, the Company entered into a third amendment to the Laboratory and Office Lease. Pursuant to the amendment (1) the term of the lease was extended to March 14, 2024 and (2) the monthly rental rate for the last 21 months of the lease term was increased from approximately $375,000 to approximately $388,000. We determined that the amendment should be accounted for as a lease modification under ASC 842, not as a separate contract, with an effective date of lease modification of November 1, 2021, when the agreement was fully executed. At the effective date of modification, we recorded an adjustment to the right-of-use asset and lease liability in the amount of approximately $7,616,000.
Manufacturing Agreement with Catalent
We entered into an agreement with Catalent Pharma Solutions, LLC or Catalent, for Catalent to provide us with contracted manufacturing services related to the manufacture of CUE-102 materials. At December 31, 2021, we owed Catalent approximately $1,255,000 which was fully accrued for on December 31, 2021.
Einstein License Agreement
The Company’s commitments with respect to the Einstein License are summarized above at “Significant Contracts and Agreements Related to Research and Development Activities”.