Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows of our Company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Torrid is a direct-to-consumer brand of apparel, intimates and accessories in North America, targeting the 25- to 40-year old woman who is curvy and wears sizes 10 to 30. Torrid is focused on fit and offers high quality products across a broad assortment that includes tops, bottoms, denim, dresses, intimates, activewear, footwear and accessories. Our proprietary product offering delivers a superior fit for the curvy woman that makes her love the way she looks and feels. Our style is unapologetically youthful and sexy. We believe our customer values the appeal and versatility of our curated product assortment that helps her look her best for any occasion, including weekend, casual, work and dressy, all at accessible price points. We specifically design for stylish curvy women and are maniacally focused on fit. Through our product and brand experience we connect with customers in a way that other brands, many of which treat plus-size customers as an after-thought, have not.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
We use the following metrics to assess the progress of our business, inform how we allocate our time and capital, and assess the near-term and longer-term performance of our business.
(A)Active customers and net sales per active customer calculated on a preceding four quarters basis.
(B)The computation of comparable sales includes results from stores that were temporarily closed due to COVID-19.
(C)Please refer to "Results of Operations" for a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA.
Active Customers. We define an active customer as a distinct, identifiable customer who has completed at least one purchase transaction either in-store or online in the preceding four quarters. We are able to identify the vast majority of our customers primarily through our robust loyalty program, which gives us access to extensive customer and sales data. We have improved our customer tracking capabilities and have grown the proportion of our net sales attributable to active customers over time. The proportion of net sales that we are able to attribute to active customers was 96% for fiscal year 2019, 98% for fiscal year 2020 and 97% for fiscal year 2021. As a result, historical year-over-year growth in active customers may factor in increases attributable to our improved capabilities. We view the number of active customers as a key indicator of our growth, the reach of our e-Commerce and stores platform, the value proposition and consumer awareness of our brand and our customers’ desire to purchase our products.
Net Sales per Active Customer. We define net sales per active customer for any given period as the net sales in the preceding four quarters, divided by the total number of active customers at the end of that period. We view net sales per active
customer as a key indicator of our customers’ purchasing patterns, including their initial and repeat purchase behavior and intend to closely monitor this metric going forward.
Comparable Sales. We define comparable sales for any given period as the sales of our e-Commerce operations and stores that we have included in our comparable sales base during that period. We include a store in our comparable sales base after it has been open for 15 full fiscal months. If a store is closed during a fiscal year, it is only included in the computation of comparable sales for the full fiscal months in which it was open. The computation of comparable sales includes results from stores that were temporarily closed due to COVID-19. Partial fiscal months are excluded from the computation of comparable sales. Comparable sales allow us to evaluate how our unified commerce business is performing exclusive of the effects of new store openings. We apply current year foreign currency exchange rates to both current year and prior year comparable sales to remove the impact of foreign currency fluctuation and achieve a consistent basis for comparison. Comparable sales allow us to evaluate how our unified commerce business is performing exclusive of the effects of non-comparable sales.
Number of Stores. Store count reflects all stores open at the end of a reporting period. In connection with opening new stores, we incur pre-opening costs, which primarily consist of payroll, travel, training, marketing, initial opening supplies, costs of transporting initial inventory and fixtures to store locations, and occupancy costs incurred from the time of possession of a store site to the opening of that store. These pre-opening costs are included in our selling, general and administrative expenses and are expensed as incurred.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are supplemental measures of our operating performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with GAAP and our calculation thereof may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA represents GAAP net income (loss) plus interest expense less interest income, net of other (income) expense, plus provision for less (benefit from) income taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), and share-based compensation, non-cash deductions and charges and other expenses. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of our total net sales. We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin facilitate operating performance comparisons from period to period by isolating the effects of certain items that vary from period to period without any correlation to ongoing operating performance. We also use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin as two of the primary methods for planning and forecasting the overall expected performance of our business and for evaluating on a quarterly and annual basis actual results against such expectations. Further, we recognize Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin as commonly used measures in determining business value and, as such, use them internally to report and analyze our results and we additionally use Adjusted EBITDA as a benchmark to determine certain non-equity incentive payments made to executives.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have limitations as analytical tools. These measures are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to or substitutes for net income (loss), income (loss) from operations or any other performance measures determined in accordance with GAAP or as alternatives to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Among other limitations, Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect:
•interest expense;
•interest income, net of other (income) expense;
•provision for income taxes;
•depreciation and amortization;
•share-based compensation;
•non-cash deductions and charges;
•other expenses; and
•duplicative Ohio Distribution Center costs.
Material Events and Uncertainties Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Customer Acquisition Retention. Our success is impacted not only by efficient and profitable customer acquisition, but also by our ability to retain customers and encourage repeat purchases. It is important to maintain reasonable costs for these marketing efforts relative to the net sales and profit we expect to derive from customers. Failure to effectively attract customers on a cost-efficient basis would adversely impact our profitability and operating results. New requirements for consumer disclosures regarding privacy practices, and new application tracking transparency framework that requires opt-in consent for certain types of tracking were implemented by third party providers in 2021 which has increased the difficulty and cost of acquiring and retaining customers. These changes may adversely affect our results of operations.
Customer Migration from Single to Omni-channel. We have a history of converting customers from single-channel customers to omni-channel customers, defined as active customers who shopped both online and in-store within the last twelve months. Customers that shop across multiple channels purchase from us more frequently and, spent approximately 3.4 times more per year than our single-channel customer.
Overall Economic Trends. Consumer purchases of clothing generally remain constant or may increase during stable economic periods and decline during recessionary periods and other periods when disposable income is adversely affected. Consequently, our results of operations during any given period are often impacted by the overall economic conditions in the markets which we operate. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have a materially adverse impact on the macroeconomic environment in the United States as well as our results of operations.
Demographic Changes. Our business has experienced growth over recent periods due, in part, to an increase in the plus-size population. Slower or negative growth in this demographic, in particular among women ages 25 to 40, specific to certain geographic markets, income levels or overall, could adversely affect our results of operations.
Growth in Brand Awareness. We intend to continue investing in our brand, with a specific focus on growing brand awareness, customer engagement, and conversion through targeted investments in performance and brand marketing. We have made significant historical investments to strengthen the Torrid brand through our marketing efforts, brand partnerships, events and expansion of our social media presence. If we fail to cost-effectively promote our brand or convert impressions into new customers, our net sales growth and profitability may be adversely affected.
Impact of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition will depend on future developments that are uncertain. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily closed our headquarters, distribution center and retail stores, required our employees and contractors to work remotely, and implemented travel restrictions. The operations of our suppliers and manufacturers and behaviors of customers have likewise been altered. Concurrently with the vaccine rollout, business restrictions and stay-at-home orders have eased out (although we remain subject to the risk of future restrictions). Consumer spending has also increased with additional U.S. government stimulus payments. Consequently, our operating results improved significantly during fiscal year 2021. However, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains highly uncertain and depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the extent and effectiveness of the vaccine rollout and containment actions taken in relation to new variants of COVID-19. As a result, recent favorable trends may not continue and our results of operations may continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investments. We have invested significantly to strengthen our business, including augmenting leadership across our organization and enhancing our infrastructure and technology, and have delivered significant growth as a result. In order to realize such growth, we anticipate that our operating expenses will grow as we continue to increase our spending on advertising and marketing and hire additional personnel primarily in marketing, product design and development, merchandising, technology, operations, customer service and general and administrative functions. We will also continue to selectively expand our store footprint and make investments to improve the customer experience both in-store and online. We believe that such investments will increase the number and loyalty of our customers and, as a result, yield positive financial performance in the long term.
Seasonality. While seasonality frequently impacts businesses in the retail sector, our business is generally not seasonal. Accordingly, our net sales do not fluctuate as significantly as those of other brands and retailers from quarter to quarter and any modest seasonal effect does not significantly change the underlying trends in our business. Additionally, we do not generate an outsized share of our net sales or Adjusted EBITDA during the holiday season. Typically, our Adjusted EBITDA generation is strongest in the first half of the year as we benefit from more favorable merchandise margins, lower advertising and lower shipping expenses relative to the second half of the year. The lack of net sales seasonality provides structural cost advantages relative to peers, including reduced staffing cyclicality and seasonal distribution capacity needs.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Sales. Net sales reflects our revenues from the sale of our merchandise, shipping and handling revenue received from e-Commerce sales and gift card breakage income, less returns, discounts and loyalty points/awards. Revenue from our stores is recognized at the time of sale and revenue from our e-Commerce channel is recognized upon shipment of the merchandise to the home of the customer; except in cases where the merchandise is shipped to a store and revenue is recognized when the customer retrieves the merchandise from the store. Net sales are impacted by the size of our active customer base, product assortment and availability, marketing and promotional activities and the spending habits of our customers. Net sales are also impacted by the migration of single-channel customers (i.e., customers shopping only in-store or online) to omni-channel customers (i.e., customers shopping both in-store and online), who on average spend significantly more than single-channel customers in a given year.
Gross Profit. Gross profit is equal to our net sales less cost of goods sold. Our cost of goods sold includes merchandise costs, freight, inventory shrinkage, payroll expenses associated with the merchandising department, distribution center expenses and store occupancy expenses, including rent, common area maintenance charges, real estate taxes and depreciation. Merchandising payroll costs and store occupancy costs included within cost of goods sold are largely fixed and do not necessarily increase as volume increases. We review our inventory levels on an ongoing basis in order to identify slow-moving merchandise and generally use markdowns to clear that merchandise. The timing and level of markdowns are driven primarily by customer acceptance of our merchandise. The primary drivers of our merchandise costs include the raw materials, labor in the countries where we source our merchandise, customs duties, and logistics costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include all operating costs not included in cost of goods sold or marketing expenses. Our historical revenue growth has been accompanied by increased selling, general and administrative expenses. For instance, we continue to make payroll investments to support our growth.
Marketing Expenses. We continue to make investments in marketing in an effort to grow and retain our active customer base and increase our brand awareness. Marketing expenses consist primarily of (i) targeted online performance marketing costs, such as retargeting, paid search/product listing advertising, and social media advertisements, (ii) store and brand marketing, public relations and photographic production designed to acquire, retain and remain connected to customers, (iii) direct mail marketing costs and (iv) payroll and benefits expenses associated with our marketing team.
Interest Expense. Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense and other fees associated with our Existing ABL Facility, as amended, Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement and New Term Loan Credit Agreement. On June 14, 2021, we repaid and terminated the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement with borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement and amended our Existing ABL Facility.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our provision for income taxes consists of an estimate of federal and state income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions and uncertain tax positions.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
(A)Depreciation and amortization excludes amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discount that are reflected in interest expense.
(B)Prior to the consummation of our IPO on July 6, 2021, share-based compensation was determined based on the remeasurement of our liability-classified incentive units.
(C)Non-cash deductions and charges includes losses on property and equipment disposals and the net impact of non-cash rent expense.
(D)Other expenses include IPO-related transaction fees and the reimbursement of certain management expenses, primarily for travel, incurred by Sycamore on our behalf, which are not considered to be part of our core business.
Net Sales
Net sales for fiscal year 2021 increased $305.3 million, or 31.4%, to $1,278.8 million, from $973.5 million for fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in orders placed and an increase in average order value relative to fiscal year 2020, which was impacted by disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Active customers increased 0.6 million, or 18.8%, to 3.8 million at the end of fiscal year 2021, from 3.2 million at the end of fiscal year 2020. Net sales per active customer increased by 9.4% from $306 in fiscal year 2020 to $335 in fiscal year 2021. The total number of stores we operate increased by 16 stores, or 2.6%, to 624 stores at the end of fiscal year 2021, from 608 stores at the end of fiscal year 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for fiscal year 2021 increased $188.7 million, or 57.1%, to $519.0 million, from $330.3 million for fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher net sales volumes that drove a $205.6 million increase in merchandise margin. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased 6.7% to 40.6% in fiscal year 2021 from 33.9% in fiscal year 2020.
This increase was primarily driven by higher merchandise margin rate and leverage of store occupancy costs, distribution costs, merchandising payroll costs and store depreciation expense as a result of higher net sales volume. The higher merchandise margin rate was primarily driven by decreased promotional activity and write downs of inventory, partially offset by increased transportation costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2021 increased $198.8 million, or 89.5%, to $420.9 million, from $222.1 million for fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $152.0 million increase in share-based compensation expense, increased store payroll costs of $27.7 million, increased performance bonuses of $8.0 million, other store operating cost increases of $6.9 million and increased headquarters general and administrative expenses of $4.2 million, primarily due to additional costs associated with being a publicly traded company. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales increased 10.2% to 33.0% in fiscal year 2021 from 22.8% in fiscal year 2020. This increase was driven by increased share-based compensation expense and performance bonuses, partially offset by leverage of headquarters general and administrative expenses, other store operating costs and store/e-Commerce payroll costs as a result of higher net sales volume.
Marketing Expenses
Marketing expenses for fiscal year 2021 increased $1.3 million, or 2.5%, to $52.7 million, from $51.4 million for fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased digital, store and brand marketing, partially offset by decreased direct mail program spend. Marketing expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased by 1.2% to 4.1% in fiscal year 2021 from 5.3% in fiscal year 2020. This decrease was driven by leverage of our marketing expenses as a result of higher net sales volume.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $29.5 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $21.3 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily due to the write-off of $5.2 million of unamortized deferred financing costs and OID when we repaid the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement, and the $2.1 million prepayment penalty. The increase was also due to an increase in the total borrowings outstanding related to the New Term Loan Credit Agreement as of January 29, 2022 compared to the total borrowings outstanding related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement as of January 30, 2021, partially offset by a lower variable interest rate related to the New Term Loan Credit Agreement compared to the variable interest rate related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes for fiscal year 2021 increased by $34.8 million to $45.8 million, from $11.0 million for fiscal year 2020. Our effective tax rate was 289.2% for fiscal year 2021 as compared to 30.9% for fiscal year 2020. The unconventional effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 is primarily due to the increase in the amount of non-deductible items associated with share-based compensation, relative to income before provision for income taxes for fiscal year 2021. The increase in the amount of non-deductible items associated with share-based compensation during fiscal year 2021 was driven by a $111.4 million remeasurement adjustment related to the increase in the value of the incentive units as indicated by the Torrid Holding LLC equity value as of June 30, 2021, following the pricing of our IPO.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
The following table provides a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
(A)Depreciation and amortization excludes amortization of debt issuance costs and original issue discount that are reflected in interest expense.
(B)Prior to the consummation of our IPO on July 6, 2021, share-based compensation was determined based on the remeasurement of our liability-classified incentive units.
(C)Non-cash deductions and charges includes losses on property and equipment disposals and the net impact of non-cash rent expense.
(D)Other expenses include IPO-related transaction fees and the reimbursement of certain management expenses, primarily for travel, incurred by Sycamore on our behalf, which are not considered to be part of our core business.
(E)Represents the duplicative and start-up costs associated with our West Jefferson, Ohio distribution center leased in fiscal year 2018. This isolates the effect of incurring costs related to our West Jefferson, Ohio distribution center, which was not yet fully operational in fiscal year 2019, while also incurring distribution and e-Commerce fulfillment costs charged to us by Hot Topic under the various services agreements.
Net Sales
Net sales for fiscal year 2020 decreased $63.5 million, or 6.1%, to $973.5 million, from $1,037.0 million for fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by a decline in orders placed and a decline in average order value as a result of the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Active customers decreased 0.2 million, or 5.4%, to 3.2 million at the end of fiscal year 2020, from 3.4 million at the end of fiscal year 2019. Net sales per active customer decreased by 0.6% from $308 in fiscal year 2019 to $306 in fiscal year 2020. The total number of stores we operate increased by 1 store, or 0.2%, to 608 stores at the end of fiscal year 2020, from 607 stores at the end of fiscal year 2019.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for fiscal year 2020 decreased $65.8 million, or 16.6%, to $330.3 million, from $396.1 million for fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower net sales volumes that drove an $88.2 million decrease in merchandise margin. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased 4.3% to 33.9% in fiscal year 2020 from 38.2% in fiscal year 2019. This decrease was driven by lower merchandise margin rate, partially offset by decreased store occupancy costs. The decrease in store occupancy costs was driven by negotiated rent concessions for certain store leases, including rent abatement during the period that those stores were closed due to COVID-19, as well as the transition to variable rent structures, many of which extend through fiscal year 2021 and beyond. The lower merchandise margin rate was primarily driven by increases in promotional activity and e-Commerce shipping cost increases.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2020 decreased $31.3 million, or 12.3%, to $222.1 million, from $253.4 million for fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily due to lower store payroll costs of $24.0 million as a result of temporary store closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a decrease of $4.2 million in share-based compensation expense and a decrease of $2.8 million in performance bonuses. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased by 1.7% to 22.8% in fiscal year 2020 from 24.5% in fiscal year 2019. This decrease was driven by decreased store payroll costs, share-based compensation and performance bonuses, partially offset by increases in other store operating costs and deleverage of our headquarters general and administrative expenses as a result of lower net sales volume.
Marketing Expenses
Marketing expenses for fiscal year 2020 decreased $14.3 million, or 21.8%, to $51.4 million, from $65.7 million for fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily due to decreased spending in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including photographic production and direct mail printing, partially offset by increased online marketing initiatives. Marketing expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased by 1.0% to 5.3% in fiscal year 2020 from 6.3% in fiscal year 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $21.3 million for fiscal year 2020, compared to $16.5 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily due to the interest expense incurred in connection with borrowings of $260.0 million in June 2019 related to the Original Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes for fiscal year 2020 decreased by $7.8 million to $11.0 million, from $18.8 million for fiscal year 2019. Our effective tax rate remained substantially the same at 30.9% for fiscal year 2020 as compared to 31.0% for fiscal year 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our business relies on cash flows from operations as our primary source of liquidity. We do, however, have access to additional liquidity, if needed, through borrowings under our Existing ABL Facility, as amended. Our primary cash needs are for merchandise inventories, payroll, rent for our stores, headquarters and distribution center, capital expenditures associated with opening new stores and updating existing stores, logistics and information technology. We also need cash to fund our interest and principal payments on the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. Additional future liquidity needs will include funding the costs of operating as a public company. The most significant components of our working capital are cash and cash equivalents, merchandise inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and accrued and other current liabilities. We believe that cash generated from operations and the availability of borrowings under our Existing ABL Facility, as amended, or other financing arrangements will be sufficient to meet working capital requirements and anticipated capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. There can be no assurance, however, that our business will generate sufficient cash flows from operations or that future borrowings will be available under our Existing ABL Facility, as amended, or otherwise to enable us to service our indebtedness, or to make capital expenditures in the future. Our future operating performance and our ability to service or extend our indebtedness will be subject to future economic conditions and to financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of operating, investing and financing activities are shown in the following table (dollars in thousands):
Net Cash Provided By Operating Activities
Operating activities consist primarily of net income (loss) adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization and share-based compensation, the effect of working capital changes and taxes paid.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal year 2021 was $121.2 million compared to $151.8 million during fiscal year 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily as a result of increases in inventory purchases and prepaid income taxes and decreases in net income (loss) and operating lease liabilities and a lower increase in accounts payable compared to fiscal year 2020. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was partially offset by a $152.0 million increase in share-based compensation expense added back to net cash provided by operating activities as a non-cash adjustment. The increase in share-based compensation expense for fiscal year 2021 was due to an increase in Torrid Holding LLC’s equity value combined with share-based compensation pursuant to the Torrid Holdings Inc. 2021 Long-Term Incentive Plan adopted on June 22, 2021. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was also partially offset by an increase in accrued and other current liabilities related to increases in accrued inventory in-transit and accrued payroll and related expenses, an increase in income taxes payable and an increase in due to related parties.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal year 2020 was $151.8 million compared to $99.1 million during fiscal year 2019. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was primarily as a result of increases in accounts payable and income taxes payable, a decrease in inventory purchases as a result of the decrease in net sales and a decrease in operating lease liabilities. The increase in cash provided by operating activities was partially offset by a decrease in net income (loss) and a lower increase in accrued and other current liabilities related to lower accrued payroll and related expenses and lower term loan interest payable.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Typical investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures for growth (new store openings, relocations and major remodels), store maintenance (minor store remodels and investments in store fixtures), and infrastructure to support the business related primarily to information technology, our headquarters facility and our West Jefferson, Ohio distribution center.
Net cash used in investing activities were $17.6 million and $11.6 million in fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily as a result of an increase in capital expenditures related to the opening of new stores and store relocations and investments in our West Jefferson, Ohio distribution center during fiscal year 2021, compared to fiscal year 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities were $11.6 million and $56.1 million in fiscal years 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily as a result of a decrease in purchases of property and equipment due to fewer new store openings in fiscal year 2020, a decrease in investments in our West Jefferson, Ohio distribution center in fiscal year 2020 and the absence of information technology asset purchases from Hot Topic in fiscal year 2019.
Net Cash Used In Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of borrowings and repayments related to our Existing ABL Facility, as amended, borrowings and repayments related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement and New Term Loan Credit Agreement and fees and expenses paid in connection with entry into our Existing ABL Facility, as amended, and New Term Loan Credit Agreement and from the repayment and termination of the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Net cash used in financing activities was $197.8 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $45.9 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase in net cash used in financing activities is primarily as a result of the following activities during fiscal year
2021: (i) $300.0 million distribution to Torrid Holding LLC, (ii) principal payments on the Amended Term Loan Credit agreement of $210.7 million, (iii) $2.1 million prepayment penalty related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement, (iv) tax payments of $2.1 million made on behalf of our employees related to the vesting of restricted stock awards and RSUs, (v) $0.7 million of deferred financing costs related to the 3rd Amendment to the Existing ABL Facility, as amended and (vi) $23.4 million for repurchases and retirement of common stock, partially offset by proceeds from the New Term Loan Credit Agreement of $340.5 million, net of OID and deferred financing costs and proceeds of $0.6 million for issuances under share-based compensation plans.
Net cash used in financing activities was $45.9 million for fiscal year 2020 compared to $23.3 million for fiscal year 2019. The increase in cash used in financing activities was primarily as a result of an increase in term loan principal payments.
Debt Financing Arrangements
For the stated periods, our debt financing arrangements consisted of the following (in thousands):
(1)The Original ABL Facility was amended on June 14, 2021 to, among other things, effect an increase in aggregate commitments (subject to a borrowing base) from $70.0 million to $150.0 million. As of January 29, 2022, availability under the Amended ABL Facility was $123.9 million, which reflects no borrowings and $5.3 million of standby letters of credit issued and outstanding.
(2)On June 14, 2021, we repaid and terminated the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement with borrowings under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement.
New Term Loan Credit Agreement
On June 14, 2021, we entered into a term loan credit agreement (“New Term Loan Credit Agreement”) among Bank of America, N.A., as agent, and the lenders party thereto.
The New Term Loan Credit Agreement provides for term loans in an initial aggregate amount of $350.0 million (“Principal”), which is recorded net of an original issue discount (“OID”) of $3.5 million and has a maturity date of June 14, 2028. In connection with the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, we paid financing costs of approximately $6.0 million.
The $346.5 million proceeds of the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, net of OID, were used to (i) repay and terminate the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement (as defined below); (ii) make a $131.7 million distribution to the direct and indirect holders of our equity interests; and (iii) pay for financing costs associated with the New Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Loans made pursuant to the New Term Loan Credit Agreement bear interest at an annual rate equal to, at our option, either (a) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the prime rate quoted by The Wall Street Journal, (2) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (3) a LIBOR rate for an interest period of one month, plus 1.00% (in each case, subject to a floor of 1.75%); or (b) at a LIBOR rate for the interest period relevant to such borrowing (subject to a floor of 0.75%), in each case plus an applicable margin of 5.50% for LIBOR borrowings and 4.50% for base rate borrowings.
If we elect the LIBOR rate, interest is due and payable on the last day of each interest period, unless an interest period exceeds three months, then the respective dates that fall every three months after the beginning of the interest period shall also
be interest payment dates. If we elect the Base rate loan, interest is due and payable the last day of each calendar quarter. The elected interest rate on January 29, 2022 was approximately 6%.
In addition to paying interest on the outstanding Principal under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, we are required to make fixed mandatory repayments of the Principal on the last business day of each fiscal quarter until maturity commencing with the second full fiscal quarter following the closing date (“Repayment”). For each of the fiscal quarters until the maturity date and starting with the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021, Repayments represent 1.25% of the Principal, reduced as a result of the application of prior Prepayments (as defined below).
Under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, we are also required to make variable mandatory prepayments of the Principal, under certain conditions as described below, approximately 102 days after the end of each fiscal year (each, a “Prepayment”). Prepayments, if applicable, commence at the end of fiscal year 2022 and represent between 0% and 50% (depending on our first lien net leverage ratio) of Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the New Term Loan Credit Agreement) in excess of $10.0 million, minus prepayments of Principal, the Existing ABL Facility, as amended (to the extent accompanied by a permanent reduction in the commitments thereunder) and certain other specified indebtedness and amounts in connection with certain other enumerated items.
In addition to mandatory Repayment and Prepayment obligations, we may at our option, prepay a portion of the outstanding Principal (“Optional Prepayment”). If we make Optional Prepayments before June 14, 2023, we will be subject to penalties ranging from 1.00% to 2.00% of the aggregate principal amount.
All of Torrid LLC’s existing domestic subsidiaries and Torrid Intermediate LLC unconditionally guarantee all obligations under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. Substantially all of the assets of Torrid LLC, Torrid LLC’s existing subsidiaries and Torrid Intermediate LLC will secure all such obligations and the guarantees of those obligations, subject to certain exceptions.
The New Term Loan Credit Agreement also contains a number of covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, will restrict our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to: create, incur or assume liens on our assets or property; incur additional indebtedness; issue preferred or disqualified stock; consolidate or merge; sell assets; pay dividends or make distributions, make investments, or engage in transactions with our affiliates.
As of January 29, 2022, we were compliant with our debt covenants under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement.
We consider the carrying amount of the term loan to approximate fair value because it is carried at a market observable interest rate that resets periodically and is categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
As of January 29, 2022, total borrowings, net of OID and financing costs, of $341.4 million remain outstanding under the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. During fiscal year 2021, we recognized $14.0 million of interest expense and $0.9 million OID and financing costs related to the New Term Loan Credit Agreement. The OID and financing costs are amortized over the New Term Loan Credit Agreement’s seven-year term and are reflected as a direct deduction of the face amount of the term loan in our consolidated balance sheets. We recognize interest payments, together with amortization of the OID and financing costs, in interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Term Loan Credit Agreement
On June 14, 2019, we entered into a term loan credit agreement (“Term Loan Credit Agreement”) among Cortland Capital Market Services LLC, as agent, KKR Credit Advisors (US) LLC, as structuring advisor, and the lenders party thereto (the “Original Lenders”). On September 17, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Term Loan Credit Agreement (“Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement”) with the Lenders, pursuant to which the definition of total debt used in the calculation of Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined below) was amended. All other material terms of the Term Loan Credit Agreement remained substantially the same. In September 2020, in conjunction with the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement, we prepaid $35.0 million of the outstanding Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal (as defined below), associated accrued interest of $0.2 million and an amendment fee of $0.5 million. On June 14, 2021, we utilized the proceeds from the New Term Loan Credit Agreement to pay the remaining outstanding Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal (as defined below) of $207.5 million, associated accrued interest of $1.2 million and a prepayment penalty of $2.1 million.
The Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement provided for term loans in an initial aggregate amount of $260.0 million (“Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal”), which was recorded net of an original issue discount (“OID”) of
$2.9 million and had a maturity date of December 14, 2024. In connection with the Term Loan Credit Agreement, we paid financing costs of approximately $4.6 million.
The $257.1 million proceeds of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, net of OID, were used to (i) purchase $213.2 million of senior participating preferred stock from Hot Topic’s Parent, HT Intermediate Holdings Corp., for which we subsequently received a promissory note receivable in exchange from Torrid Holding LLC; (ii) purchase certain information technology assets from Hot Topic for $29.5 million; (iii) make a $10.0 million distribution to Torrid Holding LLC; and (iv) pay for financing costs associated with the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Loans made pursuant to the Original Term Loan Credit Agreement bore interest at an annual rate equal to, at our option, either (a) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the prime rate quoted by The Wall Street Journal, (2) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (3) a LIBOR rate for an interest period of one month, plus 1.00%; or (b) at a LIBOR rate for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, in each case plus an applicable margin of either 6.75% or 7.00% for LIBOR borrowings and either 5.75% or 6.00% for base rate borrowings, in each case, based upon our total net leverage ratio as of the relevant testing date.
If we elected the LIBOR rate, interest was due and payable on the last day of each interest period, unless an interest period exceeded three months, then the respective dates that fell every three months after the beginning of the interest period would also be interest payment dates. If we elected the Base rate loan, interest was due and payable the last day of each fiscal quarter.
In addition to paying interest on the outstanding Principal under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement, we were required to make fixed mandatory repayments of the Principal on the last business day of each fiscal quarter until maturity (“Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Repayment”). Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Repayments for the first four fiscal quarters, starting in the third quarter of fiscal year 2019, represented 0.75% of the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal, reduced as a result of the application of prior Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Prepayments (as defined below). For each of the eight fiscal quarters thereafter, Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Repayments represented 1.25% of the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal, reduced as a result of the application of prior Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Prepayments (as defined below). For each of the 10 fiscal quarters thereafter until the maturity date, Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Repayments represented 1.875% of the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal, reduced as a result of the application of prior Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Prepayments (as defined below).
Under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement, we were also required to make variable mandatory prepayments of the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal, under certain conditions as described below, approximately 102 days after the end of each fiscal year (each, an “Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Prepayment”). Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Prepayments, if applicable, commenced at the end of fiscal year 2018 and represented between 25% and 75% (depending on our first lien net leverage ratio) of Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement) in excess of $2.0 million, minus prepayments of Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement Principal, the Existing ABL Facility, as amended (as defined below), (to the extent accompanied by a permanent reduction in the commitments thereunder) and certain other specified indebtedness and amounts in connection with certain other enumerated items. As of January 30, 2021, our Excess Cash Flow amount was $2.0 million which did not meet the Excess Cash Flow threshold to require an Original Prepayment.
All of Torrid LLC’s existing domestic subsidiaries and Torrid Intermediate LLC unconditionally guaranteed all obligations under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement. Substantially all of the assets of Torrid LLC, Torrid LLC’s existing subsidiaries and Torrid Intermediate LLC secured all such obligations and the guarantees of those obligations, subject to certain exceptions.
Our borrowings under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement were subject to a financial covenant that required us to maintain a maximum ratio of our total debt to EBITDA, (as defined in the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement) (“Total Net Leverage Ratio”). The maximum ratio was 3.60 for the quarter ended November 2, 2019, 3.35 for the quarters ended February 1, 2020, May 2, 2020, and August 1, 2020, 3.10 for the quarter ended October 31, 2020, 2.50 for the quarter ended January 30, 2021, 2.35 for the quarter ended May 1, 2021, 2.10 for the quarters ending July 31, 2021 and October 30, 2021, and 1.85 for all quarters thereafter. The Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement amended the definition of total debt used in the Total Net Leverage Ratio calculation for the quarters ended October 31, 2020, January 30, 2021, and May 1, 2021 and July 31, 2021. The amended definition of total debt permitted us to exclude indebtedness associated with our Existing ABL Facility, as amended, through the quarter ended October 31, 2020, removed the $20.0 million cap from the amount of cash and cash equivalents on-hand that we were permitted to net against our total debt for purposes of the ratio calculation through the quarter
ended January 30, 2021, and raised the $20.0 million cap to $40.0 million and $30.0 million for the quarters ended May 1, 2021 and July 31, 2021, respectively, before reverting to $20.0 million for all quarters thereafter.
The Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement contained a limitation on our capital expenditures paid in cash in any fiscal year and such expenditures could not exceed 37.5% of prior year Adjusted EBITDA (as defined by the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement). If the amount of our capital expenditures paid in cash in any year was less than the 37.5% threshold, 50% of the difference was to be automatically applied to increase the maximum threshold in the next year. The Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement also contained a number of covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, would restrict our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to: create, incur or assume liens on our assets or property; incur additional indebtedness; make capital expenditures; issue preferred or disqualified stock; incur hedging obligations; consolidate or merge; sell assets; pay dividends or make distributions, make investments, or engage in transactions with our affiliates.
During fiscal year 2019, we recognized $14.9 million of interest expense and recognized $0.9 million of non-cash interest expense related to OID and financing costs related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement. During fiscal year 2020, we recognized $19.2 million of interest expense and recognized $1.4 million of OID and financing costs related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement. During fiscal year 2021, we recognized $8.2 million of interest expense and recognized $0.4 million of OID and financing costs related to the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement. The OID and financing costs were amortized over the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement’s five and a half-year term and were reflected as a direct deduction of the face amount of the term loan in our consolidated balance sheets. On June 14, 2021, upon repayment of the outstanding borrowings under the Amended Term Loan Credit Agreement, we wrote off $5.2 million of unamortized OID and financing costs and incurred a $2.1 million prepayment penalty. We recognize interest payments, together with amortization of the OID and financing costs, in interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Senior Secured Asset-Based Revolving Credit Facility
In May 2015, we entered into a credit agreement for a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility (“Original ABL Facility”) of $50.0 million (subject to a borrowing base), with Bank of America, N.A. On October 23, 2017, we entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (“Existing ABL Facility”), which amended our Original ABL Facility. The Existing ABL Facility increased the aggregate commitments available under the Original ABL Facility from $50.0 million to $100.0 million (subject to a borrowing base); and increased our right to request additional commitments from up to $30.0 million to up to $30.0 million plus the aggregate principal amount of any permanent principal reductions we may take (subject to customary conditions precedent). On June 14, 2019, in conjunction with the Term Loan Credit Agreement, we entered into an amendment to the Existing ABL Facility (the “1st Amendment”). The 1st Amendment decreased the aggregate commitments available under the Existing ABL Facility from $100.0 million to $70.0 million (subject to a borrowing base), permitted indebtedness incurred pursuant to the Term Loan Credit Agreement and made certain other modifications. On September 4, 2019, we entered into another amendment to the Existing ABL Facility (the “2nd Amendment”). The 2nd Amendment permitted parent company financial statements to be used to satisfy reporting requirements and made certain other modifications. On June 14, 2021, in conjunction with the New Term Loan Credit Agreement, we entered into a third amendment to the Existing ABL Facility (the “3rd Amendment”), which amended our Existing ABL Facility, as amended. The 3rd Amendment increased the aggregate commitments available under the Existing ABL facility, as amended, from $70.0 million to $150.0 million (subject to a borrowing base) and extended the date upon which the principal amount outstanding of the loans would be due and payable in full from October 23, 2022 to June 14, 2026. All other material terms of the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, remain substantially the same as the previous agreements it replaced.
The borrowing base for the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, at any time equals the sum of 90% of eligible credit card receivables, plus 90% of the appraised net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory and eligible in-transit inventory multiplied by the cost of such eligible inventory and eligible in-transit inventory (to be increased to 92.5% during the period beginning on September 1 of each year and ending on December 31 of each year). The Existing ABL Facility, as amended, includes borrowing capacity for letters of credit and for borrowings on same-day notice, referred to as Swing Line Loans, and is available in U.S. dollars.
Under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, we have the right to request up to $50.0 million of additional commitments plus the aggregate principal amount of any permanent principal reductions we may take plus the amount by which the borrowing base exceeds the aggregate commitments (subject to customary conditions precedent). The lenders under this facility are not under any obligation to provide any such additional commitments, and any increase in commitments is subject to customary conditions precedent. If we were to request any such additional commitments and the existing lenders or new lenders
were to agree to provide such commitments, the size of the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, could increase to up to $200.0 million, but our ability to borrow under this facility would still be limited by the amount of the borrowing base.
Borrowings under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, bear interest at an annual rate equal to, at our option, either (a) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the prime rate of Bank of America, N.A., (2) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (3) a LIBOR rate for an interest period of one month adjusted for certain costs, plus 1.00% or (b) at a LIBOR rate for the interest period relevant to such borrowing adjusted for certain costs (“Adjusted LIBOR”), in each case plus an applicable margin that ranges from 1.25% to 1.75% for LIBOR borrowings and 0.25% to 0.75% for base rate borrowings, in each case, based on average daily availability. As of January 29, 2022, the applicable interest rate for borrowings under the Existing ABL Facility was approximately 4% per annum.
If we elect the LIBOR rate, interest is due and payable on the last day of each interest period, unless an interest period exceeds three months, then the respective dates that fall every three months after the beginning of the interest period shall also be interest payment dates. If we opt for the base rate (including a Swing Line Loan), interest is due and payable on the first business day of each month and on the maturity date.
In addition to paying interest on outstanding principal under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, we are required to pay a commitment fee in respect of unutilized commitments. The commitment fee ranges between 0.25% and 0.375% per annum of unutilized commitments and will be subject to adjustment each fiscal quarter based on the amount of unutilized commitments during the immediately preceding fiscal quarter. We must also pay customary letter of credit fees and agent fees.
If at any time the aggregate amount of outstanding loans, unreimbursed letter of credit drawings and undrawn letters of credit under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, exceeds the lesser of (a) the commitment amount and (b) the borrowing base, we will be required to repay outstanding loans and/or cash collateralize letters of credit in an aggregate amount equal to such excess, with no reduction of the commitment amount.
We may voluntarily reduce the unused portion of the commitment amount and repay outstanding loans at any time. Prepayment of the loans may be made without premium or penalty other than customary “breakage” costs with respect to LIBOR loans.
All obligations under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, are unconditionally guaranteed by substantially all of Torrid Intermediate LLC’s existing majority-owned domestic subsidiaries and will be required to be guaranteed by certain of Torrid Intermediate LLC’s future domestic majority-owned subsidiaries. All obligations under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, and the guarantees of those obligations, will be secured, subject to certain exceptions, by substantially all of Torrid Intermediate LLC’s assets.
The Existing ABL Facility, as amended, requires us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.00 to 1.00 if we fail to maintain Specified Availability (as defined by the Existing ABL Facility, as amended) of at least the greater of 10% of the Loan Cap, as defined by the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, and $7.0 million. The Existing ABL Facility, as amended, contains a number of other covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, will restrict our ability and the ability of our subsidiaries to: incur additional indebtedness; pay dividends on our capital stock or redeem, repurchase or retire our capital stock or our other indebtedness; make investments, loans and acquisitions; engage in transactions with our affiliates; sell assets, including capital stock of our subsidiaries; alter the business we conduct; consolidate or merge; and incur liens. As of January 29, 2022, we were compliant with our debt covenants under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended.
The Existing ABL Facility, as amended, specifically restricts dividends and distributions, aside from amounts to cover ordinary operating expenses and taxes, between our subsidiaries and to us. However, dividends and distributions are permitted at any time that either (1) availability under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, is equal to or greater than 15% of the maximum borrowing amount on a pro forma basis and we are pro forma compliant with a 1.00 to 1.00 fixed charge coverage ratio or (2) availability under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, is equal to or greater than 20% of the maximum borrowing amount on a pro forma basis. As of January 29, 2022, the maximum restricted payment utilizing the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, that our subsidiaries could make from its net assets was $109.8 million.
We consider the carrying amounts of the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, to approximate fair value because of the variable interest rate of this facility.
Availability under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, as of January 30, 2021 and as of January 29, 2022 was $65.5 million and $123.9 million, respectively, which reflects no borrowings. In March 2020, we borrowed $50.0 million from the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, as a precautionary measure to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility in light of uncertainty resulting from COVID-19. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2020, we repaid the $50.0 million outstanding under the Existing ABL Facility, as amended. Standby letters of credit issued and outstanding were $4.5 million as of January 30, 2021 and $5.3 million as of January 29, 2022. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2017, we incurred $0.5
million of financing costs for the Existing ABL Facility, which were reduced in fiscal year 2019 by $0.1 million written off to account for the impact of our entry into the 1st Amendment. During the second quarter of fiscal year 2021, we incurred an additional $0.7 million of financing costs in connection with our entry into the 3rd Amendment. These financing costs, together with the unamortized financing costs of $0.1 million associated with the Original ABL Facility, are amortized over the five-year term of the Existing ABL Facility, as amended, and are reflected in prepaid expenses and other current assets and deposits and other noncurrent assets in our consolidated balance sheets. During fiscal years 2019, 2020 and 2021, we amortized financing costs of $0.1 million in each period. During fiscal years 2019, 2020 and 2021, interest payments were $0.5 million, $0.6 million and $0.6 million, respectively. We recognize amortization of financing costs and interest payments for the revolving credit facilities in interest expense in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Share Repurchases
On December 6, 2021, our board of directors authorized a new share repurchase program under which we may purchase up to $100.0 million of our outstanding common stock. Repurchases may be made from time to time, depending upon a variety of factors, including share price, corporate and regulatory requirements, and other market and business conditions, as determined by us. We may purchase shares of our common stock in the open market at current market prices at the time of purchase, in privately negotiated transactions, or by other means. The authorization does not, however, obligate us to acquire any particular amount of shares, and the share repurchase program may be suspended or terminated at any time at our discretion. As of January 29, 2022, we had approximately $76.6 million remaining under the repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into long term contractual obligations and commitments in the normal course of business, primarily debt obligations, purchase obligations and non-cancelable operating leases. As of January 29, 2022, our contractual cash obligations over the next several periods are set forth below (dollars in thousands).
(1)Amounts assume that the New Term Loan Credit Agreement is paid upon maturity and does not consider any variable mandatory principal prepayments or optional principal prepayments which we may make in the future.
(2)Assumes an interest rate of approximately 6% per annum, consistent with the interest rate at January 29, 2022.
(3)Amounts listed above do not include cash obligations related to relocation expenses in connection with the involuntary separation of certain employees due to the uncertainty regarding the amount of such expenses.
(4)Includes estimated annual future minimum occupancy payments under operating leases including minimum base rents, common area maintenance charges and heating, ventilation and cooling charges, for lease terms that include periods covered by options to extend some of our leases, as we are reasonably certain to exercise those options. Options to terminate our leases have not been included in any lease terms as we are not reasonably certain to exercise those options. See “Note 9-Leases” contained in the consolidated financial statements and notes, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional disclosure related to operating lease obligations.
We have not included any income tax audit settlement payments due in less than one year in the contractual obligations table above as we do not have any open income tax audits as of January 29, 2022 or any material gross unrecognized tax benefits for which the statutes of limitations are expected to expire in fiscal year 2022. In addition, due to the uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with noncurrent unrecognized tax benefits of $3.5 million, we are unable to make a reliable estimate of the periods of cash settlement with the respective tax authorities and have not included such amounts in the contractual obligations table above.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion of results of operations and financial condition is based upon the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and certain assumptions about future
events that affect the classification and amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes, including revenue and expenses, assets and liabilities, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions are based on our historical results as well as management’s judgment. Although management believes the judgment applied in preparing estimates is reasonable based on circumstances and information known at the time, actual results could vary materially from estimates based on assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
The most significant accounting estimates involve a high degree of judgment or complexity. Management believes the estimates and judgments most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and to the understanding of our reported financial results include those made in connection with revenue recognition, including accounting for gift card breakage, estimated merchandise returns and loyalty program expenses; estimating the value of inventory; determining operating lease liabilities; and estimating share-based compensation expense. Management evaluates its policies and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our significant accounting estimates related to these accounts in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are described below (see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding our critical accounting policies).
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when our performance obligations under the terms of a contract or an implied arrangement with a customer are satisfied, which is when the merchandise is transferred to the customer and the customer obtains control of it. The amount of revenue we recognize reflects the total consideration we expect to receive for the merchandise, which is the transaction price. For arrangements that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis.
At our retail store locations, we satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue at the point in time when a customer takes possession of the merchandise and tenders payment at the point-of-sale register. For e-Commerce sales shipped to a customer from our distribution center, or from a retail store location (ship from store), we satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue upon shipment, which is the point in time we believe the customer obtains control of the merchandise after payment has been tendered. Income we receive from customers for shipping and handling is recognized as a component of revenue upon shipment of merchandise to the customer. We satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue from e-Commerce sales shipped to a retail store location from our distribution center, or fulfilled from merchandise already located at a retail store location (buy-online-pickup-in-store), at the point in time when the customer retrieves the merchandise from within the retail store location or at a retail store curbside.
We are required to estimate certain amounts included in a contract or an implied arrangement with a customer which add variability to the transaction price. Under certain conditions, we are obligated to accept customer returns for most of our merchandise. Sales returns reduce the revenue we expect to receive for merchandise and therefore add variability to the transaction price. Based on historical return pattern experience, we reasonably estimate the amount of merchandise expected to be returned and exclude it from revenue. We record a reserve for merchandise returns at the time revenue is recognized based on prior returns experience and expected future returns in accordance with our return policy and discretionary returns practices. We monitor our returns experience and resulting reserves on an ongoing basis and we believe our estimates are reasonable. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the assumptions used to calculate the allowance for sales returns. However, if actual sales returns are significantly different than the estimated allowance, our results of operations could be materially affected.
We satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue from gift cards and store merchandise credits at the point in time when the customer presents the gift cards and store merchandise credits for redemption. Gift card breakage is income recognized due to the non-redemption of a portion of gift cards sold by us for which a liability was recorded in prior periods. We recognize estimated gift card breakage over time as a component of net sales in proportion to the pattern of rights exercised by the customer as reflected in actual gift card redemption patterns over the period. Based upon historical experience, we estimate the value of outstanding gift cards that will ultimately not be redeemed (breakage) nor escheated under statutory unclaimed property laws. This amount is recognized as revenue over the time pattern established by our historical gift card redemption experience. We monitor our gift card redemption experience and associated accounting on an ongoing basis. Our historical experience has not varied significantly from amounts historically recorded and we believe our assumptions are reasonable. While customer redemption patterns result in estimated gift card breakage, changes in our customers’ behavior could impact the amount that ultimately is unused and could affect the amount recognized as a component of net sales.
If a customer earns loyalty program points in connection with the sales transactions described above, then we have a remaining performance obligation and cannot recognize all the revenue. A portion of the revenue is allocated to the loyalty program points earned during the transaction. We satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue allocated to these
loyalty program points and the resulting awards at the point in time when the awards are redeemed for merchandise, when we determine that they will not be redeemed, or when the awards and points expire. Under our loyalty program, customers accumulate points based on purchase activity and effective the second quarter of fiscal year 2019, qualifying non-purchase activity. Upon reaching a certain point level, customers can earn awards that may only be redeemed for merchandise. Unredeemed points typically expire after 13 months without additional purchase activity and effective the second quarter of fiscal year 2019, qualifying non-purchase activity. Unredeemed awards typically expire 45 days after issuance. We use historical redemption rates to estimate the value of future award redemptions and we recognize the estimated value of these future awards as a reduction of revenue in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) in the period the points are earned by the customer.
Inventory
Inventory consists of finished goods merchandise held for sale to our customers. Inventory is valued at the lower of moving average cost or net realizable value.
In the normal course of business, we record inventory reserves based on past and projected sales performance, as well as the inventory on hand. We make certain assumptions regarding net realizable value in order to assess whether our inventory is recorded properly at the lower of cost or net realizable value. These assumptions are based on both historical average selling price experience, current selling price information and estimated future selling price information. The carrying value of inventory is reduced to estimated net realizable value when factors indicate that merchandise will not be sold on terms sufficient to recover its cost.
We monitor inventory levels, sales trends and sales forecasts to estimate and record reserves for excess, slow-moving and obsolete inventory. Accordingly, estimates of future sales prices requires management judgment based on historical experience, assessment of current conditions and assumptions about future transactions. In addition, we conduct physical inventory counts to determine and record actual shrinkage. Estimates for shrinkage are recorded between physical counts, based on actual shrinkage experience. Actual shrinkage can vary from these estimates. We believe our assumptions are reasonable, and we monitor actual results to adjust estimates and inventory balances on an ongoing basis.
Leases
We consider an agreement to be or contain a lease if it conveys us with the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration. Based on these criteria, we have operating lease agreements for our retail stores, distribution center and headquarter office space; and vehicles and equipment; under primarily non-cancelable leases with terms ranging from approximately two to seventeen years.
Certain of our operating lease agreements contain one or more options to extend the leases at our sole discretion. However, the periods covered by the options to extend the leases of our retail stores, vehicles and equipment are not recognized as part of the associated ROU assets and lease liabilities, as we are not reasonably certain to exercise the options. The periods covered by the options to extend the leases of our distribution center and headquarter office space are recognized as part of the associated ROU assets and lease liabilities, as we are reasonably certain to exercise the options. Some of our operating lease agreements contain options to terminate the lease under certain conditions.
The retail space leases provide for rents based upon the greater of the minimum annual rental amounts or a percentage of annual store net sales volume. Certain leases provide for increasing minimum annual rental amounts. We consider rents based upon a percentage of annual store net sales volume, and other rent-related payments that generally vary because of changes in facts and circumstances (other than due to the passage of time), to be variable lease payments. Variable lease payments associated with retail space leases are recognized as occupancy costs within cost of goods sold in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. We generally consider all other lease payments to be fixed in nature and the sum of all the discounted remaining fixed payments in the lease terms make up the lease liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet (if the lease terms are longer than 12 months).
We discount the fixed lease payments that make up the lease liabilities using an incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”), as the rates implicit in our leases are not readily determinable. The IBR is the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. The determination of the incremental borrowing rate incorporates various assumptions including the financial scale, leverage and coverage measures that indicate our financial flexibility and long-term viability. These measures utilize credit ratings that are assigned scores which, when weighted based on certain quantitative factors, indicate overall credit rating. An IBR for each lease term is determined based on the credit rating. All scores, credit ratings and corresponding IBRs are highly subjective.
We choose not to separate nonlease components (such as common area maintenance charges and heating, ventilation and air conditioning charges), from lease components (such as fixed minimum rent payments), and instead account for each separate lease component and the nonlease components associated with that lease component as a single lease component. We do not apply ASU 2016-02, Leases, and all related guidance ("ASC 842") requirements to leases that have lease terms of 12 months or less upon commencement, and instead recognize short-term lease payments, if applicable, in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued interpretive guidance in April 2020, which provides entities the option to elect to account for lease concessions as though the enforceable rights and obligations existed in the original lease terms. We elected this option; accordingly, we do not remeasure the lease liabilities or record a change to the ROU assets for any concessions we receive for our retail store leases. Rather, deferred lease payments are recorded to operating lease liabilities until paid and lease concessions are recorded in the period they are negotiated or when the lower lease expense is paid.
Share-Based Compensation
Prior to our IPO, Torrid Holding LLC issued 13,660,000 Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, Class E, Class F, Class G, Class H and Class J Torrid incentive units, in the aggregate, net of forfeitures, to certain members of our management. These incentive units were intended to constitute profits interests.
We recognized the impact of share-based compensation associated with incentive units issued by Torrid Holding LLC in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). The share-based compensation expense and related capital contribution are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as these awards were deemed to be for our benefit. The intent of the incentive units was to provide profit-sharing opportunities to management rather than equity ownership in our then parent, Torrid Holding LLC. The incentive units did not have any voting or distribution rights and contained a repurchase feature, whereby upon termination, Torrid Holding LLC had the right to purchase from former employees any or all of the vested incentive units at fair value. In addition, although the fair value of the incentive units was determined through an option pricing methodology that utilized the possible equity values of Torrid Holding LLC, the settlement amounts and method of settlement of the incentive units were at the discretion of the Board. Based on these aforementioned features and characteristics, we determined that the incentive units were in-substance liabilities accounted for as liability instruments in accordance with ASC 710, Compensation. The incentive units were remeasured based on the fair value of the awards at the end of each reporting period. We recorded the expense associated with changes in the fair value of these incentive units as a capital contribution from our former parent, Torrid Holding LLC, as our former parent was the legal obligor for the incentive units.
The incentive units were valued utilizing a CCA methodology based on a Black-Scholes OPM. Under the OPM, each class of incentive units was modeled as a call option with a unique claim on the assets of Torrid Holding LLC. The characteristics of each class of incentive units determined the uniqueness of the claim on the assets of Torrid Holding LLC. The OPM used to value the incentive units incorporated various assumptions, including the time to liquidity event, equity volatility and risk-free interest rate of return. Equity volatility was based on the historical volatilities of comparable publicly traded companies for the time horizon equal to the time to the anticipated liquidity event; and the risk-free interest rate was for a term corresponding to the time to liquidity event. The assumptions underlying the valuation of the incentive units represented our best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgement. The most recent remeasurement of the fair value of the incentive units utilizing the CCA methodology was performed as of May 1, 2021. Following the pricing of our IPO, the vested portion of the incentive units was exchanged for shares of our common stock of an equivalent fair value as the vested incentive units and the unvested portion was cancelled. As such, the fair value of these incentive units is no longer recognized in our consolidated statement of operations.
On June 22, 2021, in connection with our IPO, we adopted the Torrid Holdings Inc. 2021 Long-Term Incentive Plan (the “2021 LTIP”), for employees, consultants and directors. The 2021 LTIP provides for the grant of stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), among other types of awards, all of which are accounted for in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. The Company measures share-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognizes share-based compensation cost as expense over the vesting period. As share-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations is based on awards ultimately expected to vest, the amount of expense has been reduced for actual forfeitures as they occur.
Stock options are valued utilizing a Black-Scholes OPM. The OPM used to value the stock options incorporates various assumptions, including dividend yield, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected term of the stock options. The expected volatility is estimated based on the historical volatility of a select peer group of similar publicly traded companies for
a term that is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. The risk-free interest rates are based on the U.S. Treasury constant maturity interest rate whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. The expected term of the stock options represents the estimated period of time until exercise and is calculated using the simplified method which deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. The grant date fair value of restricted stock and RSUs is based on the closing price per share of our common stock on the grant date. We recognize compensation expense for time-based awards on a straight-line basis and for performance-based awards on the graded-vesting method over the vesting period of the awards.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to "Note 3-Accounting Standards" in our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.