ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited financial statements and notes thereto for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the following sections, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Throughout this Report, and particularly in this Item 7, the forward-looking statements are based upon the Company’s current expectations, estimates and projections and that reflect the Company’s beliefs and assumptions based upon information available to the Company at the date of this Report. In some cases, you can identify these statements by words such as “may,” “might,” “could,” “will,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “likely,” “believes,” “estimates,” “intends,” “forecasts,” “foresees,” “predicts,” “potential” or “continue,” and other similar terms. These forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that are difficult to predict. The Company’s actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements relating to the Company’s future financial performance, the ability to grow the Company’s business, increase the Company’s revenue, manage expenses, generate additional cash, achieve and maintain profitability, develop and commercialize existing and new products and applications, improve the performance of the Company’s worldwide sales and distribution network, and to the outlook regarding long term prospects. The Company cautions you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s analysis only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company undertakes no obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Form 10-K.
Some of the important factors that could cause the Company’s results to differ materially from those in the Company’s forward-looking statements, and a discussion of other risks and uncertainties, are discussed in Item 1A - Risk Factors. The Company encourages you to read that section carefully as well as other risks detailed from time to time in the Company’s filings with the SEC.
Introduction
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is organized as follows:
•Executive Summary. This section provides a general description and history of the Company’s business, a brief discussion of the Company’s product lines and the opportunities, trends, challenges and risks the Company focuses on in the operation of the Company’s business.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. This section describes the key accounting policies that are affected by critical accounting estimates.
•Recent Accounting Guidance. This section describes the issuance and effect of new accounting pronouncements that are or may be applicable to us.
•Results of Operations. This section provides the Company’s analysis and outlook for the significant line items on the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources. This section provides an analysis of the Company’s liquidity and cash flows, as well as a discussion of the Company’s commitments that existed as of December 31, 2021.
We have omitted discussion of 2019 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which has been filed with the SEC.
Executive Summary
Company Description
The Company is a leading medical device company specializing in the research, development, manufacture, marketing and servicing of light and other energy-based aesthetics systems for practitioners worldwide. In addition to internal development of products, the Company distributes third party sourced products under the Company’s own brand names. The Company offers easy-to-use products which enable practitioners to perform safe and effective aesthetic procedures, including treatment for body contouring, skin resurfacing and revitalization, tattoo removal, removal of benign pigmented lesions, vascular conditions, hair removal, and toenail fungus. The Company’s platforms are designed to be easily upgraded to add additional applications and hand pieces, which provide flexibility for the Company’s customers as they expand their practices. In addition to systems and upgrade revenue, the Company generates revenue from the sale of post warranty service contracts, providing services for products that are out of warranty, hand piece refills and other per procedure related revenue on select systems and distribution of third-party manufactured skincare products.
The Company’s ongoing research and development activities primarily focus on developing new products, as well as improving and enhancing the Company’s portfolio of existing products. The Company also explores ways to expand the Company’s product offerings through alternative arrangements with other companies, such as distribution arrangements. The Company introduced Secret RF, a fractional RF microneedling device for skin revitalization, in January 2018, enlighten SR in April 2018, truSculpt iD in July 2018, excel V+ in February 2019 truSculpt flex in June 2019, Secret PRO in July 2020 and excel V+III during the fourth quarter of 2020. In 2021, the Company introduced truSculpt flex+, a treatment mode that decreased the treatment time from approximately 45 minutes to 15 minutes.
The Company’s corporate headquarters and U.S. operations are located in Brisbane, California, where the Company conducts manufacturing, warehousing, research and development, regulatory, sales and marketing, service, and administrative activities. The Company markets sells and services the Company’s products through direct sales and service employees in North America (including Canada), Australia, Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Sales and Services outside of these direct markets are made through a worldwide distributor network in over 42 countries.
Products and Services
The Company derives revenue from the sale of products and services. Product revenue includes revenue from the sale of systems, hand pieces and upgrade of systems (collectively “Systems” revenue), replacement hand pieces, truSculpt iD cycle refills, and truSculpt flex cycle refills, as well as single use disposable tips applicable to Secret RF (“Consumables” revenue), the sale of third party manufactured skincare products (“Skincare” revenue); and the leasing of equipment through a membership program. A system consists of a console that incorporates a universal graphic user interface, a laser and (or) an energy-based module, control system software and high voltage electronics, as well as one or more hand pieces. However, depending on the application, the laser or other energy-based module is sometimes contained in the hand piece such as with the Company’s Pearl and Pearl Fractional applications instead of within the console.
The Company offers customers the ability to select the system that best fits their practice at the time of purchase and then to cost-effectively add applications to their system as their practice grows. This provides customers the flexibility to upgrade their systems whenever they choose and provides the Company with a source of additional Systems revenue. The Company’s primary system platforms include excel, enlighten, Secret RF, truSculpt and xeo.
Skincare revenue relates to the distribution of ZO’s skincare products in Japan. The skincare products are purchased from a third-party manufacturer and sold to medical offices and licensed physicians. The Company acts as the principal in this arrangement, as the Company determines the price to charge customers for the skincare products and controls the products before they are transferred to the customer.
Service includes prepaid service contracts, and labor, time and material on out-of-warranty products.
Significant Business Trends
The Company believes that the ability to grow revenue will be primarily impacted by the following:
•continuing to expand the Company’s product offerings, both through internal development and sourcing from other vendors;
•ongoing investment in the Company’s global sales and marketing infrastructure;
•use of clinical results to support new aesthetic products and applications;
•enhanced luminary development and reference selling efforts (to develop a location where Company’s products can be displayed and used to assist in selling efforts);
•customer demand for the Company’s products;
•consumer demand for the application of the Company’s products;
•marketing to physicians in the core dermatology and plastic surgeon specialties, as well as outside those specialties; and
•generating recurring revenue from the Company’s growing installed base of customers through the sale of system upgrades, services, hand piece refills, truSculpt cycles, skincare products and replacement tips for Secret RF products.
For a detailed discussion of the significant business trends impacting the Company’s business, please see the section titled “Results of Operations” below.
Critical accounting policies, significant judgments and use of estimates
The preparation of the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and related notes requires the Company to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company has based its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that the Company believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. The Company periodically reviews its
estimates and makes adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, its financial condition or results of operations will be affected.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements. The Company believes that its critical accounting policies reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of its audited consolidated financial statements. The critical accounting policies, judgments and estimates should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and other disclosures included in this report.
For an analysis of the Company’s Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates please refer to Note 1 “Summary of significant accounting policies” to the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies, estimates and assumptions may have a material impact on reported financial condition and operating performance and may involve significant levels of judgment to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to significant change:
Revenue Recognition
See "Part II, Item 8. Revenue Recognition, Note 1" to the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about the Company’s revenue recognition policy, significant judgement and criteria for recognizing revenue.
The Company enters into contracts with multiple performance obligations where customers purchase a combination of systems and services. Determining whether systems and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately requires judgment. The Company determines the transaction price for a contract based on the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for the transferred goods or services. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, such as expected price adjustments for returns, the Company applies judgment when estimating variable consideration and when estimating the extent to which the transaction price is subject to the constraint on variable consideration. The Company evaluates constraints based on its historical and projected experience with similar customer contracts.
The Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation in proportion to the relative standalone selling prices (“SSP”) and recognizes revenue when control of the related goods or services is transferred for each performance obligation.
The Company utilizes the observable standalone selling price when available, which represents the price charged for the performance obligation when sold separately. When standalone selling prices for systems or services are not directly observable, the Company determines the standalone selling prices using relevant information available and applies suitable estimation methods including, but not limited to, the cost plus a margin approach.
The Company determines the SSP for systems based on directly observable sales in similar circumstances to similar customers. The SSPs for extended service contracts are based on observable prices when sold on a standalone basis.
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract, including sales commissions, are allocated to the distinct goods and services to which they relate based on the relative stand-alone selling prices. Incremental costs related to obligations delivered at inception are recognized at contract inception. Those related to obligations delivered over time are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit if the Company expects to recover those costs. The Company uses the portfolio method to recognize the amortization expense related to these capitalized costs related to initial contracts and such expense is recognized over a period associated with the revenue of the related portfolio, which is generally two to three years for the Company’s product and service arrangements.
Leases
Lessee
The Company is a party to certain operating and finance leases for vehicles, office space and storages. The Company’s material operating leases consist of office space, as well as storage facilities. The Company’s leases generally have remaining terms of one to ten years, some of which include options to renew the leases for up to five years.
The Company determines if a contract contains a lease at inception. Right of use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date. Operating lease liabilities represent the present value of lease payments not yet paid. Operating lease right of use assets represent the right to use an underlying asset and are based upon the operating lease liabilities adjusted for prepayments or accrued lease payments, initial direct costs, lease incentives, and impairment of operating lease assets. To determine the present value of lease payments not yet paid, the Company estimates the incremental secured borrowing rates corresponding to the maturities of the leases. The Company bases the rate estimates on prevailing financial market conditions, credit analysis and management judgment.
The Company recognizes expense for operating leases on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Additionally, tenant incentives used to fund leasehold improvements are recognized when earned and reduce the Company’s right-of-use asset related to the lease. These are amortized through the right-of-use asset as reductions of expense over the lease term.
Valuation of Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value, cost being determined on a standard cost basis which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis. Net realizable value is the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of the Company’s business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. Standard costs are monitored and updated quarterly or as necessary, to reflect changes in raw material costs, labor to manufacture the product and overhead rates.
The cost basis of the Company’s inventory is reduced for any products that are considered excess or obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. The Company provides for excess and obsolete inventories when conditions indicate that the inventory cost is not recoverable due to physical deterioration, forecast usage, obsolescence, reductions in estimated future demand and reductions in selling prices. Inventory provisions are measured as the difference between the cost of inventory and net realizable value to establish a lower cost basis for the inventories. The Company balances the need to maintain strategic inventory levels with the risk of obsolescence due to changing technology, timing of new product introductions and customer demand levels.
The Company includes demonstration units within inventories. Demonstration units are carried at cost and amortized over an estimated economic life of two years. Amortization expense related to demonstration units is recorded in Products cost of revenue or in the respective operating expense line based on which function and purpose for which the demonstration units are being used. Proceeds from the sale of demonstration units are recorded as revenue and all costs incurred to refurbish the systems prior to sale are charged to cost of revenue.
See "Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements, Note 1" in the accompanying Notes to consolidated financial statements for more information.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is determined using the asset and liability approach of accounting for income taxes. Under this approach, deferred taxes represent the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between book and tax treatment of assets and liabilities and carryforwards to the extent they are realizable.
The Company is subject to taxes on earnings in both the U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. On a quarterly basis, the Company assesses the realizability of its deferred tax assets. For those jurisdictions where tax carryforwards are likely to expire unused or the projected operating results indicate that realization is not more likely than not, a valuation allowance is recorded to offset the deferred tax asset within that jurisdiction. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, the Company considers future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event that the Company determines that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net recorded amount, a reduction of the valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should the Company determine that it would not be able to realize all or part of its net deferred tax asset in the future, a reduction to the deferred tax asset would be charged to income in the period such determination was made.
The Company’s net taxable temporary differences and tax carryforwards are recorded using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized. Should the expected applicable tax rates change in the future, an adjustment to the Company’s deferred taxes would be credited or charged, as appropriate, to income in the period such determination was made.
The Company’s effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate primarily due to changes in the valuation allowance, foreign operations, research and development tax credits, state taxes, and certain benefits realized related to stock option activity. The
Company’s current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on undistributed profits of foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. state taxes, should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the U.S. The Company’s future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by earnings being lower in countries where the Company has lower statutory rates and being higher in countries where the Company has higher statutory rates, or by changes in tax laws, accounting principles, interpretations thereof, net operating loss carryback, research, and development tax credits, and due to changes in the valuation allowance applied to its U.S. deferred tax assets. In addition, the Company is subject to the examination of the Company’s income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. The Company regularly assesses the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of the Company’s provision for income taxes.
Undistributed earnings of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries as of December 31, 2021 are considered to be indefinitely reinvested and, accordingly, no provision for income taxes has been provided thereon. Due to the Transition Tax and Global Intangible Low-Tax Income (“GILTI”) regimes as enacted by the 2017 Tax Act, those foreign earnings will not be subject to federal income taxes when actually distributed in the form of a dividend or otherwise. The Company, however, could still be subject to state income taxes and withholding taxes payable to various foreign countries. The amounts of taxes which the Company could be subject to are not material to the accompanying financial statements.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. federal government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). The CARES Act changed several of the existing U.S. corporate income tax laws by, among other things, increasing the amount of deductible interest, allowing companies to carry back certain Net Operating Losses (“NOLs”) and increasing the amount of NOLs that corporations can use to offset income. Further, in December 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 was signed into law. It clarified that gross income does not include any amount that would otherwise arise from the forgiveness of a PPP loan. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on the Company's income tax provision, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and related taxes payable.
The Company periodically assesses its exposures related to its global provision for income taxes and believe that it has appropriately accrued taxes for contingencies. Any reduction of these contingent liabilities or additional assessment would increase or decrease income, respectively, in the period such determination was made.
The Company records a liability for uncertain tax positions that do not meet the more likely than not standard as prescribed by the authoritative guidance for income tax accounting. The Company records tax benefits for only those positions that it believes will more likely than not be sustained. For positions that the Company believes that it is more likely than not that it will prevail, the Company records a benefit considering the amounts and probabilities that could be realized upon ultimate settlement. If the Company judgment as to the likely resolution of the uncertainty changes, if the uncertainty is ultimately settled or if the statute of limitation related to the uncertainty expires, the effects of the change would be recognized in the period in which the change, resolution or expiration occurs. The Company has provided for unrecognized tax benefits of $2.7 million and $1.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. See “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements, Note 7. Income Taxes” in the accompanying Notes to consolidated financial statements for more information.
Litigation
The Company has been, and may in the future become, subject to a number of legal proceedings involving securities litigation, product liability, intellectual property, contractual disputes, trademark and copyright, and other matters. The Company records a liability and related charge to earnings in its consolidated financial statements for legal contingencies when the loss is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. The Company’s assessment is reevaluated each accounting period and is based on all available information, including discussion with any outside legal counsel that represents us. If a reasonable estimate of a known or probable loss cannot be made, but a range of probable losses can be estimated, the low-end of the range of losses is recognized if no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other. If a loss is reasonably possible, but not probable and can be reasonably estimated, the estimated loss or range of loss is disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance, variable interest or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was not involved in any unconsolidated transactions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncement
In addition to the impacts from new accounting pronouncements included above see Note 1 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Pronouncements” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. for a complete discussion of recent accounting pronouncements adopted and not adopted.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected consolidated financial data expressed as a percentage of net revenue.
Net Revenue
The following table sets forth selected consolidated revenue by major geographic area and product category with changes thereof.
Total Net Revenue
The Company’s total revenue increased by $83.6 million, or 57%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, due primarily to a significant recovery in sales in the North America market as the U.S. economic outlook improved in 2021 and increase in Skincare products sales in Japan. The increase was driven mainly by increase in volume.
Revenue by Geography
The Company’s North America revenue increased by $42.2 million, or 61%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, driven primary by a recovery in sales following an improvement in conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Company's revenue in Japan increased $27.0 million, or 62%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase was due primarily to a significant increase in sales of Skincare products.
The Company’s Rest of World revenue increased $14.5 million, or 41%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, driven primarily by a recovery in sales following an improvement in conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenue by Product Type
Systems Revenue
Systems revenue in North America increased by $35.4 million, or 70%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, mainly due to the recovery from the business disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Rest of the World systems revenue increased by $13.5 million, or 34%, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in Rest of the World revenue was primarily due to increased sales in the Company’s direct businesses in Australia and Europe, partially offset by decreased sales from distributors in the Middle East and Asian regions.
Consumables Revenue
Consumables revenue increased $7.1 million, or 77%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in consumables revenue was primarily due to the increasing installed base of truSculpt iD, Secret RF, truSculpt 3D and truSculpt flex, each of which have a consumable element.
Skincare Revenue
The Company’s revenue from Skincare products in Japan increased $24.6 million, or 98%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was due primarily to increased marketing and promotional efforts, as well as changes in customers behavior due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as some consumers opted to purchase skincare products rather than go to a doctor's office for treatment, a trend which began in 2020.
Service Revenue
The Company’s Service revenue increased $3.0 million, or 13%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was due primarily to increased sales of service contracts, as well as support and maintenance services provided on a time and materials basis to the Company's network of international distributors.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased from 51.3% to 57.6%, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of revenue was primarily driven by an increase in volumes as a result of the economic recovery. The increase in sales volume improved the Company's leveraging of fixed costs, which improved the Company's gross margin.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, expenses associated with customer-attended workshops and trade shows, post-marketing studies, advertising, and training. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $24.0 million, or 45%, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase reflected headcount growth and an $11.3 million increase in commission costs due to higher revenue. Also contributing to the increase in sales and marketing expenses was a $4.0 million increase in consulting and outside professional services, a $3.5 million increase in marketing costs related to new business, trade shows and other promotions, and a $2.4 million increase due to resumption in travel activities.
Research and Development (“R&D”)
R&D expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, clinical research, regulatory and material costs. R&D expenses increased by $7.2, or 51%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in
expense was due primarily to a $4.7 million increase in salaries and benefits, a $1.4 million increase in outside services, and a $0.7 million increase in material and equipment costs used for research and development activities.
General and Administrative (“G&A”)
G&A expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, legal, accounting, audit and tax consulting fees, as well as other general and administrative expenses. G&A expenses increased by $1.4 million, or 5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in expenses was due primarily to a $6.2 million increase in labor-related expenses driven by an increase in headcount, partially offset by a $2.1 million decrease in professional fees, consulting services and legal fees, and a $2.1 million decrease in credit loss expense.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest and other income (expense), net, consists of the following:
Interest and other income (expense), net, increased $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020, due to a $7.2 million gain resulting from the forgiveness of the PPP loan and accrued interest. This gain was partially offset by interest expense of $2.5 million related to the convertible notes issued in March 2021, and $1.8 million due to foreign exchange fluctuations.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision increased $0.9 million, or 181%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. This increase reflects higher net earnings from the Company's foreign subsidiaries.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
The Company’s principal source of liquidity is cash generated from the issuance of convertible notes and common stock through exercise of stock options and the Company’s employee stock purchasing program. The Company actively manages its cash usage and investment of liquid cash to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet its daily needs. The majority of the Company’s cash is held in U.S. banks and its foreign subsidiaries maintain a limited amount of cash in their local banks to cover their short-term operating expenses.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $175.8 million and $51.9 million of working capital, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents increased by $117.1 million to $164.2 million as of December 31, 2021, from $47.0 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to net proceeds from the issuance of the convertible notes, partially offset by $16.1 million in premiums paid for separate capped call transactions related to the issuance of the convertible notes.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (in thousands):
Consolidated Cash Flow Data
In summary, the Company’s cash flows were as follows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $1.2 million, which reflected net income, adjusted for non-cash items of $14.4 million, offset by changes in assets and liabilities of $13.2 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $0.9 million, which was primarily due to purchases of property, equipment and software.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $117.5 million, which was primarily due to the proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, net of issuance costs, and cash used for the purchase of capped calls of $117.4 million
Adequacy of Cash Resources to Meet Future Needs
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $164.2 million as of December 31, 2021. For fiscal year 2021, the Company’s principal source of liquidity was $133.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the convertible notes, partially offset by $16.1 million in premiums paid concurrently for a separate capped call transaction. The Company believes that the existing cash resources are sufficient to meet the Company’s anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures through at least the next 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued, but there can be no assurances.
Debt
In March 2021, the Company issued $138.3 million aggregate principal amount of convertible notes due on March 15, 2026 in a private placement offering. The convertible notes bear interest at a rate of 2.25% per year payable semiannually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year. The convertible notes are presented as long-term debt, net of debt discount. Proceeds from the offering were $133.5 million, net of issuance costs, including underwriters’ fees, which were recorded in the consolidated balance sheet.
On July 9, 2020, the Company terminated its undrawn revolving line of credit with Wells Fargo and subsequently entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank. The agreement provides for a four-year secured revolving loan facility (“SVB Revolving Line of Credit”) in an aggregate principal amount of up to $30.0 million. See Note 12 - Debt in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements for more information.
The Loan and Security Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank contains customary affirmative covenants, such as financial statement reporting requirements and delivery of borrowing base certificates, as well as customary covenants that restrict the Company’s ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, sell certain assets, guarantee obligations of third parties, declare dividends, or make certain distributions, and undergo a merger or consolidation or certain other transactions. The Loan and Security Agreement also contains certain financial condition covenants.
On March 4, 2021, the Loan and Security Agreement dated July 9, 2020 was amended to (i) permit the Company to issue the convertible notes, and (ii) to permit the capped call transactions.
On or about May 28, 2021, the Loan and Security Agreement was amended. The amendment removed the quarterly minimum revenue requirement but kept the in place the other financial covenants.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not drawn on the SVB Revolving Line of Credit and the Company is in compliance with all financial covenants of the SVB Revolving Line of Credit.
Purchase Commitments
The Company maintains certain open inventory purchase commitments with its suppliers to ensure a smooth and continuous supply for key components. The Company’s liability in these purchase commitments is generally restricted to an agreed-upon period. Such time periods can vary among different suppliers. The Company believes it has adequate funds to fulfill any such commitments in the future using the sources discussed in this Item 7 - Management’s Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Other
In the normal course of business, the Company enters into agreements that contain a variety of representations, warranties, and indemnification obligations. For example, the Company has entered into indemnification agreements with each of the Company’s directors and executive officers. The Company’s exposure under the various indemnification obligations is unknown and not reasonably estimable as they involve future claims that may be made against us. As such, the Company has not accrued any amounts for such obligations.