ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Part I, including matters set forth in the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and our financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Except when stated otherwise, we present the discussion in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on a consolidated basis.
Overview
Carvana is the leading e-commerce platform for buying and selling used cars. We are transforming the used car buying and selling experience by giving consumers what they want - a wide selection, great value and quality, transparent pricing, and a simple, no pressure transaction. Each element of our business, from inventory procurement to fulfillment and overall ease of the online transaction, has been built for this singular purpose.
See Part I, Item 1 - "Business" for a detailed description and discussion of the Company's business.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic, and a number of state and local government authorities issued shelter in place and stay at home orders which negatively impacted our operations and the demand for used vehicles during the first half of 2020. During the second half of 2020 and continuing through December 2021, we have seen a recovery in general market conditions as demand for used vehicles has increased across our network, resulting in a 74.2% increase in used vehicle unit sales during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We have experienced and may continue to experience ongoing effects from COVID-19 such as production or other operational constraints that may negatively impact our operations and costs. However, we believe we have been relatively successful in navigating the impact of COVID-19 on our business to date and believe our business model positions us well to scale up and down to meet expected customer demand during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
There are ongoing related risks to our business that depend on future developments related to the continuously evolving COVID-19 pandemic. Please see the “Results of Operations” section of this Item below and certain risk factors described in Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly the first risk factor included there, for more detailed descriptions of the impacts and risks to our business. We continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business and our results of operations and financial condition as conditions evolve as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Used Vehicle Unit Sales
Since launching to customers in Atlanta, Georgia in January 2013, we have experienced rapid growth in sales through our website www.carvana.com. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of vehicles we sold to retail customers grew by 74.2% to 425,237, compared to 244,111 in the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our retail units sold grew by 37.5% to 244,111, compared to 177,549 in the year ended December 31, 2019. Our used vehicle sales in the year ended December 31, 2020 were negatively impacted at the onset of COVID-19 in the United States but have rebounded since then. We expect our used vehicle sales to grow in future periods with increased penetration in our current markets and expansion into new markets.
We view the number of vehicles we sell to retail customers as the most important measure of our growth, and we expect to continue to focus on building a scalable platform to increase our retail units sold. This focus on retail units sold is motivated by several factors:
•Retail units sold enable multiple revenue streams, including the sale of the vehicle itself, the sale of automotive finance receivables originated to finance the vehicle, the sale of VSCs, the sale of GAP waiver coverage, and the sale of vehicles acquired from customers.
•Retail units sold are the primary driver of customer referrals and repeat sales. Each time we sell a vehicle to a new customer, that customer may refer future customers and can become a repeat buyer in the future.
•Retail units sold are an important driver of the average number of days between when we acquire the vehicle and when we sell it. Reducing average days to sale impacts gross profit on our vehicles because used vehicles depreciate over time.
•Retail units sold allow us to benefit from economies of scale due to our centralized online sales model. We believe our model provides meaningful operating leverage in acquisition, reconditioning, transport, customer service, and delivery.
We plan to invest in technology and infrastructure to support growth in retail units sold. This includes continued investment in our vehicle acquisition, reconditioning and logistics network, as well as continued investment in product development and engineering to deliver customers a best-in-class experience.
Markets and Population Coverage
Our growth in retail units sold is driven by increased penetration in our existing markets and expansion into new markets. We define a market as a metropolitan area in which we have commenced local advertising and offer free home delivery to customers with a Carvana employee in a branded delivery truck. Opening a new market involves hiring a team of customer advocates, connecting the market to our existing logistics network and initiating local advertising. As a market scales, we may elect to build a vending machine in the market to further increase customer awareness and enhance our fulfillment operations.
Our expansion model has enabled us to increase the number of markets we operate in each year, resulting in an increase in the total percentage of the U.S. population that we serve in each of the past nine years. Our market openings during 2021 increased the total percentage of the U.S. population served to 81.0% in 311 markets as of December 31, 2021 from 73.7% in 266 markets as of December 31, 2020. Over time, we have continually improved our market expansion playbook, which we believe provides us with the capability to efficiently execute our growth plan. We continually evaluate consumer demand and our operational capacity to determine our market opening and vending machine launch strategy.
When we open a market, we commence advertising using a blend of brand and direct advertising channels. Our advertising spend in each market is approximately proportionate to each market’s population, subject to adjustments based on specific characteristics of the market, used vehicle market seasonality, and special events such as vending machine openings. This historically has led to increased market penetration over time following the market opening. We also advertise on national television to increase brand awareness.
Revenue and Gross Profit
Our increased penetration in existing markets and expansion into new markets has led to growth in retail unit sales. We generate revenue on retail units sold from four primary sources: the sale of the vehicles, gains on the sales of loans originated to finance the vehicles, wholesale sales of vehicles we acquire from customers, and sales of ancillary products such as VSCs and GAP waiver coverage.
Our largest source of revenue, used vehicle sales, totaled $9.9 billion, $4.7 billion, and $3.4 billion during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As we increase penetration in existing markets and expand to new ones, we expect used vehicle sales to increase along with retail units sold. We generate gross profit on used vehicle sales from the difference between the retail selling price of the vehicle and our cost of sales associated with acquiring the vehicle and preparing it for sale.
Wholesale sales, which includes sales of trade-ins and other vehicles acquired from customers that do not meet the requirements for our retail inventory, totaled $1.9 billion, $445 million, and $267 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We expect wholesale sales to increase with retail units sold through trade-ins and as we expand our program of acquiring vehicles from customers who wish to sell us a car independent of a retail sale. We generate gross profit on wholesale vehicle sales from the difference between the wholesale selling price of the vehicle and our cost of sales associated with acquiring the vehicle and preparing it for sale.
Other sales and revenues, which primarily includes gains on the sales of automotive finance receivables we originate, sales commission on VSCs and sales of GAP waiver coverage totaled $1.0 billion, $401 million, and $252 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We expect other sales and revenues to increase with retail units sold. We also expect other sales and revenues to increase as we improve our ability to monetize loans we originate, including through securitization transactions, and sell and offer attractive financing solutions and ancillary products to our customers, including
products customarily sold by automotive retailers or insurance products customarily sold by traditional insurance companies. Other sales and revenues are 100% gross margin products for which gross profit equals revenue.
During our growth phase, our highest priority, outside of safety, will continue to be providing exceptional customer experiences, increasing our brand awareness and building an infrastructure to support growth in retail units sold. Secondarily, we plan to pursue several strategies designed to increase our total gross profit per unit. These strategies include the following:
•Increase the purchase of vehicles from customers. We plan to grow the number of vehicles that we purchase from our customers either as trade-ins or independent of a retail sale. This in turn will grow our wholesale business, provide additional vehicles for our retail business, which are more profitable compared to the same vehicle acquired at auction, and expand our inventory selection.
•Reduce average days to sale. Our goal is generally to increase both our population coverage and our sales at a faster rate than we increase our inventory size, which we believe would decrease average days to sale due to a relative increase in demand versus supply. Reductions in average days to sale lead to fewer vehicle price reductions, and therefore higher average selling prices, all other factors being equal. Higher average selling prices in turn lead to higher gross profit per unit sold, all other factors being equal.
•Leverage existing IRC infrastructure. As we scale, we intend to more fully utilize the capacity in our fourteen existing IRCs, which collectively have capacity to inspect and recondition approximately 800,000 vehicles per year at full utilization.
•Increase utilization of our logistics network. As we scale, we intend to more fully utilize our in-house logistics network to transport cars to our IRCs after acquisition from customers or wholesale auctions.
•Increase conversion of existing products. We plan to continue to improve our website to highlight the benefits of our complementary product offerings, including financing, VSCs, GAP waiver coverage, and trade-ins.
•Add new products and services. We plan to utilize our online sales platform to offer additional complementary products and services to our customers.
•Increase monetization of our finance receivables. We plan to continue selling finance receivables in securitization transactions and otherwise expand our base of financial partners who purchase the finance receivables originated on our platform to reduce our effective cost of funds.
•Optimize purchasing and pricing. We are constantly improving the ways in which we predict customer demand, value vehicles sight unseen and optimize what we pay to acquire those vehicles. We also regularly test different pricing of our products, including vehicle sticker prices, trade-in and independent vehicle offers, and ancillary product prices, and we believe we can improve by further optimizing prices over time.
Seasonality
Used vehicle sales generally exhibit seasonality with sales peaking late in the first calendar quarter and diminishing through the rest of the year, with the lowest relative level of vehicle sales expected to occur in the fourth calendar quarter. Due to our rapid growth, our overall sales patterns to date have not reflected the general seasonality of the used vehicle industry, but we expect this to change once our business and markets mature. Used vehicle prices also exhibit seasonality, with used vehicles depreciating at a faster rate in the last two quarters of each year and a slower rate in the first two quarters of each year, all other factors being equal. We expect to experience seasonal and other fluctuations in our quarterly operating results, which may not fully reflect the underlying performance of our business. COVID-19 impacted used vehicle sales in the first and second quarters of 2020 and stimulus payments and labor impacts associated with the different waves of COVID-19 have had impacts on seasonality, and may continue to do so in ways that are uncertain. See COVID-19 Update in this Item. See Item 1A "Risk
Factors - Risks Related to Our Business - We expect to experience seasonal and other fluctuations in our quarterly operating results, which may not fully reflect the underlying performance of our business."
Investment in Growth
We have aggressively invested in the growth of our business and we expect this investment to continue during normal conditions. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase substantially as we continue to expand our logistics network, increase our advertising spending, and serve more of the U.S. population. There is no guarantee that we will be able to realize the desired return on our investments.
Relationship with Related Parties
For discussion about our relationships with related parties, refer to Note 6 - Related Party Transactions of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our Proxy Statement for our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Key Operating Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our progress and make strategic decisions. Our key operating metrics reflect the key drivers of our growth, including increasing brand awareness, enhancing the selection of vehicles we make available to our customers, and serving more of the U.S. population. Our key operating metrics also demonstrate our ability to translate these drivers into retail sales and to monetize these retail sales through a variety of product offerings.
(1) Includes $0, $2, and $31, respectively, related to the 100k Milestone Gift.
Retail Units Sold
We define retail units sold as the number of vehicles sold to customers in a given period, net of returns under our seven-day return policy. We view retail units sold as a key measure of our growth for several reasons. First, retail units sold is the primary driver of our revenues and, indirectly, gross profit, since retail unit sales enable multiple complementary revenue streams, including financing, VSCs, GAP waiver coverage, and trade-ins. Second, growth in retail units sold increases the base of available customers for referrals and repeat sales. Third, growth in retail units sold is an indicator of our ability to successfully scale our logistics, fulfillment, and customer service operations.
Population Coverage
We previously reported number of markets as a key operating metric. As we have continued to grow, the population covered by these markets is increasingly a more important driver of our growth than the number of markets we serve. We define a market as a metropolitan area in which we have commenced local advertising and offer free home delivery to customers, which is typically conducted by a Carvana employee in a branded delivery truck. We define population coverage as the metropolitan statistical area population in the markets we serve at the end of the period divided by the total population in the U.S., based on 2015 data from the U.S. Census Bureau. We view the growth in population we serve as a key driver of our
growth. As we increase our population coverage, the number of consumers who have access to our fully integrated customer experience increases, which in turn helps increase the number of vehicles we sell.
Average Monthly Unique Visitors
We define a monthly unique visitor as an individual who has visited our website within a calendar month, based on data provided by Google Analytics. We calculate average monthly unique visitors as the sum of monthly unique visitors in a given period, divided by the number of months in that period. We view average monthly unique visitors as a key indicator of the strength of our brand, the effectiveness of our advertising and merchandising campaigns, and consumer awareness of our brand.
Number of IRCs
Number of IRCs is a new key operating metric. An IRC is an industrial site where we inspect, recondition, photograph, and store vehicles for sale on our website. As we continue to grow, our number of IRCs is a more important metric than average days to sale due to the impact of IRC capacity on retail units sold and the relative stability of average days to sale in recent years. We define the number of IRCs as the number of owned or leased IRCs in which Carvana employees perform our 150-point inspection and recondition vehicles to “Carvana Certified” standards before sale to customers. As we scale, we intend to more fully utilize the capacity in our existing 14 IRCs, which, as of December 31, 2021, collectively have capacity to inspect and recondition approximately 800,000 vehicles per year at full utilization. As we increase our number of IRCs, we increase this capacity to inspect and recondition vehicles, which in turn increases the number of vehicles we can sell.
Total Website Units
We define total website units as the number of vehicles listed on our website on the last day of a given reporting period, including vehicles available for sale, vehicles currently engaged in a purchase or reserved by a customer, and vehicles that can be reserved that generally have not yet completed the inspection and reconditioning process. We view total website units as a key measure of our growth. Growth in total website units increases the selection of vehicles available to consumers, which we believe will allow us to increase the number of vehicles we sell. Moreover, growth in total website units indicates our ability to scale our vehicle purchasing, inspection and reconditioning operations. As part of our inventory strategy, over time we may choose not to expand total website units while continuing to grow sales, thereby improving other key operating metrics of the business.
Total Gross Profit per Unit
We define total gross profit per unit as the aggregate gross profit in a given period, divided by retail units sold in that period including gross profit generated from the sale of the used vehicle, gains on the sales of loans originated to finance the vehicle, commissions on sales of VSCs, revenue from GAP waiver coverage, and gross profit generated from wholesale sales of vehicles.
Components of Results of Operations
Used Vehicle Sales
Used vehicle sales represent the aggregate sales of used vehicles to customers through our website. Revenue from used vehicles sales is recognized upon delivery to the customer or pick up of the vehicle by the customer, and is reported net of a reserve for expected returns. Factors affecting used vehicle sales revenue include the number of retail units sold and the average selling price of these vehicles. Changes in retail units sold are a much larger driver of changes in revenue than are changes in average selling price.
The number of used vehicles we sell depends on the volume of traffic to our website, our population coverage, our inventory selection, the effectiveness of our branding and marketing efforts, the quality of our customer's purchase experience, our volume of referrals and repeat customers, the competitiveness of our pricing, competition from other used car dealerships and general economic conditions. Absent the impact of COVID-19, on a quarterly basis, the number of used vehicles we sell is also affected by seasonality, with demand for used vehicles reaching a seasonal high point late in the first quarter of each year, commensurate with the timing of tax refunds, and diminishing through the rest of the year, with the lowest relative level of used vehicle sales expected to occur in the fourth calendar quarter. The impact of COVID-19 and related stimulus payments and labor impacts on seasonality is uncertain.
Our retail average selling price depends on the mix of vehicles we acquire, retail prices in our markets, our average days to sale and our pricing strategy. We may choose to shift our inventory mix to higher or lower cost vehicles, or to raise or lower our prices relative to market to take advantage of supply or demand imbalances, which could temporarily lead to average selling prices increasing or decreasing. We also generally expect lower average days to sale to be associated with higher retail average selling prices due to decreased vehicle depreciation prior to sale, all other factors being equal.
Wholesale Vehicle Sales
Wholesale vehicle sales is equal to the aggregate proceeds we receive on vehicles sold to wholesalers. The vehicles we sell to wholesalers are primarily acquired from customers who sell a vehicle to us without purchasing a retail vehicle and from our customers who trade-in their existing vehicles when making a purchase from us. Factors affecting wholesale vehicle sales include the number of wholesale units sold and the average wholesale selling price of these vehicles. The average selling price of our wholesale units is primarily driven by the mix of vehicles we sell to wholesalers, as well as general supply and demand conditions in the applicable wholesale vehicle market, both of which have been impacted by COVID-19. Beginning in 2020, wholesale vehicle sales includes aggregate proceeds we receive on vehicles sold to DriveTime through competitive online auctions that are managed by an unrelated third party.
Other Sales and Revenues
We generate other sales and revenues primarily through the sales of loans we originate and sell in securitization transactions or to financing partners, reported net of a reserve for expected repurchases, commissions we receive on VSCs and sales of GAP waiver coverage. In 2016, we entered into a master dealer agreement with DriveTime, pursuant to which we receive a commission for selling VSCs that DriveTime administers. The commission revenues we recognize on VSCs depends on the number of retail units we sell, the conversion rate of VSCs on these sales, commission rates we receive, VSC early cancellation frequency and product features. The GAP waiver coverage revenue we recognize depends on the number of retail units we sell, the number of customers that choose to finance their purchases with us, the frequency of GAP waiver coverage early cancellation, and the conversion rate of GAP waiver coverage on those sales.
We generally seek to sell the loans we originate to securitization trusts we sponsor and establish or to financing partners. The securitization trusts issue asset-backed securities, some of which are collateralized by the finance receivables that we sell to the securitization trusts. We also sell the loans we originate under committed forward-flow arrangements, including a master purchase and sale agreement and master transfer agreements, and through fixed pool loan sales, with financing partners who generally acquire them at premium prices without recourse to us for their post-sale performance. Factors affecting revenue from these sales include the number of loans we originate, the average principal balance of the loans, the credit quality of the portfolio, and the price at which we are able to sell them in securitization transactions or to financing partners.
The number of loans we originate is driven by the number of used vehicles sold and the percentage of our sales for which we provide financing, which is influenced by the financing terms we offer our customers relative to alternatives available to the customer. The average principal balance is driven primarily by the mix of vehicles we sell, since higher average selling prices typically mean higher average balances. The price at which we sell the loan is driven by the terms of our securitization transactions and forward-flow arrangement, applicable interest rates, and whether or not the loan includes GAP waiver coverage.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the cost to acquire, recondition, and transport vehicles associated with preparing them for resale. Vehicle acquisition costs are driven by the mix of vehicles we acquire, the source of those vehicles, and supply-and-demand dynamics in the wholesale vehicle market. Reconditioning costs consist of direct costs, including parts, labor, and third-party repair expenses directly attributable to specific vehicles, as well as indirect costs, such as IRC overhead. Transportation costs consist of costs incurred to transport the vehicles from the point of acquisition to the IRC. Cost of sales also includes any necessary adjustments to reflect vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Used Vehicle Gross Profit
Used vehicle gross profit is the vehicle sales price minus our costs of sales associated with vehicles that we list and sell on our website. Used vehicle gross profit per unit is our aggregate used vehicle gross profit in any measurement period divided by the number of retail units sold in that period.
Wholesale Vehicle Gross Profit
Wholesale vehicle gross profit is the vehicle sales price minus our cost of sales associated with vehicles we sell to wholesalers. Factors affecting wholesale gross profit include the number of wholesale units sold, the average wholesale selling price of these vehicles, and the average acquisition price associated with these vehicles.
Other Gross Profit
Other sales and revenues consist of 100% gross margin products for which gross profit equals revenue. Therefore, changes in gross profit and the associated drivers are identical to changes in revenues from these products and the associated drivers.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses include expenses associated with advertising and providing customer service to customers, operating our vending machines and hubs, operating our logistics and fulfillment network and other corporate overhead expenses, including expenses associated with information technology, product development, engineering, legal, accounting, finance, and business development. We anticipate that these expenses will increase as we grow. SG&A expenses exclude the costs of inspecting and reconditioning vehicles and transporting vehicles from the point of acquisition to the IRC, which are included in cost of sales, and payroll costs for our employees related to the development of software products for internal use, which are capitalized to software and depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
Interest Expense
Interest expense includes interest incurred on our Senior Notes, including amounts previously due to Verde, our Floor Plan Facility, and our Finance Receivable Facilities (each as defined in Note 9 - Debt Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), as well as our notes payable, finance leases, and long-term debt, which are used to fund general working capital, our inventory, our transportation fleet, and certain of our property and equipment. Interest expense excludes interest incurred during various construction projects to build, upgrade, or remodel certain facilities, which is capitalized to property and equipment and depreciated over the estimated lives of the related assets.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expense (income), net includes changes in fair value on our beneficial interests in securitizations, purchase price adjustment receivables, and fair value adjustments related to our warrants to acquire Root Class A common stock as discussed in Note 17 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, along with other general expenses such as gains or losses from disposals of long-lived assets.
Income Tax Provision
Income taxes are recognized based upon our anticipated underlying annual blended federal and state income tax rates adjusted, as necessary, for any discrete tax matters occurring during the period. As the sole managing member of Carvana Group, LLC (“Carvana Group”), Carvana Co. consolidates the financial results of Carvana Group. Carvana Group is treated as a partnership and therefore not subject to U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. Any taxable income or loss generated by Carvana Group is passed through to and included in the taxable income or loss of its members, including Carvana Co., based on its economic interest held in Carvana Group. Carvana Co. is taxed as a corporation and is subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes with respect to its allocable share of any taxable income or loss of Carvana Group, as well as any stand-alone income or loss generated by Carvana Co. As of December 31, 2021, the Company's income tax expense is related to certain subsidiaries.
Results of Operations
(1) Includes $54, $4, and $0, respectively, of wholesale revenue from related parties.
(2) Includes $208, $105, and $60, respectively, of other sales and revenues from related parties.
Used Vehicle Sales
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Used vehicle sales increased by $5.2 billion to $9.9 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.7 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of used vehicles sold to 425,237 from 244,111 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in units sold was driven by growth in existing markets due to expanded inventory selection, enhanced marketing efforts, increased brand awareness, customer referrals, and growth in market population coverage to 81.0% as of December 31, 2021 from 73.7% as of December 31, 2020. In addition, the average selling price of our retail units sold increased to $23,167 in the year ended December 31, 2021 from $19,420 in the prior year, due primarily to overall appreciation in the used vehicle market compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Used vehicle sales increased by $1.3 billion to $4.7 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of used vehicles sold to 244,111 from 177,549 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in units sold was driven by growth in existing markets due to expanded inventory selection, enhanced marketing efforts, increased brand awareness, and customer referrals. The increase in unit sales was also driven by growth to 266 markets as of December 31, 2020 from 146 markets as of December 31, 2019. In addition, the average selling price of our retail units sold increased to $19,420 in the year ended December 31, 2020 from $19,266 in the prior year, due primarily to vehicle mix.
Wholesale Vehicle Sales
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Wholesale vehicle sales increased by $1.5 billion to $1.9 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $445 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We have seen an increase in wholesale vehicle sales as we have increased the number of vehicles acquired from customers who did not purchase a retail vehicle from us and through trade-ins received for retail units sold. In addition, the average selling price of our wholesale units sold increased to $11,287 during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $8,065 during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the mix of vehicles acquired from customers and strong wholesale market prices.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Wholesale vehicle sales increased by $178 million to $445 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $267 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. We primarily obtain our wholesale inventory by acquiring vehicles from customers. As our retail unit sales increased, so did the trade-ins we received. Moreover, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we also acquired more vehicles from customers who did not purchase a retail unit from us. In addition, the average selling price of our wholesale units sold increased to $8,065 during the year ended December 31, 2020 from $6,707 during the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the mix of vehicles acquired from customers and strong wholesale market prices.
Other Sales and Revenues
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Other sales and revenues primarily consist of gains on the sales of finance receivables we originate, commissions we receive on sales of VSCs and sales of GAP waiver coverage. Other sales and revenues increased by $642 million to $1.0 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $401 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by originating and selling more finance receivables due to our increased retail unit sales and higher average sale price, resulting in an increase in gain on loan sale. Additionally, the increase was due to an increase in retail units sold, which led to an increase in VSC sales, along with an increase in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021 from interest earned on finance receivables held on balance sheet prior to selling them throughout the year.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Other sales and revenues increased by $149 million to $401 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $252 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by originating and selling more finance receivables, resulting in an increase in gain on loan sale. Additionally, the increase in retail units sold, led to an increase in VSC sales and GAP waiver coverage sales, along with an increase in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 from interest earned on finance receivables held on balance sheet prior to selling them throughout the year.
Used Vehicle Gross Profit
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Used vehicle gross profit increased by $338 million to $697 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $359 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in retail units sold, as well as an increase in used vehicle gross profit per unit to $1,638 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,472 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The per unit increase was primarily driven by acquiring more vehicles from customers.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Used vehicle gross profit increased by $121 million to $359 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $238 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in retail units sold, as well as an increase in used vehicle gross profit per unit to $1,472 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1,340 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The per unit increase was primarily driven by acquiring more vehicles from customers.
Wholesale Vehicle Gross Profit
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Wholesale vehicle gross profit increased by $155 million to $189 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $34 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in wholesale units sold to 170,056 during the year ended December 31, 2021 from 55,204 in the prior year, along with an increase in wholesale vehicle gross profit per wholesale unit to $1,116 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $610 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in number of wholesale vehicles sold and the improved gross
profit per wholesale unit were primarily due to acquiring more vehicles from customers and strong wholesale market prices, respectively.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Wholesale vehicle gross profit increased by $17 million to $34 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $17 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by an increase in wholesale units sold to 55,204 during the year ended December 31, 2020 from 39,895 in the prior year, along with an increase in wholesale vehicle gross profit per wholesale unit to $610 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $422 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in number of wholesale vehicles sold and the improved gross profit per wholesale unit were primarily due to acquiring more vehicles from customers and strong wholesale market prices in the latter part of 2020, respectively.
Other Gross Profit
Other sales and revenues consist of 100% gross margin products for which gross profit equals revenue. Therefore, changes in other gross profit and the associated drivers are identical to changes in other sales and revenues and the associated drivers.
Components of SG&A
(1) Compensation and benefits includes all payroll and related costs, including benefits, payroll taxes, and equity-based compensation, except those related to preparing vehicles for sale, which are included in cost of sales, and those related to the development of software products for internal use, which are capitalized to software and depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
(2) Market occupancy costs includes occupancy costs of our vending machines and hubs. It excludes occupancy costs related to reconditioning vehicles which are included in cost of sales and the portion related to corporate occupancy which are included in other costs.
(3) Logistics includes fuel, maintenance, and depreciation related to operating our own transportation fleet, and third-party transportation fees, except the portion related to inbound transportation, which is included in cost of sales.
(4) Other costs include all other selling, general, and administrative expenses such as IT expenses, corporate occupancy, professional services and insurance, limited warranty, and title and registration.
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $907 million to $2.0 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.1 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was partially due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $329 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily driven by expansion of our teams to support current and future growth. Advertising expense increased $193 million to $479 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $286 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in advertising to drive growth in units sold and acquired from customers. Market occupancy, logistics, and other expenses also increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in the number of units sold, and in preparation for future growth.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $339 million to $1.1 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $787 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was partially due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $93 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily driven by expansion of our teams to support our growth. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was also due to an increase in advertising expense of $82 million to $286 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $204 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in advertising to drive growth in units sold and acquired from customers. Market occupancy, logistics, and other expenses also increased during the year ended
December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase in the number of units sold, population coverage, and in preparation for future growth. These increases were partially offset by efforts to decrease and balance discretionary spend as a result of the uncertain economic environment surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Fiscal 2021 Versus 2020. Interest expense increased by $45 million to $176 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $131 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to issuing our 2027 Notes and 2029 Notes, which resulted in approximately $14 million of increased interest expense. Interest expense also increased due to additional sale leaseback financing and borrowings on our short-term revolving facilities during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Versus 2019. Interest expense increased by $50 million to $131 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $81 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to refinancing our Senior Notes, which resulted in approximately $34 million of debt extinguishment costs upon redemption of the 2023 Notes in the fourth quarter of 2020. The remaining increase was primarily due to additional senior notes issuance and sale leaseback financing, partially offset by a decrease in borrowings on our Floor Plan Facility during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net changed by $7 million to expense of $6 million compared to income of $1 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The changes are primarily due to fair value adjustments on our warrants to acquire Root Class A common stock, and on our retained beneficial interests in securitizations and purchase price adjustment receivables compared to 2020, when capital markets and loan performance assumptions were more uncertain, primarily due to COVID-19.
Income Tax Provision
We recognized an income tax expense of $1 million and an income tax benefit of less than $1 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, from certain subsidiaries. We did not recognize an income tax expense or benefit during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement the consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we also present the following non-GAAP measures: EBITDA and EBITDA margin. We believe the presentation of both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with increased transparency into financial measures used by our management team, and it also improves investors’ understanding of our underlying operating performance and their ability to analyze our ongoing operating trends. All historic non-GAAP financial measures have been reconciled with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
EBITDA and EBITDA Margin
EBITDA and EBITDA Margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that do not represent and should not be considered an alternative to net loss or cash flow from operations, as determined by GAAP. EBITDA is defined as net loss before interest expense, income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization expense. EBITDA Margin is EBITDA as a percentage of total revenues. We use EBITDA to measure the operating performance of our business and EBITDA Margin to measure our operating performance relative to our total revenues. We believe that EBITDA and EBITDA Margin are useful measures to us and to our investors because they exclude certain financial and capital structure items that we do not believe directly reflect our core operations and may not be indicative of our recurring operations, in part because they may vary widely across time and within our industry independent of the performance of our core operations. We believe that excluding these items enables us to more effectively evaluate our performance period-over-period and relative to our competitors. EBITDA and EBITDA Margin may not be comparable to similarly titled measures provided by other companies due to potential differences
in methods of calculations. A reconciliation of EBITDA to net loss, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, and calculation of EBITDA Margin is as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We generate cash from the sale of used retail vehicles, the sale of wholesale vehicles, proceeds from the sale of finance receivables originated in connection with the sale of used vehicles, and ancillary products. We generate additional cash flows through our financing activities including our short-term revolving inventory and finance receivable facilities, real estate and equipment financing, the issuance of long-term notes, and new issuances of equity. Historically, cash generated from financing activities has funded growth and expansion into new markets and strategic initiatives and we expect this to continue in the future.
Our ability to service our debt and fund working capital, capital expenditures, and business development efforts will depend on our ability to generate cash from operating and financing activities, which is subject to our future operating performance, as well as to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory, and other conditions, some of which may be beyond our control. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, our construction of IRCs and vending machines, the timing and extent of our spending to support our technology and software development efforts, and increased population coverage. Additionally, as disclosed in Note 9 - Debt Instruments of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are subject to certain restrictive covenants that limit our ability to, among other things, make intercompany payments and pay dividends.
We had the following liquidity resources available as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) Based on pledging all eligible vehicles and finance receivables under the available commitment in the Floor Plan Facility and Finance Receivable Facilities, excluding the impact to restricted cash requirements.
Our total liquidity resources is composed of cash and equivalents, availability under existing credit facilities, and additional unpledged assets, including vehicle inventory, finance receivables, real estate, and securities, on our balance sheet that can be financed using traditional asset-based financing sources.
Cash and cash equivalents includes cash deposits and highly liquid investment instruments with original maturities of three months or less, such as money market funds.
Availability under short-term revolving facilities is the available amount we can borrow under our existing vehicle inventory floor plan and finance receivable facilities based on the pledgable value of vehicle inventory and finance receivables on our balance sheet on the period end date. Availability under short-term revolving facilities is distinct from the total commitment amount of these facilities because it represents the currently borrowable amount, rather than committed future amounts that could be borrowed to finance future additional assets.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the short-term revolving facilities had a total commitment of approximately $4.3 billion and $2.25 billion, an outstanding balance of $2.05 billion and $40 million, and an unused commitment of $2.25 billion and $2.21 billion, respectively.
Availability under real estate agreements is the available amount we can borrow under our existing real estate financing agreements based on the value of existing real estate on our balance sheet. From time to time, we may enter into committed real estate financing agreements that allow for future pledging of real estate assets on a flexible timeline. We began using committed real estate financing agreements in 2017 and may do so in the future.
Unpledged vehicle inventory and finance receivables is the value of vehicle inventory and finance receivables on our balance sheet on the period end date beyond that covered by committed financing agreements. On February 1, 2022, we upsized our vehicle inventory floor plan commitment to $3.0 billion. The additional commitment would increase our availability under short-term revolving facilities and committed liquidity sources available by $665 million, with a corresponding reduction in unpledged vehicle inventory and finance receivables.
Unpledged real estate assets include IRC and vending machine real estate assets that have not been previously pledged or sold. Since our first sale-leaseback transaction in 2017, we have historically had flexible access to real estate financing and expect to continue to use various forms of real estate financing in the future.
Unpledged beneficial interests in securitizations includes retained beneficial interests in securitizations that have not been previously pledged or sold. We historically have financed the majority of our retained beneficial interests in securitizations and expect to continue to do so in the future.
To optimize our cost of capital, in any given period we may choose not to maximize borrowings on our short-term revolving facilities, maximize revolving commitment size, or immediately sale-leaseback or pledge real estate and retained beneficial interests in securitizations. This has the benefit of reducing interest expense and debt issuance costs and providing flexibility to minimize financing costs over time.
We consider our total liquidity resources as an input into our planning. In general, changes in total liquidity resources fall into two broad categories: changes due to current business operations and changes due to investments in automotive retail assets.
Changes in liquidity due to current business operations include EBITDA net of share-based compensation, non-real estate capital expenditures, including technology, furniture, fixtures, and equipment, and changes in traditional working capital, including accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and other miscellaneous assets and liabilities.
In addition, as a growing automotive retailer, we also invest in and generate several types of automotive retail assets, including vehicle inventory, finance receivables, retained beneficial interests in securitizations, and real estate. To maximize capital efficiency, we generally seek to finance these assets with matched sources of asset-based financing, including short-term revolving facilities for vehicle inventory and finance receivables, beneficial interests financing for retained beneficial interests
in securitizations, and sale-leaseback or other real estate financing for IRCs and vending machines. We have historically used these sources of financing to finance our investment in these assets and expect to continue to do so in the future.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our outstanding principal amount of indebtedness, including finance leases, was approximately $5.4 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively, summarized in the table below. See Note 9 - Debt Instruments and Note 15 - Leases of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for definitions and further information on our debt and finance leases.
(1) Amount includes notes payable and finance leases.
(2) Amount includes real estate financing and notes payable.
(3) The unamortized debt issuance costs related to long-term debt are presented as a reduction of the carrying amount of the corresponding liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. Unamortized debt issuance costs related to revolving debt arrangements are presented within other assets on our consolidated balance sheets and not included here.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Operating Activities
Our primary sources of operating cash flows result from the sales of used retail vehicles, wholesale vehicles, finance receivables we originate, and ancillary products. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are purchases of inventory, cash used to acquire customers, and personnel-related expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was approximately $2.6 billion, an increase of $2.0 billion compared to net cash used in operating activities of $608 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was a decrease of $149 million compared to net cash used in operating activities of $757 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The changes in our net cash used in operating
activities were primarily due to our changes in working capital, primarily related to the increase in our vehicle inventory, partially offset by the net cash inflows associated with the change in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Investing Activities
Our primary use of cash for investing activities is purchases of property and equipment to expand our operations. Cash used in investing activities was approximately $627 million, $346 million, and $228 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, resulting in increases of approximately $281 million and $118 million. The increases were primarily driven by increases in purchases of property and equipment, specifically related to the construction of new IRCs and vending machines, and our investment in Root in October 2021, partially offset by increases in principal payments received on beneficial interests in securitizations. Constructing new IRCs and vending machines allows us to recondition more vehicles and reach additional customers. To finance these investments we have entered into various financing transactions, such as sale-leasebacks.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities primarily relate to our short and long-term debt activity and proceeds from equity issuances which have been used to provide working capital and for general corporate purposes, including paying down our short-term revolving facilities. Cash provided by financing activities was approximately $3.5 billion and $1.2 billion during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $2.3 billion. The change primarily relates to increased net proceeds of $2.5 billion from changes in our short-term revolving facilities, along with increased net proceeds from long-term debt proceeds of approximately $895 million. These increases were partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock of approximately $1.1 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash provided by financing activities was approximately $1.2 billion and $1.0 billion during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, an increase of $150 million. The change primarily relates to increased proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock of $762 million, along with increased net proceeds from long-term debt of approximately $216 million. The increases were partially offset by a net decrease in proceeds from short-term revolving facilities of $796 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We expect our primary sources of cash to continue to be sufficient to fund our operating activities and cash commitments for investing and financing activities for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of December 31, 2021:
(1) All debt arrangements above are discussed and defined in Note 9 - Debt Instruments, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) Represents the principal amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2021. Due to the uncertainty of forecasting the timing of expected variable interest rate payments, interest payment amounts are not included in the table. Borrowings under the Floor Plan Facility are generally payable within five business days of the sale of the underlying vehicle or fifteen business days of the sale of the finance receivable originated in connection with the sale of the vehicle. In either case, the payment is expected to be within one year of December 31, 2021.
(3) Represents the principal amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2021. Due to the uncertainty of forecasting the timing of expected variable interest rate payments, interest payment amounts are not included in the table. Interest payments on borrowings under the Finance Receivable Facilities are expected to be paid in the first fifteen days of each calendar month.
(4) The securitization trusts distribute payments directly to the lender related to our pledged beneficial interests in securitizations. These amounts represent anticipated principal amount reductions based on the expected timing of these payments. Due to the uncertainty of forecasting the expected interest payments, interest payment amounts are not included in the table.
(5) Represents fixed interest payments on our outstanding Senior Notes, notes payable, and finance leases.
(6) Related party operating lease payments exclude rent payments due under the DriveTime Lease Agreement and the DriveTime Hub Lease Agreement for locations where we share space with DriveTime, as those are contingent upon the Company's utilization of the leased assets, and thus can vary, as further discussed in Note 6 - Related Party Transactions, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(7) Includes minimum remaining fixed payments related to IRC and vending machine construction contracts, excluding variable installation costs, which fluctuate based on actual completion time.
Fair Value Measurements
We report money market securities, certain receivables, warrants to acquire Root Class A common stock and beneficial interests in securitizations at fair value. See Note 17 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated into this item by reference.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting estimates which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We sell used vehicles directly to our customers through our website. We recognize revenue at the agreed upon purchase price stated in the contract, including any delivery charges, less an estimate for returns. Our return policy allows customers to initiate a return during the first seven days after delivery. Estimates for returns are based on an analysis of historical experience, trends and sales data. Changes in these estimates are reflected as an adjustment to revenue in the period identified.
Customers purchasing used vehicles from us may enter into contracts for VSCs and, if they finance with us, GAP waiver coverage. The prices of VSCs and GAP waiver coverage are set forth in each contract. We sell and receive a commission on VSCs under a master dealer agreement with DriveTime, pursuant to which we sell VSCs that DriveTime administers and is the
obligor. We receive a commission on GAP waiver coverage contracts where the administrator of the contract is obligated to reimburse the holder of the underlying finance receivable for a balance that is in excess of the value of the financed vehicle in the event of a total loss. We recognize commission revenue at the time of sale, net of a reserve for estimated contract cancellations. Our risk related to contract cancellations is limited to the commissions that we receive. Cancellations fluctuate depending on the customer-financing default or prepayment rates, and shifts in customer behavior, including those related to changes in the coverage or term of the product. To the extent that actual experience differs from historical trends, there could be significant adjustments to our contract cancellation reserves. The reserve for cancellations of VSCs and GAP waiver coverage is estimated based upon historical experience and recent trends and is reflected as a reduction of other sales and revenues. Changes in these estimates are reflected as an adjustment to revenue in the period identified.
Under the master dealer agreement with DriveTime, we are also contractually entitled to receive profit-sharing revenues based on the performance of the VSCs once a required claims period has passed. This is a form of variable consideration we recognize as revenue to the extent that it is probable that it will not result in a significant revenue reversal. We apply the expected value method, utilizing expected VSC performance based on historical claims and cancellation data from our customers, as well as other qualitative assumptions to estimate the amount we expect to receive. We reassess the estimate each reporting period with any changes reflected as an adjustment to other sales and revenues in the period identified. Profit-sharing payments will begin when the underlying VSCs reach a specified level of claims history.
Finance Receivables
Finance receivables include installment contracts we originate to facilitate vehicle sales. We classify these receivables as held for sale, as we do not intend to hold the finance receivables we originate to maturity. We typically sell the finance receivables we originate. We record a valuation allowance to report finance receivables at the lower of unpaid principal balance or fair value. To determine the fair value of finance receivables we utilize industry-standard modeling, such as discounted cash flow analysis, factoring in our historical experience, the credit quality of the underlying receivables, loss trends and recovery rates, as well as the overall economic environment. For purposes of determining the valuation allowance, finance receivables are evaluated collectively to determine the allowance as they represent a large group of smaller-balance homogeneous loans. To the extent that actual experience differs from historical trends, there could be significant adjustments to our valuation allowance. Principal balances of finance receivables are charged-off when we are unable to sell the finance receivable and the related vehicle has been repossessed and liquidated or the receivable has otherwise been deemed uncollectible. The estimates and trends used have historically been effective in our determination of our valuation allowance.
Beneficial Interests in Securitizations
The Company's beneficial interests in securitizations include rated notes and certificates and other assets, all of which are classified as Level 3 due to the lack of observable market data. The Company determines the fair value of its rated notes based on non-binding broker quotes. The non-binding broker quotes are based on models that consider the prevailing interest rates, recent market transactions, and current business conditions. The Company determines the fair value of its certificates and other assets using a combination of non-binding market quotes and internally developed discounted cash flow models. The discounted cash flow models use discount rates based on prevailing interest rates and the characteristics of the specific instruments. See Note 17 - Fair Value of Financial Instruments, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail on the discount rates.
Significant increases or decreases in the inputs to the models could result in a significantly higher or lower fair value measurement. The Company elected the fair value option on its beneficial interests in securitizations, which allows it to recognize changes in the fair value of these assets in the period the fair value changes resulting in a gain or loss in that period.
Valuation of Inventory
Vehicle inventory consists of used vehicles, primarily acquired directly from customers and at auction. Direct and indirect vehicle reconditioning costs including parts and labor, inbound transportation costs and other incremental costs are capitalized as a component of inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Vehicle inventory cost is determined by specific identification. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price less costs to complete, dispose and transport the vehicles. Selling prices are derived from historical data and trends, such as sales price and inventory turn times of similar vehicles, as well as independent market resources. Each reporting period we recognize any necessary adjustments to reflect vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value through cost of sales. To the extent that there are significant
changes to estimated vehicle selling prices or decreases in demand for used vehicles, there could be significant adjustments to reflect our inventory at net realizable value.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities related to the expected future tax consequences arising from temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities based on enacted statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. Any effects of changes in income tax rates or laws are included in income tax expense in the period of enactment. We reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on the evidence available, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In making the assessment under the more likely than not standard, appropriate consideration must be given to all positive and negative evidence related to the realization of the deferred tax assets. The assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency, and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carry forward periods by jurisdiction, our experience with loss carryforwards not expiring unutilized, and all tax-planning alternatives that may be available. A valuation allowance is recognized if under applicable accounting standards we determine it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets would not be realized.