Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of Cvent’s financial condition and results of operations together with Cvent’s audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 and notes thereto. Certain of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to plans and strategy for Cvent’s business, includes forward- looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Cvent’s actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. You should carefully read Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and the section entitled "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" included elsewhere in this Annual Report to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from Cvent’s forward-looking statements.
Overview
Cvent was founded in 1999 in the Washington, D.C. metro area as a provider of event registration software to meeting and event organizers. Since that time, we have continually innovated to develop a comprehensive platform of event marketing and management solutions and hospitality solutions. We believe that since inception, we have demonstrated an entrepreneurial spirit, culture of teamwork and sense of resilience, particularly in moments of crisis. This is best evidenced by the Company’s continued progress and innovation in the midst of challenges like the recessions of 2001 and 2008 and the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Cvent is a leading cloud-based platform of enterprise event marketing and management and hospitality solutions. We power the marketing and management of meetings and events through our Event Cloud and Hospitality Cloud solutions. Our Event Cloud consists of tools to enable event organizers to manage the entire event lifecycle and deliver engaging experiences across every type of event and all event delivery models: in-person, virtual and hybrid. Event Cloud serves as the system of record for event and engagement data collected across an organization’s total event program, which comprises every internal and external event an organization hosts or attends (“Total Event Program”). Our Hospitality Cloud offers a marketplace that connects event organizers looking for the appropriate event space for their in-person and hybrid events with hoteliers and venue operators through a vertical search engine built on our proprietary database of detailed event space information. In addition, our Hospitality Cloud provides marketing and software solutions that hotels and venues leverage to digitally showcase their event space to attract valuable leads and grow their businesses. This combination of the Cvent Event Cloud and Hospitality Cloud results in a cohesive platform that we believe generates powerful network effects and attracts more event organizers and hotels and venues.
Impact of COVID-19 on Operating Results
COVID-19 was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. Many governments instituted lockdowns or other similar measures to slow infection rates in response. In response to COVID-19, as many other companies have done, we required substantially all of our employees to continue to work remotely; implemented travel restrictions; and postponed or canceled our in-person customer, industry and employee events, and converted other events to virtual-only experiences.
The global COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted our ability to sign new or renew existing clients starting. Our customer count declined 19.3% as of December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. Further, the global COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted our ability to sign new clients, and to upsell to and renew contracts with our existing clients, starting in March 2020. Additionally, in May 2020, in response to the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented a global reduction in force of approximately 10% that affected all areas of our business. We compensated our termed employees for a total of $3.6 million in severance payments. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced overall cost declines in terms of absolute dollars, and in the case of the year ended December 31, 2021, as a percentage of revenue, because of temporary cost reduction policies that were implemented in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic and the suspension of in-person meetings and events. We do not expect both the declines in revenue and expense to recur in the near-term as the impact of the pandemic decreases. In particular, our sales started to increase on a year-over-year basis starting in February 2021, we began increasing our workforce in the second half of 2020, and we expect to continue increasing the size of our workforce into 2022 to support our business as it recovers from the pandemic and expands due to the emergence of virtual and hybrid events and the accelerated digitization of the meetings and events industry and total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $20.1 million, or 4.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The extent to which the global COVID-19 pandemic affects our business will depend on future developments in the United States and around the world, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and different COVID-19 variants, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions required to contain and treat it, among others. Although the ultimate impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial results remains uncertain, a continued and prolonged public health crisis such as the global COVID-19 pandemic could have a material negative impact on our business, operating results and financial condition. See Part I. Item 1A. “Risk Factors - The effects of the global
COVID-19 pandemic have materially affected how we and our customers are operating our businesses, and the duration and extent to which this will impact our future results of operations and overall financial performance remains uncertain” for more information.
Reverse Recapitalization Transaction
Description of the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction
On December 8, 2021, we consummated the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, dated July 23, 2021, by and among Dragoneer, which, following the Domestication (as defined below) and the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction, is now known as Cvent Holding Corp.; Redwood Opportunity Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub I”); Redwood Merger Sub LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Merger Sub II”) and Papay Topco, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Legacy Cvent”); pursuant to which, among other things, promptly following the de-registration of Dragoneer as an exempted company in the Cayman Islands and the continuation and domestication of the Company as a corporation in the State of Delaware with the name “Cvent Holding Corp.” (the “Domestication”), Merger Sub I merged with and into Legacy Cvent (the “First Merger”), with Legacy Cvent as the surviving company in the First Merger and, after giving effect to such First Merger, Legacy Cvent became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, and immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, Legacy Cvent as the surviving company of the First Merger merged with and into Merger Sub II (the “Second Merger”), with Merger Sub II as the surviving company in the Second Merger. After giving effect to such Second Merger, Merger Sub II became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the time at which the First Merger became effective (the “First Effective Time”), each share and equity award of Legacy Cvent outstanding as of immediately prior to the First Effective Time was exchanged for shares of Company Common Stock or comparable equity awards that are settled or are exercisable for shares of Company Common Stock, as applicable, based on an implied Legacy Cvent equity value of $4,467,973,959. Net proceeds from this transaction after deducting fees and expenses were approximately $523.0 million, $500.0 million of which was used to repay the outstanding principal indebtedness under our Term Loan Facility.
The Reverse Recapitalization Transaction provided for, among other things, the following transactions:
a)in connection with the Domestication, (i) each issued and outstanding Class A ordinary share and Class B ordinary share of Dragoneer was converted into one share of Common Stock; (ii) the governing documents of Dragoneer were amended and restated and became the certificate of incorporation and the bylaws of the Company filed a notice of deregistration with the Cayman Islands Registrar of Companies, together with the necessary accompanying documents, and filed a certificate of corporate domestication with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, under which Dragoneer was domesticated and continues as a Delaware corporation and (iii) Dragoneer changed its name to “Cvent Holding Corp.”
b)Legacy Cvent consummated the merger transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, whereby (i) Merger Sub I merged with and into Legacy Cvent, and the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub I ceased and Legacy Cvent became the surviving corporation and (ii) promptly following the First Effective Time, Legacy Cvent merged with and into Merger Sub II, with Merger Sub II as the surviving company in the Second Merger after giving effect to the Mergers, Merger Sub II will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of Dragoneer. In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the First Effective Time, each share and equity award of Legacy Cvent outstanding as of immediately prior to the First Effective Time was exchanged for shares of Common Stock or comparable equity awards that were settled or were exercisable for shares of Common Stock, as applicable, based on an implied Legacy Cvent equity value of $4,467,973,959 at a ratio of approximately 454:1. Legacy Cvent’s existing stockholders prior to the First Effective Time received approximately 416,483,028 shares of Common Stock and Legacy Cvent’s existing option-holders prior to the First Effective Time received approximately 51,649,748 options to purchase Common Stock, subject to the same vesting terms as the corresponding Legacy Cvent options. In connection with the special meeting of the shareholders of Dragoneer on December 7, 2021 (the “Special Meeting”) and the Business Combination, the holders of 23,313,333 Class A ordinary shares exercised their right to redeem their shares for cash at a redemption price of approximately $10.00 per share, for an aggregate redemption amount of approximately $233,151,648.
Related Transactions in Connection with the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction
Other related transactions that took place in connection with the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction are as follows:
•the issuance and sale of 47,500,000 shares of Common Stock to certain investors (“PIPE Investors”) at a purchase price of $10.00 per share for aggregate proceeds of $475.0 million pursuant to the subscription agreements entered into on July 23, 2021 (“Subscription Agreements”);
•the issuance and sale of 5,000,000 Class A ordinary shares to Dragoneer Funding II LLC at a purchase price of $10.00 per share for aggregate proceeds of $50.0 million pursuant to the terms of the forward purchase agreement between Dragoneer and Dragoneer Funding II LLC, an affiliate of Dragoneer Growth Opportunities Holdings II, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “Sponsor”), dated October 29, 2020 (“Forward Purchase Agreement”) and the Business Combination Agreement;
•the conversion of the $2.0 million promissory note made from the Sponsor into 200,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares at a price of $10.00 per share upon the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction; and
•the repayment of $500.0 million of existing Legacy Cvent debt.
Accounting for the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction
Notwithstanding the legal form of the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Dragoneer was treated as the acquired company and Legacy Cvent was treated as the acquirer for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the financial statements of the Company represents a continuation of the financial statements of Legacy Cvent, with the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction treated as the equivalent of Legacy Cvent issuing stock for the net assets of Dragoneer, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Dragoneer were stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Operations prior to the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction are those of Legacy Cvent. Legacy Cvent was determined to be the accounting acquirer in the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction based on an evaluation of the following facts and circumstances:
•Legacy Cvent’s existing stockholders had a majority of the voting power in the Company following the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction;
•Legacy Cvent had the ability to nominate a majority of the initial members of our Board;
•Legacy Cvent’s senior management is the senior management of the Company;
•Legacy Cvent’s operations prior to the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction comprised the ongoing operations of the Company;
•Legacy Cvent was the larger entity based on historical operating activity and had the larger employee base prior to the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction; and
•The post-combination company assumed a Legacy Cvent branded name: “Cvent Holding Corp.”
Our Business Model
We generate revenue from two primary sources: Event Cloud subscription-based solutions, and Hospitality Cloud marketing-based and subscription-based solutions. Event Cloud subscriptions are primarily priced based on the number of registrations purchased, as well as the number and complexity of mobile applications, onsite and virtual event technology purchased. In addition, customers may subscribe to additional modules that enhance the functionality of our Event Cloud solutions. Our Event Cloud contract amounts are sum-certain based on the committed annual number of registrants and events across an organization’s Total Event Program. Generally, if a customer exceeds the number of purchased registrations, the customer will incur an overage fee for the registrations that exceeded the number of registrations purchased. In some cases, the subscription price is based on the number of subscriptions being purchased by the customer. Hospitality Cloud marketing revenue is generated based on the number of advertisements purchased, rather than on a pay-per-click or impression basis. The price for the advertisement is primarily determined by the term, targeted geography, market tier, number and prominence of the advertising placement. Hospitality Cloud solutions are priced primarily on by the number of licenses purchased. The terms of our subscription and marketing contracts for both the Event Cloud and Hospitality Cloud are typically non-cancellable, for annual or multi-year terms and are billed in advance on an annual or quarterly basis. We recognize revenue associated with subscription and marketing agreements ratably over the term of the subscription or advertising period.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by:
Customer Acquisition
We are focused on continuing to acquire new customers to support our long-term growth. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness of our pricing and products, offerings of our competitors, the effectiveness of our marketing efforts and the growth of the market for event marketing and management software and hospitality
solutions, which has been negatively affected by the pandemic. While the pandemic impacted our ability to attract new customers over the past 24 months (our customer base declined by 19.3% when comparing the number of customers as of December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020), we believe there is a significant opportunity to expand our penetration into enterprises, hotels and venues, as well as into the mid-market. We intend to continue to invest heavily in our sales and marketing efforts to drive new customer acquisition. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 21,000 customers, as defined below, with approximately 11,000 customers in our Event Cloud and approximately 10,000 customers in our Hospitality Cloud. Our customers include businesses of various sizes and industries, associations, non-profits, academic institutions and government organizations. In the Event Cloud, we define a customer as a party who has entered into an active subscription contract with us. The majority of our customers are parties who are separate organizations. In certain instances, separate business units of an organization that have each entered into separate subscription agreements with us are considered separate customers. In the Hospitality Cloud, we define a customer as an entity with an active account with the Company, where the customer pays for the account or the account has been paid for by the customer’s parent company. For example, a corporate brand’s individual hotel properties whose accounts are paid for by that property’s corporate brand would be considered separate customers.
Expansion Within Our Existing Customer Base
Our business model relies on not only acquiring new customers, but also on renewing and expanding relationships with existing customers over time. Our ability to expand sales within our existing customer base will depend on a number of factors, including their satisfaction with our solutions and support, competition and the extent to which our customers expand their Total Event Program. We believe that based on current customer penetration, there is significant opportunity to further expand our sales with existing customers. We typically upsell our Event Cloud software solutions to increase the total number of registrations. Additionally, we cross-sell additional software solutions to our existing customers to enable those customers to realize the benefit of our integrated event marketing and management solutions. With the emergence of virtual and hybrid events, we expect to be able to both upsell our Event Cloud solutions and cross-sell our Attendee Hub solution to our customers as they host more events in their Total Event Program and attract additional attendees through the expanded reach of virtual and hybrid events. In the Hospitality Cloud, we have additional marketing solutions that we upsell to existing Hospitality Cloud customers. We also cross-sell software solutions that include, but are not limited to, lead scoring to prioritize group RFPs, three-dimensional hotel tours, event diagramming to collaborate with event organizers on designing optimal and safe event layouts and viewing three-dimensional renderings, room block management to enable event attendees to reserve hotel rooms, business transient solutions that simplify how hotels attract, manage and win corporate travel business and business intelligence solutions to benchmark against internal and targeted competitive metrics.
Innovation of Existing Solutions and Introduction of New Solutions
Our continued growth is contingent upon our ability to sustain innovation in order to maintain a competitive advantage. We continually invest in improving our existing solutions and creating new solutions targeted at enabling event organizers to more effectively organize, market, manage and report on the meetings they organize and attend, and enabling hotels and venues to more effectively drive group meetings revenue. Although we have built some of the most robust and integrated event marketing and management solutions in the industry, we recognize that the pace of technological innovation is accelerating, and that we need to continue to innovate to maintain our product differentiation.
For example, in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic that drastically altered the meetings and events industry beginning in March 2020, we quickly shifted technology resources in April 2020 to develop a virtual solution that would support the evolving needs of the industry. Five months later, at the end of August 2020, we introduced Attendee Hub, our interactive virtual and hybrid event solution. The strength of Attendee Hub, together with significant demand for a virtual meetings solution, has made Attendee Hub the fastest growing product in our history based on sales. Additionally, we believe Attendee Hub can help us to become a leader in supporting the anticipated shift to hybrid events that have both virtual and in-person elements.
Expansion of International Footprint
Our ability to continue to serve our international clients and grow our international revenue as a percentage of total revenue will be dependent on our ability to continue to effectively implement our international go-to-market strategy, our ability to adapt to cultural differences and the increased international adoption of technology by event organizers, hoteliers and venues. We believe there is significant opportunity for us to increase our market penetration internationally. Our solutions are currently used by clients in 129 countries. In addition to our sales team in North America, we have sales teams in the United Kingdom, Singapore, and the United Arab Emirates. In addition, we employ sales personnel in Australia, Spain, the Netherlands and Germany. Additionally, we have localized our products in different languages, with some parts of our products being localized in over 30 different languages. To support our international expansion, we opened a new data center in Europe in early 2019. The percentage of revenue generated from customers outside North America was 13.3%, 12.3% and 11.7% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Seasonality
Given the purchasing patterns of Hospitality Cloud customers under our contracts, Cvent’s Hospitality Cloud sales are highly seasonal, and approximately 50% of annual Hospitality Cloud sales are closed in the fourth quarter of each year. Because of these purchasing patterns, the percentage of Hospitality Cloud sales that are closed in the fourth quarter and the ratable revenue recognition of those sales in the following year, the amount of Hospitality Cloud sales that are made in the fourth quarter of the year will significantly drive the revenue growth of the following year. We believe this seasonality will continue to affect our quarterly and annual results.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our GAAP financial information, we review the following key business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions.
Net Dollar Retention Rate
To evaluate the efficacy of our land and expand model, we examine the rate at which our customers increase their spend with us for our solutions. Our net dollar retention rate measures our ability to increase spend across our existing customer base through expanded use of our platform, offset by customers who choose to stop using our solutions or spend less with us.
We calculate our net dollar retention rate as a quotient of the following:
•Denominator: Revenue from customers whose revenue existed in the twelve months ending on the day twelve months prior to the date as of which the retention rate is being reported.
•Numerator: Revenue in the last twelve months from the customers whose revenue is reflected in the denominator.
In the Event Cloud, we define a customer as a party who has entered into an active subscription contract with us. The majority of our customers are parties who are separate organizations. In certain instances, separate business units of an organization that have each entered into separate subscription agreements with us are considered separate customers. In the Hospitality Cloud, we define a customer as an entity with an active account with the Company, where the customer pays for the account or the account has been paid for by the customer’s parent company. For example, a corporate brand’s individual hotel properties whose accounts are paid for by that property’s corporate brand would be considered separate customers.
The calculation excludes revenue associated with acquisitions where by-client revenue is not available, revenue is recognized on a transactional basis and revenue associated with our client conference. This revenue comprised 2.8%, 5.8% and 11.3% of revenue for years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
We believe our ability to not only retain, but upsell and cross-sell additional features and products to, our existing customers will continue to support our net dollar retention rate. As of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, our net dollar retention rate was 101.0%, 89.2% and 108.4%, respectively. The decline in net dollar retention rate in 2020 was primarily due to the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and the increase in net dollar retention rate in 2021 was primarily due to the lessening impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic in 2021 and the adoption of our new virtual solution, Attendee Hub, and we expect this rate to return to historical levels once the impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our business subsides, and then potentially exceed historical levels as a result of the market opportunity created by virtual and hybrid events.
Our net dollar retention rate may fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including the growing level of our revenue base, the level of penetration within our customer base, expansion of products and features, our ability to retain our customers and our ability to upsell and cross-sell to our customers. Our calculation of net dollar retention rate may differ from similarly titled metrics presented by other companies.
Customers Contributing More Than $100,000 of Annual Recurring Revenue
We focus on growing the number of customers that contribute more than $100,000 of annual recurring revenue (“ARR”) as a measure of our ability to scale with our existing customers and attract larger organizations to Cvent. Revenue from these customers represented 41.0%, 32.9% and 32.6% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we had 802, 666 and 722 customers that contributed more than $100,000 of ARR in each of their respective years, demonstrating our rapid penetration of larger organizations including enterprises. The increase we saw as of December 31, 2021 is the primarily result of cross-selling Attendee Hub into our existing client base, significantly increasing the value of those clients. The threshold value of customers for which we calculate ARR and our calculation of ARR may differ from similarly titled metrics presented by other companies.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We generate revenue from two primary sources: Event Cloud subscription-based solutions and Hospitality Cloud marketing-based and subscription-based solutions. Subscription-based solution revenue consists primarily of fees to provide our customers with access to our cloud-based software platform. Marketing-based solution revenue consists primarily of fees for digital advertising on CSN or one of our other online advertising platforms.
Event Cloud
We generate the majority of our Event Cloud revenue from subscriptions for our event marketing and management software solution. Subscription revenue is driven primarily by the number of registrations purchased and the number and complexity of mobile applications, onsite events and virtual events purchased in addition to additional modules that enhance the functionality of the software solution. In some cases, the subscription price is based on the number of subscriptions being purchased by the customer.
The terms of our Event Cloud contracts are typically non-cancellable, have annual or multi-year terms, and are billed in advance, generally annually, but also on a quarterly basis. In the case of multi-year agreements, the agreement sometimes includes annual price increases over the contract term. Our agreements are sum-certain and not pay-as-you-go. Generally, if a customer exceeds their purchased number of registrations, the customer will incur an overage fee. We recognize revenue associated with Event Cloud subscription agreements ratably over the term of the contract. Certain revenue associated with Onsite Solutions and Attendee Hub products is recognized at a point in time as the services are performed and the performance obligations are satisfied. Amounts that have been contractually invoiced are initially recorded as deferred revenue and are recognized as revenue ratably over the subscription period. We refer to contractual amounts that have not been invoiced as unbilled contract value, and together with deferred revenue, remaining performance obligations. Unbilled contract value is not reflected in our consolidated financial statements.
Hospitality Cloud
We generate our Hospitality Cloud revenue from marketing and subscription-based software solutions. Marketing solutions revenue is primarily driven by the number of advertisements purchased on CSN. The advertisement price is primarily determined by the term, targeted geography, market tier, number and prominence of the advertising placement. Subscription revenue is driven primarily by the number of licenses purchased for our lead scoring solution to prioritize group RFPs, three-dimensional hotel tours, event diagramming to collaborate with event organizers on designing optimal event layouts and viewing three-dimensional renderings, room block management to enable event attendees to reserve hotel rooms, business transient solutions and business intelligence solutions to benchmark against internal and targeted competitive metrics. In some cases, the subscription price is based on the number of subscriptions being purchased by the customer.
The terms of our subscription and marketing contracts are typically non-cancellable, annual or multi-year terms, and are typically billed in advance, generally annually, but also on a quarterly basis. In the case of multi-year agreements, the agreement sometimes includes annual price increases over the contract term. Our agreements are sum-certain and not based on usage. We recognize revenue associated with these agreements ratably over the term of the subscription or advertising period. Amounts that have been contractually invoiced are initially recorded as deferred revenue and are recognized as revenue ratably over the subscription or advertising period. We refer to contractual amounts that have not been invoiced as unbilled contract value, and together with deferred revenue, remaining performance obligations.
We refer to contractual amounts that have not been invoiced as unbilled contract value, and together with deferred revenue, remaining performance obligations. Unbilled contract value is not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. See “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance -Seasonality” for the effects of seasonality on our Hospitality Cloud Revenue.
For multi-year agreements for either Event Cloud or Hospitality Cloud solutions, we typically invoice the amount for the first year of the contract at signing, followed by subsequent annual invoices at the anniversary of each year. Since we bill most of our customers in advance, there can be amounts that we have not yet been contractually able to invoice. Until such time as these amounts are invoiced or recognized in revenue, they are considered by us to be unbilled contract value, and together with deferred revenue, remaining performance obligations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 our total current deferred revenue was $239.8 million and $207.6 million, which amounts do not include unbilled contract value for contracts not yet billed of $573.4 million and $576.1 million, respectively. We expect that the amount of unbilled contract value relative to the total value of our contracts will change from year to year for several reasons, including the amount of cash collected early in the contract term, the specific timing and duration of customer agreements, varying invoicing cycles of agreements, the specific timing of customer renewal, changes in customer financial
circumstances and foreign currency fluctuations. We expect to recognize approximately 68.1% of our remaining performance obligations as revenue over the subsequent 24 months, and the remainder thereafter.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of employee-related expenses, such as salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, related to providing support and hosting our solutions, costs of cloud-based data center capacity, software license fees, costs to support our onsite solutions and virtual products, interchange fees related to merchant services and amortization expense associated with capitalized software. In addition, we allocate a portion of overhead, such as rent and depreciation and amortization to cost of revenue based on headcount.
Although Cvent breaks out revenue by cloud, we do not track or manage the business by cost of revenue by cloud. Rather, we manage cost of revenue by type of direct cost, and a significant portion of these direct costs are shared costs to support both Event Cloud and Hospitality Cloud solutions. This is consistent with Cvent’s approach to management of the business as one comprehensive solution for the entire event management lifecycle.
We are invested in our customers’ success and as such, we will continue to invest in providing support, expanding our capacity to support our growth and developing new features to support virtual and hybrid events and enhance our existing products, which in the near-term will result in higher cost of revenue in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is total revenue less total cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. We expect that our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as a result of seasonality related to our onsite solutions, virtual and merchant services products in the near-term, and additional costs associated with potential future acquisitions.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses include selling and marketing expenses, research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses and intangible asset amortization, exclusive of amounts included in cost of revenue.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel and related expenses for our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions and stock-based compensation. We capitalize commissions when they are earned by staff, which is when the customer contract is signed. We amortize capitalized commissions over the average historic customer contract life. In addition to staff costs, our cost of marketing includes product marketing and other brand-building and lead generation tactics such as webinars, trade shows, product seminars, content marketing, digital marketing, third-party content distribution and our annual client conference, Cvent CONNECT. In addition, we also allocate a portion of overhead, such as rent and depreciation to sales and marketing based on headcount.
We intend to continue to invest in sales and marketing and expect spending in these areas to increase in the near-term in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue over the near-term as we continue to expand our business both domestically and internationally and take advantage of the growing need for virtual and hybrid events. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to be among the most significant components of our operating expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our research and development staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation and the cost of third-party contractors. Research and development expenses, other than software development costs that qualify for capitalization, are expensed as incurred. In addition, we allocate a portion of overhead, such as rent and depreciation to research and development based on headcount.
With the exception of software developed by companies we have acquired, we maintain a unified software code base for our entire platform, which we believe improves the efficiency of our research and development activities. We expect research and development expenses to increase in the near-term in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue as we expand our product offerings, including our virtual and hybrid event functionality, and integrate and support potential future acquired businesses and technologies.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for administrative, internal information technology operations, finance, legal and human resource staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, as well as professional fees, insurance premiums and other corporate expenses. In addition, we allocate a portion of overhead, such as rent and depreciation to general and administrative based on headcount.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue over the near-term as we continue to expand our operations and hire additional personnel to support our growth. Additionally, we expect to incur incremental general and administrative expenses to comply with the additional requirements of being a public company.
Intangible Asset Amortization, Exclusive of Amounts Included in Cost of Revenue
Intangible asset amortization, exclusive of amounts included in cost of revenue, consists entirely of amortization expenses related to acquired customer relationship and trademark intangible assets. This line item excludes intangible asset amortization related to cost of revenue, which is defined as acquired developed technology and capitalized software intangible asset amortization.
We expect our intangible asset amortization expenses to increase in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue over the near-term as we expect to strategically acquire companies to aid in our near-term growth.
Other
Our other income/expense items include interest expense, amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount, gain/loss on divestitures, net and other income/expense, net.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates primarily to interest payments on our outstanding borrowings under the $740.0 million credit facility with a syndicate of lenders, comprised of an initial $700.0 million term loan facility (which term loan facility was increased by way of a $53.0 million incremental facility on October 16, 2018) and a $40.0 million incremental facility on October 26, 2018 (such term loan facility as increased by the incremental facilities, the “Term Loan Facility”) and a $40.0 million revolving loan facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”, and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “Credit Facilities”) we entered into pursuant to the Credit Agreement dated November 30, 2017 (the “Credit Agreement”) by and between Cvent, Inc. as borrower, Papay Holdco, LLC, as Holdings, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, as administrative agent, the guarantors from time to time party thereto, and the lenders and other parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, restated, amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time.
Amortization of Deferred Financing Costs and Debt Discount
Amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount consists of the amortization of up-front fees paid at the inception of our Credit Facilities.
Gain/(Loss) on Divestitures, net
Gain/(loss) on divestitures, net consists entirely of the loss incurred on the divestiture of a subsidiary of Cvent in 2020.
Other Income/(Expense), net
Other income/(expense), net consists primarily of interest income, foreign currency gains or losses, and import tax credits.
Provision for/(Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations for the period indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the period indicated:
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $518.8 million, an increase of $20.1 million, or 4.0% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Event Cloud revenue accounted for $362.1 million, or 69.8% of total revenue, and Hospitality Cloud revenue accounted for $156.7 million, or 30.2% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Event Cloud revenue increased $46.0 million, or 14.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to a $62.1 million increase in revenue from our new virtual product, Attendee Hub, which we introduced as an integrated component of our Event Management platform at the end of August 2020, and a $15.2 million increase in revenue from our event management product which is used for event planning, promotion, registration and management and supports both in-person and virtual meetings. These increases were partially offset by the suspension of in-person meetings and events caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which began to significantly affect the Company in March 2020 and affected our ability to attract new customers and retain current customers. Revenue from products that support the in-person meetings and event experiences, such as Onsite Solutions and our mobile event app, were most negatively impacted, declining by an aggregate of $33.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Hospitality Cloud revenue decreased $25.9 million, or 14.2%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year primarily due to the suspension of in-person meetings and events caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which began to significantly affect our business in March 2020. As discussed in the section “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance - Seasonality,” Hospitality Cloud sales are highly seasonal, and approximately 50% of annual sales are closed in the fourth quarter of each year. Given the high percentage of Hospitality Cloud sales that are closed in the fourth quarter and the ratable revenue recognition of those sales in
the following year, the amount of Hospitality Cloud sales that are made in the fourth quarter of the year will significantly drive the revenue growth of the following year. Hospitality Cloud sales in the fourth quarter of 2020 were down relative to the fourth quarter of the prior year, which drove the decline in Hospitality Cloud revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. While annual Hospitality Cloud revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 declined compared to 2020, the rate of decline shrunk over the course of the year, and revenue for the fourth quarter of 2021 increased by 12.1% compared to the same quarter of the prior year. We expect Hospitality Cloud revenue to continue to increase on a year-over-year basis in the future since Hospitality Cloud sales started to increase relative to the prior year period in the first half of 2021, and are expected to continue to increase as hotels spend more on marketing to drive their group business in the future as the hospitality industry continues to recover.
We generate the majority of our revenue from North America. Revenue from outside North America accounted for 13.3% and 12.3%, respectively, of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In the near-term, in absolute dollars, we expect that total revenue from outside North America will increase at the same rate as the rest of our business, and as such, we expect total revenue from outside of North America as proportion of total revenue will not substantially change.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $191.4 million, an increase of $15.2 million, or 8.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cost of revenue was driven by an increase in costs related to supporting virtual, in-person, and hybrid events. These costs include third-party costs, which increased $4.4 million, and credit card interchange fees related to our merchant services business, which increased $1.8 million. Additionally, employee expenses increased $5.0 million due to a 7.5% increase in average headcount, amortization of capitalized software development costs increased $3.4 million as a result of continued enhancement of our product platform, hosting expense increased $4.4 million and costs associated with Cvent CONNECT, which was held in a hybrid manner with in-person and virtual delivery models this year, increased $1.0 million. These cost increases were partially offset by a $2.1 million decline in depreciation expense, $1.5 million in wage subsidies received in 2021 pursuant to the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy program, a $1.4 million decrease in restructuring expense related to severance from the global reduction in force completed in May 2020 and a $0.5 million decline in intangible asset amortization.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $135.6 million, an increase of $7.2 million, or 5.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by a $4.3 million increase in marketing program spend, a $3.3 million increase in costs associated with Cvent CONNECT, which was held in a hybrid manner with in-person and virtual delivery models this year, a $2.6 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $1.4 million increase in employee expense due to a 9.5% increase in average compensation, while average headcount declined by 4.1% compared to the prior year. These cost increases were partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease in facilities and depreciation expense, a $0.9 million decrease in restructuring expense related to severance costs related to the global reduction in force completed in May 2020, a $0.5 million decline in travel related expense and a $0.4 million decline in software licenses fees.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $96.6 million, an increase of $8.8 million, or 10.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by higher employee expenses of $11.7 million due to a 4.0% increase in average headcount and a 5.6% increase in average compensation, $2.3 million in increased stock-based compensation and a $0.8 million increase in contracted services. These increases were partially offset by $3.6 million in wage subsidies received in 2021 pursuant to the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy program, lower depreciation
expense of $1.2 million, and a decrease in restructuring expense of $0.9 million related to severance from the global reduction in force completed in May 2020.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $88.2 million, an increase of $7.6 million, or 9.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by a $5.0 million increase in bad debt expense due to negotiated settlements with customers who were negatively impacted by COVID-19, a $3.7 million increase in contracted services, a $1.9 million increase in employee expense due to a 3.5% increase in average headcount and 5.8% increase in average compensation, a $1.4 million increase in stock based compensation, a $1.1 million increase in miscellaneous taxes due a decline in the amount of sales and use tax reserve released in 2021 compared to 2020, a $0.9 million increase in acquisition and transaction costs associated with acquisition due diligence, amending our credit facility agreement and costs incurred as part of the merger process with Dragoneer. These increases were partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease in legal costs associated with prosecuting a trade secret misappropriation claim, a $1.5 million decrease in restructuring expense associated with shuttering certain office spaces and $0.4 million in severance costs related to the global reduction in force completed in May 2020, a $0.9 million decrease in consulting costs incurred to consider strategic alternatives, a $0.8 million decrease in travel related expense, and a $0.5 million decrease in software licenses expense.
Intangible Asset Amortization, Exclusive of Amounts Included in Cost of Revenue. Intangible asset amortization, exclusive of amounts included in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $51.5 million, a decrease of $2.4 million, or 4.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was driven primarily by the scheduled decline in the amortization of intangible assets acquired in past years.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.1 million, a decrease of $6.5 million, or 18.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by a lower variable rate, i.e., one-month LIBOR, which declined by approximately 52 basis points on average, on our outstanding long-term debt.
Amortization of Deferred Financing Costs and Debt Discount
Amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.6 million, which did not materially change compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.2 million, which is due to the repayment of $500.0 million of First Lien Principal amount in connection with the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction in December 2021.
Loss on Divestitures, Net
Loss on divestitures, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.6 million. This loss is result of the divestiture of Kapow Events in June 2020. There were no divestitures in 2021.
Other Income/(Expense), Net
Other income/(expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.4 million, an increase of $4.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by proceeds from the sale of import tax credit certificates of $4.9 million and as well as $0.8 million in foreign currency gains in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Provision for/(Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.0 million, a decrease of $0.8 million, or 10.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was driven primarily by the impact of changes in pre-tax book income, changes in state effective tax rates, changes in the tax on global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) inclusion, the change due to the prior year divestiture of a subsidiary, and changes in the valuation allowance as a result of the reduction in deferred tax liabilities that could be used as a source of taxable income for the realization of deferred tax assets.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations for the period indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the period indicated:
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $498.7 million, a decrease of $68.9 million, or 12.1% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Event Cloud revenue accounted for $316.1 million, or 63.4% of total revenue, and Hospitality Cloud revenue accounted for $182.6 million, or 36.6% of total revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Event Cloud revenue decreased $63.1 million, or 16.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the suspension of in-person meetings and events caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which began to significantly affect the Company in March 2020. Revenue from products that support the in-person meetings and event experience, such as Onsite Solutions and our mobile event app, were most negatively impacted, declining by $61.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year. These declines were partially offset by $7.7 million of revenue from our new virtual product, Attendee Hub, which we introduced as an integrated component of our Event Management platform at the end of August 2020.
Hospitality Cloud revenue decreased $5.8 million, or 3.1%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to the suspension of in-person meetings and events caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic, which began to significantly affect our business in March 2020. As discussed in the section “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance-Seasonality,” Hospitality Cloud sales are highly seasonal, and approximately 50% of annual sales are closed in the fourth quarter of each year. Given the high percentage of Hospitality Cloud sales that are closed in the fourth quarter and the ratable revenue recognition of those sales in the following year, the amount of Hospitality Cloud sales that are made in the fourth quarter of the year will significantly drive the revenue growth of the following year. Hospitality Cloud sales in the fourth quarter of 2019 were strong in part due to increased prices for CSN contracts as a result of in-depth negotiations with our customers that identified the increased value of Cvent’s platform. These factors mitigated the amount of revenue decline of the Hospitality Cloud for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, which was also affected by the fact that revenue for Hospitality Cloud software products is recognized ratably over the term of the
contract, most of which are for one or more years, and seasonality factors discussed in the section “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance-Seasonality.”
We generate the majority of our revenue from North America. Revenue from outside North America accounted for 12.3% and 11.7%, respectively, of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $176.3 million, a decrease of $35.6 million, or 16.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in cost of revenue was driven primarily by a decline in costs related to supporting in-person events, which were suspended in March 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic. These costs include onsite third-party costs, which declined $18.3 million, credit card interchange fees related to our merchant services business, which declined $12.1 million, and employee expenses, which declined $11.0 million due to an 11.8% reduction in average headcount. This reduction in headcount was primarily the result of the global reduction in force in May 2020 in response to COVID-19. Additionally, costs associated with Cvent CONNECT declined $2.8 million as a result of the event being held virtually in 2020, and travel expenses declined $2.5 million as a result of corporate travel stopping in March 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic. These cost declines were offset by a $10.8 million increase in amortization of capitalized software development costs as a result of continued enhancement of our product platform.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $128.4 million, a decrease of $27.4 million, or (17.6)%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by an $8.7 million reduction in marketing program spend, a $7.5 million decline in costs associated with Cvent CONNECT due to it being held virtually, a $4.5 million decline in travel, meals and entertainment costs as a result of corporate travel stopping in March 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic and a $2.7 million fee incurred in connection with terminating an Australian reseller agreement to bring all Australian sales under our direct sales team incurred in 2019 that did not recur in 2020. The remaining decline was the result of a $1.4 million decrease in employee expenses due to a 5.9% reduction in average headcount partially lower headcount due to the global reduction in force completed in May 2020 and a $1.1 million decrease in contracted services.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $87.9 million, a decrease of $8.1 million, or (8.5)%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by lower employee expenses of $6.3 million due to a 1.3% reduction in average headcount partially due to the global reduction in force completed in May 2020 and a $1.4 million wage subsidy received in 2021 pursuant to the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy program, a $1.4 million decline in travel, meals and entertainment costs as a result of corporate travel stopping in March 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic and lower contracted development services of $1.5 million. These reductions were partially offset by higher software license fees of $1.0 million.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $80.6 million, a decrease of $11.5 million, or (12.4)%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by a $4.7 million reduction in professional services fees, a $4.1 million decline in employee expenses due to a 7.3% reduction in average headcount partially due to the global reduction in force completed in May 2020, no acquisition costs in 2020, compared to 2019, during which $3.3 million in acquisition costs were incurred, and a $1.9 million decline in travel, meals and entertainment as a result of corporate travel
stopping in March 2020 due to the global COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, costs associated with lower computer hardware, recruiting, and charges associated with the winding up of one of our distribution channels contributed to the decline in costs. These cost declines were partially offset by $1.9 million of higher bad debt expense associated with an increase in the allowance for expected credit losses of certain accounts receivable due to the effect of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our client’s operations, $1.6 million of increased outside legal fees associated with prosecuting a trade secret misappropriation claim, a $1.6 million increase in restructuring expense associated with shuttering certain office spaces due to the shift to a remote work environment as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic and $1.1 million in legal and consulting costs to consider strategic alternatives.
Intangible Asset Amortization, Exclusive of Amounts Included in Cost of Revenue. Intangible asset amortization, exclusive of amounts included in cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $53.8 million, a decrease of $3.8 million, or (6.7)%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by the scheduled decline in the amortization of intangible assets acquired in past years and no business acquisitions occurring in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.6 million, a decrease of $12.3 million, or 25.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was driven primarily by a lower variable rate, i.e., one-month LIBOR, which declined by approximately 170 basis points on average, on our outstanding long-term debt.
Amortization of Deferred Financing Costs and Debt Discount
Amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.8 million, which did not change compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss on Divestitures, Net
Loss on divestitures, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $9.6 million. This loss is result of the divestiture of Kapow Events in June 2020. There were no divestitures in 2019.
Other Income/(Expense), Net
Other income/(expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 million, an increase of $1.6 million, or (553.4)%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by proceeds from the sale of import tax credit certificates and interest income, partially offset by a decrease in foreign currency losses. This decrease in foreign currency losses was driven primarily by fluctuations in the British Pound, Euro and Canadian Dollar currencies.
Provision for/(Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7.9 million, an increase of $13.9 million, or 230.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was driven primarily by the impact of changes in pre-tax book income, changes in state effective tax rates and changes in the valuation allowance as a result of the reduction in deferred tax liabilities that could be used as a source of taxable income for the realization of deferred tax assets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the non-GAAP measures of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are supplemental measures of operating performance monitored by management that are not defined under GAAP and that do not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net loss or net loss margin, as determined by GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss adjusted for interest expense, amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount, gain/(loss) on extinguishment of debt, gain/(loss) on divestitures, net, other income/(expense), net, provision for/(benefit from) income taxes, depreciation, amortization of software development costs, intangible asset amortization, stock-based compensation expense, restructuring expense, cost related to acquisitions, and other items. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. We use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends. We believe Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are helpful to investors, analysts, and other interested parties because it can assist in providing a more consistent and comparable overview of our operations across our historical financial periods.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider either in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net loss, net loss margin and our other GAAP results. In evaluating Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be construed to imply that our future results will be unaffected by the types of items excluded from the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not a presentation made in accordance with GAAP and the use of the term varies from others in our industry.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss and of Adjusted EBITDA margin to net loss margin (defined as net loss divided by revenue), the most directly comparable GAAP measure, respectively, is as follows:
(1)Restructuring expense includes costs associated with severance related to the global reduction in force that took place in May 2020 in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic, severance to employees of acquired entities, retention bonuses to employees of acquired entities, costs to discontinue use of a back-office system and closing of office space.
(2)Represents costs incurred in association with acquisition activity, including due diligence and post-acquisition earn out payments.
(3)Includes other costs associated with litigation, private equity management fees, and credit facility fees, net of the gain from government subsidies related to global COVID-19 pandemic.
(4)Net loss margin represents net loss divided by revenue and Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
(5)Loss on divestitures, net is the result of the divestiture of Kapow Events in June 2020.
(6)Net loss margin represents net loss divided by revenue and Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, on-going collection of our accounts receivable and our Credit Facilities. Cash and cash equivalents may include holdings in bank demand deposits, money market instruments and certificates of deposit. We also periodically invest a portion of our excess cash in short-term investments with stated maturity dates between three months and one year from the purchase date.
Our U.S. entities held $54.2 million and $26.0 million in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our non-U.S. entities held $72.9 million and $39.2 million in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, in March 2020, global economic activity slowed down. In anticipation of possible constraints on cash and working capital, the Company fully drew on its Revolving Credit Facility on March 20, 2020. We repaid portions of the outstanding Revolving Credit Facility balance in May, September, and December 2020, leaving $13.4 million drawn as of December 31, 2020. We repaid the remaining outstanding balance on our Revolving Credit Facility as of April 2021.
As previously discussed above, during the fourth quarter we completed our Reverse Recapitalization Transaction with Dragoneer. Net proceeds from this transaction after deducting fees and expenses were approximately $523.0 million, $500.0 million of which was used to repay the outstanding principal indebtedness under our Term Loan Facility. The remaining net proceeds are included in cash and cash equivalents on our consolidated balance sheet.
We believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held by us, cash and cash equivalents anticipated to be generated by us (including the net proceeds generated from the fourth quarter Reverse Recapitalization Transaction) and borrowing capacity under our revolving line of credit are sufficient to meet working capital requirements, anticipated capital expenditures, and contractual obligations for at least 12 months. We also believe that these financial resources will continue to allow us to manage the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on our business operations for the foreseeable future, including mitigating potential reductions in revenue and delays in payments from our customers and partners. Our future capital requirements will depend on several factors, including but not limited to our obligation to repay any amounts outstanding under our Credit Facilities, our subscription growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced solutions and the continuing market adoption of our platform. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations.
Material Cash Requirements for Known Contractual and Other Obligations
The following is a description of commitments for capital expenditures and other known and reasonably likely cash requirements as December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We anticipate fulfilling such commitments with our existing cash and cash equivalents short-term investments and borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility, which amounted to $40.0 million and $26.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various purchase commitments primarily related to third-party cloud hosting, technology operations and data services. Total non-cancellable purchase commitments as of December 31, 2021 were approximately $15.7 million expiring at various dates through 2026. Total non-cancellable purchase commitments as of December 31, 2020 were approximately $33.0 million expiring at various dates through 2023. See Note 15. Purchase Commitments of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We entered into the Credit Facilities on November 30, 2017 and increased the amount of the Term Loan Facility by way of incremental facilities on October 16, 2018 and October 26, 2018. A portion of the proceeds under the Term Loan Facility was used to repay borrowings outstanding under our then existing credit facilities, together with accrued interest, a prepayment premium and related expenses, and the proceeds of the incremental facilities were used to finance additional acquisitions or to refinance acquisition indebtedness. In April 2021, we amended and extended our Revolving Credit Facility through August 30, 2024. On November 18, 2021, the Company entered into the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement which, among other things, provide the Company the option to report to the lenders financial statements at the consolidated parent level. Due to the spread of COVID-19 in the beginning of 2020, the global economic activity slowed down and in anticipation of constraints on cash and working capital, we fully drew on the Revolving Credit Facility on March 20, 2020. We paid off portions of the Revolving Credit Facility in May, September, and December 2020 and repaid the remaining balance as of April 2021. Additionally, as noted above, we used net proceeds from the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction in the fourth quarter to repay $500.0 million of principal under the Term Loan Facility. Further information regarding the Company’s debt issuances and payment commitments can be found in Note 13. Debt, of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Credit Facilities
Borrowings under the Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate per annum, at our option, equal to an applicable margin, plus, (a) for alternative base rate borrowings, the highest of (i) the prime rate in effect on such day as determined by the administrative agent, (ii) the Federal Funds Rate in effect on such day plus 1/2 of 1.00% and (iii) LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.0%) plus 1.00% and (b) for eurocurrency borrowings, LIBOR for the relevant interest period divided by 1 minus the Statutory Reserves (if any) (each term as defined in the Credit Agreement) (subject to a floor of 0.0%). The applicable margin for borrowings under the Credit Facilities is (a) with respect to term loan borrowings, 2.75% for alternate base rate borrowings and 3.75% for eurocurrency borrowings, and (b) with respect to revolving loans, 2.75% for alternate base rate borrowings and 3.75% for eurocurrency borrowings when our first lien leverage ratio is greater than 4.00 to 1.00, with step downs to (i) 2.50% for alternate base rate borrowings and 3.50% for eurocurrency borrowings when our first lien leverage ratio is less than or equal to 4.00 to 1.00 but greater than 3.50 to 1.00 and (ii) 2.25% for alternate base rate borrowings and 3.25% for eurocurrency borrowings when our first lien leverage ratio is less than or equal to 3.50 to 1.00. Our first lien leverage ratio is determined in accordance with the terms of the Credit Facilities. The interest rate on our Term Loan Facility was 3.8% and 3.9% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and the interest rate on our Revolving Credit Facility was 3.9% at December 31, 2020, with no outstanding borrowings as of December 31, 2021.
As noted above, on November 18, 2021, the Company entered into the Second Amendment which, among other things, provide the Company the option to report to the lenders financial statements at the consolidated parent level.
As previously discussed above, during the fourth quarter of 2021 the Company completed the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction. Net proceeds from this transaction after deducting fees and expenses were approximately $523.0 million, $500.0 million of which was used to repay the outstanding principal indebtedness under our Term Loan Facility. As a result of the voluntary prepayment of the outstanding principal indebtedness under our Term Loan Facility, the company recognized $7.2 million in loss on extinguishment of debt reflected in the Company's consolidated statement of operations associated with the write-off of debt issuance costs.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities is significantly influenced by the amount of cash we invest in personnel and infrastructure to support the anticipated growth of our business and the amount and timing of customer payments. Cash provided by operations in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 is primarily attributable to net loss adjusted for non-cash items. Cash provided by operations is also attributable to the change in accounts receivable and deferred revenue, which is driven by the seasonality of our business and our collections process. Our cash flows from operating activities are generally reflective of our ability to invoice annual subscription fees upfront with payments due 30 days after the customer’s receipt of the invoice. We experience seasonality in our accounts receivable. The first and fourth quarters historically include a higher level of cash collections, which is a result of higher levels of invoicing in the first and fourth quarters.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $122.2 million, which was primarily driven by net loss adjusted for non-cash items and a $33.0 million increase in deferred revenue, partially offset by $33.6 million in capitalized commissions, net. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $29.1 million, which was primarily driven by net loss adjusted for non-cash items, partially offset by a $42.1 million decline in client cash related to merchant services, and a $16.6 million decline in deferred revenue. The decline in client cash and deferred revenue were the result of the suspension of in-person events due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, which started to significantly affect our business in March 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $48.0 million, which was primarily driven by a $42.4 million increase in deferred revenue and net loss adjusted for non-cash items. These items were partially offset by increased accounts receivable of $23.4 million.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities have consisted primarily of costs related to software developed for internal use, purchases of computer equipment and leasehold improvements, purchases and sales of short-term investments, business acquisitions and proceeds from the divestiture of Kapow Events in 2020. As with other parts of our business, capital expenditures were significantly lower in 2020 as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic. During 2021, the impact of the pandemic lessened, and as these effects continue to lessen and when our business begins to grow again, we expect our capital expenditures and our investment activity to continue to increase.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $60.8 million, reflecting $41.0 million in capitalized software development, $14.8 million for the acquisition of Shoflo, and $4.7 million in purchases of property and equipment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $42.6 million, reflecting $40.6 million in capitalized software development, $2.1 million of purchases of property and equipment and $1.4 million for the acquisition of SummitSync. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $73.8 million, reflecting $45.0 million in capitalized software development, $19.9 million of purchases of property and equipment, $7.9 million of maturities of short-term investments net of purchases and $16.7 million in contingent consideration payments related to past acquisitions and the acquisitions of Wedding Spot, LLC and DoubleDutch, Inc.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of proceeds from and principal payments on the Company’s Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility and proceeds from the exercise of stock options. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.9 million, consisting of $552.7 million in proceeds from recapitalization, partially offset by $506.0 million in principal repayments on first lien term loan, $30.8 million in payment of offering costs, and $13.4 million in principal repayments of revolving credit facility. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $5.5 million, consisting of $14.4 million in proceeds from drawing on the Company’s $40.0 million Revolving Credit Facility, net of $7.9 million of scheduled principal payments on the Company’s Term Loan Facility. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $20.4 million, consisting of $28.5 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options by certain employees, net of $7.9 million of scheduled principal payments on the Company’s Term Loan Facility.
Commitments and Contingencies
See the information set forth in Note 15 (Commitments and Contingencies) to the annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses related to breach of confidentiality and claims by third parties of intellectual property infringement, misappropriation or other violation. See “Risk Factors-We have indemnity provisions under our contracts with our customers, channel partners and other third parties, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.” In addition, in connection with the consummation of the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. There are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Our critical accounting estimates are those that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements or our results of operation. A thorough understanding of these critical accounting estimates is essential when reviewing our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting estimates listed below are the most difficult management decisions as they involve the use of significant estimates and assumptions as described above. Refer to “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting estimates.
Business Combinations, Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
We account for business acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting, in accordance with which assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the acquisition date. We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. Such valuations are subject to uncertainty as they require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. We use the Multi-Period Excess Earnings Method, which is an income approach, to value the customer relationship intangible assets. We apply certain growth assumptions, related to price and volume increases, as well as expected customer churn and attrition levels to the forecasted revenue model. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. The estimates underlying such valuations have not materially changed in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 or the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate fair value of the consideration transferred in a business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized but the Company evaluates goodwill impairment of its single reporting unit annually in the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the goodwill may be impaired. The fair value of our single reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value as of December 31, 2021.
Sales Commissions
The adoption of Topic 606 resulted in the capitalization of incremental costs to obtain contracts with customers. Commissions earned by our sales personnel are considered incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Accordingly, sales commissions are capitalized when incurred and amortized on a straight-line basis over our average historical customer life, which is determined based on the underlying product line and ranges from one to four years. We determine the period of amortization by reviewing the average length of our customers contracts, changes in technology, expected contract renewals and customer retention, and other industry factors. We re-assess this calculation periodically.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
Costs incurred during the application development stage to develop software directly used in the delivery of revenue generating activities are capitalized and recorded as capitalized software development costs on the balance sheet. There is judgment involved in estimating cost incurred on a project-by-project basis in the application development stage. These costs are amortized on a project-by-project basis using the straight-line method over the estimated economic life of the application, which is generally three years, beginning when the asset is ready for its intended use. Costs incurred during the preliminary development stage, as well as maintenance and training costs are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of the existing assets and liabilities, and their respective income tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company establishes a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions based on a two-step process of evaluating recognition and measurement criteria. The first step assesses whether the tax position is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by the taxing authority, including resolution of any appeals or litigation, on the basis of the technical merits of the position. If the tax position meets the more-likely-than-not criteria, the portion of the tax benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with the relevant tax authority is recognized in the consolidated financial statements.
The Company is subject to tax on global intangible low-taxed income, or GILTI, earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. Entities can make an accounting policy election to either recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred. The Company has elected to account for GILTI tax as a current period expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
Employee stock-based compensation is recognized as a cost in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. For both equity-classified and liability-classified awards, such cost is measured at the grant date fair value of the award. We estimate the grant date fair value for stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions including the expected term of the options, the price volatility of the underlying stock, dividend yield, and a discount for the lack of marketability. The expected dividend yield is zero, as we have not previously declared cash dividends and do not currently intend to declare cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Prior to the Company becoming publicly traded, because Legacy Cvent was privately-held, the Black-Scholes pricing inputs, including the grant date fair value of the underlying common stock, volatility of the underlying stock, and a discount for the lack of marketability, were estimated based on our peer group companies, which are publicly-traded. Our peer group was established through consultation with our external valuation firm; our ultimate parent entity, an affiliate of Vista Equity Partners Management, LLC (“Vista”); and confirmed through the review of the performance and valuation attributes of our peer group to determine that our public-company peer group is a reasonable and fair proxy for our share performance, if our shares were publicly-traded. The risk-free rate for the expected term of the option was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve at the date of grant.
The initial determination of compensation cost is based on the number of stock options or other awards granted, which is then amortized over the vesting period. Liability classified awards are remeasured to fair value at each reporting date with the corresponding change in value recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We recognize expense over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis. We record the impact of forfeitures on stock compensation expense in the period the forfeitures occur.
As we are now a public company, we have a readily determinable market price for our common stock, which we will utilize in determining the fair value of any future awards. Prior to the Company becoming publicly traded, the fair value of the common stock underlying the stock options was determined by the board of directors, which intended all options granted to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per share fair value of the common stock underlying those options on the date of grant. Because there was no public market for our common stock prior to the Reverse Recapitalization Transaction, the valuations of the common stock were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation and Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling 59-60. The
assumptions used by us in the valuation model were based on future expectations combined with management judgment. In the absence of a public trading market, the board of directors with input from management exercised significant judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of the common stock as of the date of each option grant, including the following factors:
•contemporaneous independent valuations performed at periodic intervals by an unrelated third-party valuation specialist;
•the nature of the business and its history since inception;
•the economic outlook in general and the condition and outlook of the specific industry;
•the book value of the stock and the financial condition of the business;
•the operating and financial performance and forecast;
•whether or not we have goodwill or other intangible values;
•marketability of the common stock;
•the hiring of key personnel;
•any corporate or asset acquisitions, or divestitures;
•present value of estimated future cash flows;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the shares of common stock underlying these stock options, such as an initial public offering or sale of the company, given prevailing market condition and the nature and history of the business;
•illiquidity of stock-based awards involving securities in a private company;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded technology companies; and
•the U.S. and global capital market conditions.