Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) begins with an overview of our company, followed by economic and industry-wide factors impacting our company and the markets we serve, a discussion of the overall results of operations, and finally a more detailed discussion of those results within each of our reportable segments.
COMPANY ORGANIZATION
Curtiss-Wright Corporation and its subsidiaries is a global integrated business that provides highly engineered products, solutions, and services mainly to aerospace & defense markets, as well as critical technologies in demanding commercial power, process, and industrial markets. We report our operations through our Aerospace & Industrial, Defense Electronics, and Naval & Power segments. We are positioned as a market leader, or hold a significant market share position, across a diversified array of niche markets through engineering and technological leadership, precision manufacturing, and strong relationships with our customers.
Impacts of inflation, pricing, and volume
Historically, we have not been significantly impacted by inflation. Increases in raw material costs or payroll costs have generally been offset through lean manufacturing activities or price increases. A portion of our contracts contain terms and conditions that enable us to pass inflationary price increases to our customers. In those cases whereby inflationary increases are not contractually stipulated, we actively negotiate price increases. We have consistently made annual investments in capital that
deliver efficiencies and cost savings. While the historical benefits of these efforts have generally offset the margin impact of competitive pricing conditions in the markets that we serve, there are no assurances that higher prices can effectively be passed through to our customers or that we will be able to fully offset the effects of higher raw materials costs through price increases on a timely basis.
Analytical Definitions
Throughout MD&A, the terms “incremental” and “organic” are used to explain changes from period to period. The term “incremental” is used to highlight the impact that acquisitions and divestitures had on the current year results. The results of operations for acquisitions are incremental for the first twelve months from the date of acquisition. Additionally, the results of operations of divested businesses are removed from the comparable prior year period for purposes of calculating “organic” and “incremental” results. The definition of “organic” also excludes the effects of total restructuring charges, impairment of assets held for sale, and foreign currency translation.
Market Analysis and Economic Factors
Economic Factors Impacting Our Markets
Curtiss-Wright Corporation is a global integrated business that provides highly engineered products, solutions, and services mainly to aerospace & defense markets, as well as critical technologies in demanding commercial power, process, and industrial markets. Many of Curtiss-Wright’s commercial businesses are driven in large part by global economic growth, primarily led by operations in the U.S., Canada, Europe, and China. In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized the global outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which resulted in significant disruption to travel, transportation of goods and services, and financial markets globally, and caused adverse and residual impacts to both industry supply chains and production levels. Though the onset of COVID-19 variants continues to cause supply-chain disruptions to global economies, including our business, as well as our customers and suppliers, U.S. economic activity rebounded quite dramatically in 2021, due in part to the availability of vaccines and increased government support to rebuild the country’s infrastructure.
In the last decade, the U.S. economy, as measured by real gross domestic product (GDP), has slowly improved, aided by decreased levels of unemployment, improvements in the housing market, and a low interest rate environment. 2020 U.S. GDP declined 3.4% from the prior year period, principally due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, U.S. GDP rebounded sharply in 2021, up 5.7% and at the fastest pace since 1984, according to the most recent estimate, led by an acceleration in industrial activity. In 2022, economists expect growth in the broader U.S. economy to moderate due to concerns about continued supply chain disruptions and rising inflation, with current estimates for U.S. GDP ranging from 3.5% to 4.0% growth.
Similarly, the global environment, which is typically influenced by international trade, economic conditions, and geopolitical uncertainty, had also been greatly impacted by the pandemic in 2020 before dramatically rebounding in 2021. According to the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook - 2021, global GDP in world economies grew 5.9% in 2021. Looking ahead to the next few years, we remain cautiously optimistic that our economically-sensitive commercial and industrial markets will improve based upon a return to normalized global growth conditions.
Defense
We have a well-diversified portfolio of products and services that supply all branches of the U.S. military, with content on critical high-performance programs and platforms, as well as a growing international defense business. A significant portion of our defense business operations is attributed to the United States market, and characterized by long-term programs and contracts driven primarily by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) budgets and funding levels. As such, the U.S. Defense budget serves as a leading indicator of our growth in the defense market.
We derive revenue from the naval defense, aerospace defense, and ground defense markets, which collectively represent more than 50% of our total net sales. In the naval defense market, we expect continued funding for U.S. shipbuilding programs, particularly as it relates to production on the Ford class aircraft carrier, as well as Columbia class and Virginia class submarines, which have received strong bipartisan support from Congress. We have a long legacy of providing products that support nuclear propulsion systems on naval vessels. In addition, through our service centers, we are a critical provider of ship repair and maintenance for the U.S. Navy’s Atlantic and Pacific fleets. In the aerospace defense market, we expect to benefit from increased funding levels on Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR), electronic warfare, cyber, encryption, unmanned systems, and communications programs. As a supplier of COTS and
COTS+ solutions, we continue to demonstrate that electronics technology will enhance our ability to design and develop future generations of advanced systems and products for high performance applications, while also meeting the military’s Size, Weight, and Power considerations. We are also a designer and manufacturer of high-technology data acquisition and comprehensive flight test instrumentation systems. In the ground defense market, we are a supplier of advanced tactical communications solutions for battlefield network management, including COTS-based rugged, small form factor communications systems, and integrated network communications management software. The modernization of the existing U.S. ground vehicle fleet is expected to recover slowly, while international demand should remain strong, particularly for our electronics stabilization systems.
In May 2021, the President’s FY22 budget request was released, calling for $715 billion in defense spending, which represented a 1.6% increase over the FY21 enacted level of $704 billion. In December 2021, Congress passed the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for FY22, which authorizes a $25 billion increase to the President’s defense budget proposal ($740 billion vs. $715 billion) and represents a ~5% increase over FY21 enacted levels. As of the date of filing, the DoD is currently operating under a Continuing Resolution until the FY22 budget is approved by Congress. Looking ahead, in conjunction with the President’s FY23 budget request, the DoD is expected to submit the Future Years Defense Program (FYDP), which outlines expectations about its key programs over the next five years. Based on industry research, the FYDP is expected to reflect modest increases in total defense budget funding. Through continued innovation as well as incremental research and development investments, Curtiss-Wright remains aligned with high growth DoD priorities and emerging technological trends, including security, cyber, hypersonics, net-centric connected battlefield, soldier survivability, and Modular Open Systems Approach (MOSA) capabilities.
Commercial Aerospace
Curtiss-Wright derives revenue from the global commercial aerospace market, principally to the commercial jet market, and to a lesser extent the regional jet and commercial helicopter markets. Our primary focus in this market is OEM products and services for commercial jets, which is highly dependent on new aircraft production from our primary customers, Boeing and Airbus. We provide a combination of flight control and utility actuation systems, sensors, and other sophisticated electronics, as well as shot and laser peening services utilized on highly stressed components of turbine engine fan blades, and aircraft structures. In 2020, we exited the build-to-print actuation product line supporting the Boeing 737 MAX program to ensure our long-term positioning and profitability as it applies to the Company’s commercial aerospace exposure.
Passenger travel and freight logistics, along with the demand for and delivery of new aircraft, are the key drivers in the commercial aerospace market. Over the prior decade, there was an extended production up-cycle for the commercial aerospace market, which was driven by increases in production by Boeing and Airbus on both legacy and new aircraft, particularly narrow-body aircraft. Additionally, sustained low oil prices contributed to declining fuel prices, which in turn led to cheaper airfares for consumers and increased passenger growth.
In 2020, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic abruptly halted the industry’s growth as fewer and fewer passengers traveled, and business operations were disrupted globally, stunting the production of new aircraft as well as the maintenance of existing aircraft well into 2021. Changes in the propensity for the general public to travel by air as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic will likely be driven by the onset of COVID variants and the availability and implementation of vaccines. According to industry reports, air travel demand based on passenger growth is expected to continue to modestly recover in 2022, with domestic travel recovering faster than international travel, and fully recover by 2025.
While we closely monitor these industry metrics, our success and future growth in the commercial aerospace market is primarily tied to the growth in aircraft production rates, the timing of our order placement, and continued partnering with aerospace original equipment manufacturers on both the current fleet and the next-generation of single aisle programs and engines, as well as more fuel efficient and all-electric aircraft.
Power & Process
In the power market, Curtiss-Wright is a global supplier of nuclear reactor technologies. We derive sales from the commercial nuclear power generation market, whereby we supply a variety of highly engineered products and services, including reactor coolant pumps, control rod drive mechanisms, valves, motors, spent fuel management, containment doors, bolting solutions, enterprise resource planning, plant process controls, and coating services. We provide equipment and services to both the aftermarket and new build markets, and have content on every reactor operating in the U.S. today.
According to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), nuclear power comprises approximately 20% of all electric power produced in the United States, with 93 reactors operating across 55 nuclear power plants in 28 states. Our growth opportunities for aftermarket products and services are driven by plant aging, plant closures, requirements for planned outages, plant life extensions (from the end of their original 40-year operating lives to 60-year and now 80-year lives), the levying of regulatory requirements, suppliers abandoning the commercial nuclear market, and plants seeking technology and innovation advances, such as digitalization, that further enable plant modernization.
One of the industry’s most significant challenges is electricity market competitiveness, primarily driven by sustained low natural gas prices. In addition, in 2016, the industry was tasked with reassessing operating practices, improving efficiency, and reducing costs to help keep nuclear power competitive in a changing electricity market, which was collectively referred to as "Delivering the Nuclear Promise." U.S. reactor operators were also faced with increased security measures and post-Fukushima regulatory requirements over most of the past decade. All of those factors contributed to plant operators diverting and deferring their typical plant capital expenditure budgets significantly away from planned maintenance. However, since late 2017, as those necessary requirements abated and plant operators resumed a more normalized maintenance schedule, the industry began to turn the corner. As a result, we have experienced and continue to expect increased opportunities for our vast portfolio of advanced nuclear technologies to aid safety, extend the reliability and ensure the ongoing viability of nuclear plants.
Longer term, global commercial nuclear power demand will be driven by the ongoing need for increased capacity especially in developing countries with growing populations but limited power supply, as well as the clean energy transition. In addition, the continued supply constraints and environmental concerns attributed to the current dependence on fossil fuels have led to a greater appreciation of the value of nuclear technology as the most efficient and environmentally friendly source of energy available today. As a result, we expect growth opportunities in this market both domestically and internationally, although the timing of new orders remains uncertain.
We play an important role in the new build market for the Generation III+ Westinghouse AP1000 reactor design, for which we are a supplier of RCPs, and also expect to supply a variety of ancillary plant products and services. Domestically, two new build reactors remain under construction in Georgia utilizing the AP1000 design. On a global basis, nuclear plant construction remains active. Currently, there are 57 new reactors under construction across 19 countries, with 97 planned and 325 proposed over the next several decades according to the World Nuclear Organization. We continue to expect to play a role in new build nuclear plant construction, with our largest opportunities in China, India and throughout eastern Europe, including Ukraine, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria and the Czech Republic. We are also well positioned to take advantage of market opportunities to support the ongoing design and development, and future construction, of next-generation advanced and small modular reactors, driven by support from the U.S. Department of Energy as well as internationally.
In the process market, we service the oil and gas, chemical, and petrochemical industries through numerous industrial valve products, in which the majority of our industrial valve sales are to the downstream markets. We maintain a global maintenance, repair, and overhaul (MRO) business for our pressure-relief valve technologies as refineries opportunistically service or upgrade equipment that has been operating at or near full capacity. We also produce severe service, operation-critical valves for the power and process industries. We also have the opportunity to support the oil exploration industry’s need and desire for more reliable subsea pumping systems. Sales in these industries are driven by global supply and demand, crude oil prices, industry regulations, and the natural gas market. Over the long run, we believe improved economic conditions and continued global expansion will be key drivers for future growth of our severe service and operation-critical valves serving the process industry.
General Industrial
Revenue derived from our widely diversified offering to the general industrial market primarily consists of electronic sensors and control systems, electro-mechanical actuation, and surface treatment services. We supply our products and services to OEMs and aftermarket industrial customers, including the transportation, commercial trucking, off-road equipment, agriculture, construction, and automotive industries. Our performance in these markets is typically aligned with the performance of the U.S. and global economies, with changes in global GDP rates and industrial production driving our sales, particularly for our surface treatment services.
One of the key drivers within our general industrial market is our focus on electronification and electrification, where our electronic sensors and controls systems products serve the on-and-off highway, medical mobility, and specialty vehicles markets. Notable products include electronic throttle controls, shift controls, joysticks, power management systems, and traction inverter systems, driving our ability to provide a full suite of in-cab operator control systems to our customers. Increased industry demand for electronic control systems and sensors has been driven by the need for improved operational
efficiency, safety, repeatability, reduced emissions, enhanced functionality, and greater fuel efficiencies to customers worldwide. Key to our future growth is expanding the human-machine interface (HMI) technology portfolio and providing a complete system solution to our customers. Existing and emerging trends in commercial vehicle safety, emissions control, and improved driver efficiency are propelling commercial vehicle OEMs toward higher performance subsystems. These trends are accelerating the evolution from discrete HMI components towards a more integrated vehicle interface architecture. Growth opportunities also exist with a range of intelligent actuators for industrial automation and robotics which help our customers quickly leverage data and utilize analytics within the Internet of Things environment. Meanwhile, our surface treatment services, which include shot and laser peening, engineered coatings, and analytical testing services across an extensive global network, are used to increase the safety, reliability, and longevity of components operating in harsh environments. Sales are primarily driven by global demand from general industrial customers.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following MD&A is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of the Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, is contained in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
NM - Not meaningful
Components of sales and operating income growth (decrease):
Sales for the year increased $115 million, or 5%, to $2,506 million, compared with the prior year period. On a segment basis, sales from the Defense Electronics and Naval & Power segments increased $116 million and $18 million, respectively, with sales from the Aerospace & Industrial segment decreasing $19 million. Changes in sales by segment are discussed in further detail in the "Results by Business Segment" section below.
Operating income for the year increased $94 million, or 32%, to $383 million, and operating margin increased 320 basis points compared with 2020. In the Aerospace & Industrial segment, increases in operating income and operating margin were primarily due to current year savings recognized as a result of our prior year restructuring initiatives, as well as favorable overhead absorption on higher general industrial sales. Operating income in the Defense Electronics segment increased primarily due to the benefits from our ongoing operational excellence initiatives, the incremental impact of our PacStar acquisition, as well as the absence of first year purchase accounting costs from our 901D acquisition. These increases were partially offset by higher research and development costs and unfavorable foreign currency translation. Operating margin in the Defense Electronics segment was negatively impacted by first year purchase accounting costs from our PacStar acquisition. In the Naval & Power segment, increases in operating income and operating margin were primarily due to current year savings recognized as a result of our prior year restructuring initiatives, as well as lower current period impairment losses on assets held for sale in our German industrial valves business compared to the prior year period.
Non-segment operating expense for the year increased $2 million, or 6%, to $40 million, primarily due to higher environmental costs.
Interest expense for the year increased $5 million, or 13%, to $40 million, primarily due to the issuance of $300 million Senior Notes in August 2020.
Other income, net for the year increased $2 million, or 24%, to $12 million, primarily due to the prior year recognition of accumulated foreign currency translation losses of $10 million related to the substantial liquidation of our Norwegian subsidiary. This increase was partially offset by higher pension costs, including one-time pension settlement charges recognized in the current year period related to the retirement of former executives.
The effective tax rate of 24.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased as compared to an effective tax rate of 23.4% in the prior year period. This increase was primarily due to higher current period non-deductible impairment losses related to our held for sale industrial valve business in Germany, as impairment losses recorded during the prior year period were partially offset against deferred tax liabilities.
New orders increased $258 million, or 11%, from the prior year period to $2,580 million, primarily due to an increase in new orders for industrial vehicles and sensors and actuation equipment in the Aerospace & Industrial segment, as well as the incremental impact of our PacStar acquisition in the Defense Electronics segment. In the Naval & Power segment, higher demand for industrial valve products was partially offset by the timing of naval defense orders. Changes in new orders by segment are discussed in further detail in the "Results by Business Segment" section below.
Comprehensive income (loss)
Pension and postretirement adjustments within comprehensive income during the year ended December 31, 2021 were a $131 million gain, compared to a $27 million loss for the prior year period. The gain in the current period was primarily attributed to higher asset returns and increases in the discount rate. The loss in the prior period was primarily due to decreases in the discount rate, partially offset by higher asset returns.
Foreign currency translation adjustments during the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in a comprehensive loss of $11 million, compared to a comprehensive gain of $41 million in the comparable prior period. The comprehensive loss during the current period was primarily attributed to decreases in the British Pound and Canadian Dollar, with the prior period comprehensive gain primarily attributed to increases in the Euro and British Pound.
RESULTS BY BUSINESS SEGMENT
Aerospace & Industrial
Sales in the Aerospace & Industrial segment are primarily generated from the commercial aerospace and general industrial markets and, to a lesser extent, the defense and power & process markets.
The following tables summarize sales, operating income and margin, total restructuring charges, and new orders within the Aerospace & Industrial segment.
Components of sales and operating income growth (decrease):
Sales decreased $19 million, or 2%, to $786 million, from the comparable prior year period, as lower sales in the commercial aerospace market were partially offset by sales increases in the general industrial market. In the commercial aerospace market, sales decreased $72 million primarily due to the exit of our build-to-print product line in the fourth quarter of 2020. These decreases were partially offset by sales increases of $50 million in the general industrial market, primarily due to higher demand for industrial vehicle products and surface treatment services.
Operating income increased $22 million, or 22%, to $122 million, and operating margin increased 310 basis points to 15.5%. The increases in operating income and operating margin were primarily due to current year savings recognized as a result of our prior year restructuring initiatives, as well as favorable overhead absorption on higher sales in the general industrial market.
New orders increased $202 million as compared to the prior year, primarily due to an increase in new orders for industrial vehicles as well as higher demand for sensors and actuation equipment.
Defense Electronics
Sales in the Defense Electronics segment are primarily to the defense markets and, to a lesser extent, the commercial aerospace market.
The following tables summarize sales, operating income and margin, total restructuring charges, and new orders, within the Defense Electronics segment.
Components of sales and operating income growth (decrease):
Sales increased $116 million, or 19%, to $724 million, from the comparable prior year period, primarily due to the incremental impact of our PacStar acquisition in the ground defense market, which contributed incremental sales of $115 million. Higher sales of avionics and test equipment in the commercial aerospace market were more than offset by the timing of sales on embedded computing equipment on various programs in the aerospace defense market.
Operating income increased $40 million, or 34%, to $159 million compared with the same period in 2020, while operating margin increased 250 basis points to 22.0%. The increase in operating income was primarily due to the benefits from our ongoing operational excellence initiatives as well as the incremental impact of our PacStar acquisition. Operating income also benefited from the absence of first year purchase accounting costs from our 901D acquisition as well as our prior year restructuring initiatives, partially offset by higher research and development costs and unfavorable foreign currency translation. The increase in operating margin was primarily due to our ongoing operational excellence initiatives as well as the absence of first year purchase accounting costs from our 901D acquisition, partially offset by first year purchase accounting costs from our PacStar acquisition.
New orders increased $38 million as compared to the prior year, primarily due to the incremental impact of our PacStar acquisition. This increase was partially offset by the timing of naval defense and aerospace defense orders.
Naval & Power
Sales in the Naval & Power segment are primarily to the naval defense and power & process markets.
The following tables summarize sales, operating income and margin, impairment of assets held for sale, total restructuring charges, and new orders, within the Naval & Power segment.
Components of sales and operating income growth (decrease):
Sales increased $18 million, or 2%, to $995 million, from the comparable prior year period. In the naval defense market, sales increased $20 million primarily due to increased production on the CVN-81 aircraft carrier program, as well as higher foreign military and service center sales. Sales in the power & process market were essentially flat, as higher demand for industrial valve products was more than offset by the timing of production on the China Direct AP1000 program.
Operating income increased $34 million, or 31%, to $142 million and operating margin increased 310 basis points to 14.2%. The increases in operating income and operating margin were primarily due to current year savings recognized as a result of our prior year restructuring initiatives, as well as lower current period impairment losses on assets held for sale in our German industrial valves business compared to the prior year period.
New orders increased $18 million as compared to the prior year, as higher demand for industrial valve products was partially offset by the timing of naval defense orders.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
The table below depicts sales by end market and customer type, as it helps provide an enhanced understanding of our businesses and the markets in which we operate. The table has been included to supplement the discussion of our consolidated operating results.
Net Sales by End Market and Customer Type
Aerospace & Defense Markets
Sales increased $63 million, or 4%, to $1,651 million, as compared to the prior year period, primarily due to higher sales in the ground defense and naval defense markets. The ground defense market benefited from the impact of our PacStar acquisition, which contributed incremental sales of $115 million. Sales in the naval defense market increased primarily due to higher sales of $27 million on the CVN-81 aircraft carrier program. These increases were partially offset by lower sales in the commercial aerospace market, primarily due to the exit of our build-to-print product line in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Commercial Markets
Commercial sales increased $52 million, or 6%, to $855 million, primarily due to increased demand for our industrial vehicle products in the general industrial market, which contributed higher sales of $50 million. Sales in the power & process market were essentially flat, as higher demand for our industrial valve products was more than offset by the timing of production on the China Direct AP1000 program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Cash
We derive the majority of our operating cash inflow from receipts on the sale of goods and services and cash outflow for the procurement of materials and labor; cash flow is therefore subject to market fluctuations and conditions. Most of our long-term contracts allow for several billing points (progress or milestone) that provide us with cash receipts as costs are incurred throughout the project rather than upon contract completion, thereby reducing working capital requirements.
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased $126 million to $388 million from the comparable prior year period, primarily due to a prior year voluntary pension contribution of $150 million as well as the timing of advanced cash receipts and lower disbursements in the current period. These increases were partially offset by higher outstanding receivables during the current period.
Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures were $41 million and $47 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in capital expenditures was primarily due to lower capital spending during the current period as well as lower current period investment related to the new DRG facility. For 2022, we anticipate capital expenditures of approximately $50 million to $60 million.
Divestitures
No material divestitures took place during 2021 or 2020.
Acquisitions
In 2021, we did not complete any acquisitions. In 2020, we acquired three businesses for $488 million in cash paid.
Future acquisitions will depend, in part, on the availability of financial resources at a cost of capital that meet our stringent criteria. As such, future acquisitions, if any, may be funded through the use of our cash and cash equivalents, through additional financing available under the credit agreement, or through new financing alternatives.
Financing Activities
Debt Issuances and Repayments
There were no debt issuances in 2021.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we repaid $100 million of the 2011 Notes that matured on December 1, 2021.
On August 13, 2020, the Corporation issued $300 million of Senior Notes (the “2020 Notes”), consisting of $150 million of 3.10% Senior Notes that mature on August 13, 2030 and $150 million of 3.20% Senior Notes that mature on August 13, 2032.
Revolving Credit Agreement
As of December 31, 2021, the Corporation had $94 million of borrowings outstanding under the Revolving Credit Agreement (the Credit Agreement or credit facility) and $21 million in letters of credit supported by the credit facility. The unused credit available under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021 was $385 million, which could be borrowed in full without violating any of our debt covenants. As of December 31, 2020, the Corporation had no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
Repurchase of Common Stock
During 2021, the Company repurchased approximately 2.7 million shares of its common stock for $343 million. In 2020, the Company repurchased approximately 2.0 million shares of its common stock for $200 million.
Dividends
The Company made dividend payments of approximately $29 million and $28 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Capital Resources
Cash in U.S. and Foreign Jurisdictions
Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $171 million and $198 million, respectively. The decrease in cash held by U.S. subsidiaries during 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher current period share repurchase activity, the principal payment of $100 million on the 2011 Notes that matured in December 2021, and lower foreign cash repatriation, partially offset by higher net borrowings on our credit facility during the current period. The decrease in cash held by foreign subsidiaries during 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to lower net cash receipts during the current period. There are no legal or economic restrictions on the ability of any of our subsidiaries to transfer funds, absent certain regulatory approvals in China, where approximately $13 million of our foreign cash resides.
Cash Utilization
Management continually evaluates cash utilization alternatives, including share repurchases, acquisitions, and increased dividends to determine the most beneficial use of available capital resources. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, available borrowings under the credit facility, and ability to raise additional capital through the credit markets are sufficient to meet both the short-term and long-term capital needs of the organization, including the return of capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases and growing our business through acquisitions.
Debt Compliance
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt agreements and credit facility covenants, including our most restrictive covenant, which is our debt to capitalization ratio limit of 60%. As of December 31, 2021, we had the ability to incur total additional indebtedness of $1.6 billion without violating our debt to capitalization covenant.
Future Commitments
Cash generated from operations should be adequate to meet our planned capital expenditures of approximately $50 million to $60 million and expected dividend payments of approximately $29 million in 2022. There can be no assurance, however, that we will continue to generate cash from operations at the current level, or that these projections will remain constant throughout 2022. If cash generated from operations is not sufficient to support these operating requirements and investing activities, we may be required to reduce capital expenditures, borrow from our existing credit line, refinance a portion of our existing debt, or obtain additional financing. While all companies are subject to economic risk, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, and available borrowings are sufficient to meet both the short-term and long-term capital needs of the organization.
The following table quantifies our significant future contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2021:
We do not have material purchase obligations. Most of our raw material purchase commitments are made directly pursuant to specific contract requirements.
We enter into standby letters of credit agreements and guarantees with financial institutions and customers primarily relating to future performance on certain contracts to provide products and services and to secure advance payments we have received from certain international customers. As of December 31, 2021, we had contingent liabilities on outstanding letters of credit due as follows:
(1) Amounts exclude bank guarantees of approximately $4.5 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparing consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Critical accounting policies are those that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. We believe that the following are some of the more critical judgment areas in the application of our accounting policies that affect our financial condition and results of operations:
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenues in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when control of a promised good and/or service is transferred to a customer at a transaction price that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for that good and/or service. The unit of account is a performance obligation whereby a contract's transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when the respective performance obligation is satisfied. In certain instances, the transaction price may include estimated amounts of variable consideration including but not limited to incentives, awards, price escalations, liquidated damages, and penalties, only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized to date around such variable consideration will not occur. We estimate variable consideration to be included in the transaction price using either the expected value method or most likely amount method, contingent upon the facts and circumstances of the specific arrangement. Variable consideration associated with our respective arrangements is not typically constrained.
Performance obligations are satisfied either at a point-in-time or on an over-time basis. Contracts that qualify for over-time revenue recognition are generally associated with the design, development, and manufacture of highly engineered industrial products used in commercial and defense applications and generally span between 2-5 years in duration. Revenue recognized on an over-time basis for the year ended December 31, 2021 accounted for approximately 50% of total net sales. Typically, over-time revenue recognition is based on the utilization of an input measure used to measure progress, such as costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs. Application of an over-time revenue recognition method requires the use of reasonable and dependable estimates of future material, labor, and overhead costs that will be incurred as well as a disciplined cost estimating system in which all functions of the business are integrally involved. These estimates are determined based on industry knowledge and experience of our engineers, project managers, and financial staff. Changes in total estimated costs are recognized using the cumulative catch-up method of accounting which recognizes the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods in the current period. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, there were no significant changes in estimated contract costs.
If a performance obligation does not qualify for over-time revenue recognition, revenue is then recognized at the point-in-time in which control of the distinct good or service is transferred to the customer, typically based upon the terms of delivery. Revenue recognized at a point-in-time for the year ended December 31, 2021 accounted for approximately 50% of total net sales.
Timing of revenue recognition and cash collection may result in billed receivables, unbilled receivables (contract assets), and deferred revenue (contract liabilities) on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Contract assets primarily relate to our right to consideration for work completed but not billed as of the reporting date. Contract assets are transferred to billed receivables when the rights to consideration become unconditional. Contract liabilities primarily consist of customer advances received prior to revenue being earned. Contract assets and contract liabilities are reported in the "Receivables, net" and "Deferred revenue" lines, respectively, within the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Inventory
Inventory costs include materials, direct labor, purchasing, and manufacturing overhead costs, which are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We estimate the net realizable value of our inventories and establish reserves to reduce the carrying amount of these inventories to net realizable value, as necessary. We continually evaluate the adequacy of the inventory reserves by reviewing historical scrap rates, on-hand quantities as compared with historical and projected usage levels, and other anticipated contractual requirements. We generally hold reserved inventory for extended periods before scrapping and disposing of the reserved inventory, which contributes to a higher level of reserved inventory relative to the level of annual inventory write-offs.
We purchase materials for the manufacture of components for sale. The decision to purchase a set quantity of a particular item is influenced by several factors including: current and projected price, future estimated availability, existing and projected contracts to produce certain items, and the estimated needs for our businesses.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
In consultation with our actuaries, we determine the appropriate assumptions for use in determining the liability for future pension and other postretirement benefits. The most significant of these assumptions include the discount rates used to determine plan obligations, the expected return on plan assets, and the number of employees who will receive benefits, their tenure, their salary levels, and their projected mortality. Changes in these assumptions, if significant in future years, may have an effect on our pension and postretirement expense, associated pension and postretirement assets and liabilities, and our annual cash requirements to fund these plans.
The discount rate used to determine the plan benefit obligations as of December 31, 2021, and the annual periodic costs for 2022, was increased from 2.53% to 2.87% for the Curtiss-Wright Pension Plan, and from 2.30% to 2.70% for the nonqualified benefit plan, to reflect current economic conditions. The rates reflect the hypothetical rates at which the projected benefit obligations could be effectively settled or paid out to participants on that date. We determine our discount rates for past service liabilities and service cost by utilizing a select bond yield curve developed by our actuaries, which is based on the rates of return on high-quality, fixed-income corporate bonds available at the measurement date with maturities that match the plan’s expected cash outflows for benefit payments. Interest cost is determined by applying the spot rate from the full yield curve to each anticipated benefit payment. The discount rate changes contributed to a decrease in the benefit obligation of $37 million in the CW plans.
The rate of compensation increase for base pay in the pension plans was unchanged at a weighted average of 3.5% based upon a graded scale of 4.9% to 2.9% that decrements as pay increases, which reflects the experience over past years and the Company’s expectation of future salary increases. We also retained our mortality assumptions from prior year utilizing the Pri-2012 tables published by the Society of Actuaries in October 2019, and the MP-2020 projected mortality scale published in October 2020.
The overall expected return on assets assumption is based primarily on the expectations of future performance. Expected future performance is determined by weighting the expected returns for each asset class by the plan’s asset allocation. The expected returns are based on long-term capital market assumptions provided by our investment consultants. Based on a review of market trends, actual returns on plan assets, and other factors, the Company’s expected long-term rate of return on plan assets was reduced to 5.8% as of December 31, 2021, which will be utilized for determining 2022 pension cost. An expected long-term rate of return of 6.5% was used for determining 2021 expense, with 7.5% used for 2020 pension expense and 8.0% used for 2019 pension expense.
The timing and amount of future pension income or expense to be recognized each year is dependent on the demographics and expected compensation of the plan participants, the expected interest rates in effect in future years, inflation, and the actual and expected investment returns of the assets in the pension trust.
The funded status of the Curtiss-Wright Pension Plan increased by $153 million in 2021, primarily driven by favorable asset experience due to strong market performance in 2021.
The following table reflects the impact of changes in selected assumptions used to determine the funded status of the Company’s U.S. qualified and nonqualified pension plans as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands, except for percentage point change):
See Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our pension and postretirement plans.
Goodwill
We have $1.5 billion in goodwill as of December 31, 2021. Generally, the largest separately identifiable asset from the businesses that we acquire is the value of their assembled workforces, which includes the additional benefit received from management, administrative, marketing, business development, engineering, and technical employees of the acquired businesses. The success of our acquisitions, including the ability to retain existing business and to successfully compete for and win new business, is based on the additional benefit received from management, administrative, marketing, and business development, scientific, engineering, and technical skills and knowledge of our employees rather than on productive capital (plant and equipment, technology, and intellectual property). Therefore, since intangible assets for assembled workforces are part of goodwill, the substantial majority of the intangible assets for our acquired business acquisitions are recognized as goodwill.
We test for goodwill impairment annually, at the reporting unit level, in the fourth quarter, which coincides with the preparation of our strategic operating plan. Additionally, goodwill is tested for impairment when an event occurs or if circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
We perform either a quantitative or qualitative assessment to assess if the fair value of the respective reporting unit exceeds its carrying value. The qualitative goodwill impairment assessment requires evaluating factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. As part of our goodwill qualitative assessment process for each reporting unit, when utilized, we evaluate various factors that are specific to the reporting unit as well as industry and macroeconomic factors in order to determine whether it is reasonably likely to have a material impact on the fair value of our reporting units. Examples of the factors that are considered include the results of the most recent impairment test, current and long-range forecasts, and changes in the strategic outlook or organizational structure of the reporting units. The long-range financial forecasts of the reporting units are compared to the forecasts used in the prior year analysis to determine if management expectations for the business have changed.
Actual results may differ from those estimates. When performing the quantitative assessment to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit, we consider both comparative market multiples as well as estimated discounted cash flows for the reporting unit. The significant estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to, revenue growth rates, operating margins, and future economic and market conditions. The discount rates are based upon the reporting unit’s weighted average cost of capital. As a supplement, we conduct additional sensitivity analysis to assess the risk for potential impairment based upon changes in the key assumptions such as the discount rate, expected long-term growth rate, and cash flow projections. Based upon the completion of our annual test as of October 31, 2021, we determined that there was no impairment of goodwill and that all reporting units’ estimated fair values were substantially in excess of their carrying amounts.
Other Intangible Assets
Other intangible assets are generally the result of acquisitions and consist primarily of purchased technology, customer related intangibles, and trademarks. Intangible assets are recorded at their fair values as determined through purchase accounting, based on estimates and judgments regarding expectations for the estimated future after-tax earnings and cash flows arising from follow-on sales. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives, which generally range from 1 to 20 years. Customer-related intangibles primarily consist of customer relationships, which reflect the value of the benefit derived from the incremental revenue and related cash flows as a direct result of the customer relationship. We review the recoverability of all intangible assets, including the related useful lives, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount might not be recoverable. We would record any impairment in the reporting period in which it has been identified.