Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company exploiting the power of the mitochondria and the peptides encoded in its genome to develop potential breakthrough therapeutics targeting chronic and age-related diseases. Our novel approach is built on the insight of our founders that certain mitochondrially encoded peptides produce effects that are not limited to local regulation within the mitochondria and may have important roles to play in critical systemic biological pathways quite distinct from what has traditionally been thought of as mitochondrial function.
We believe we have achieved a leading position in exploring the mitochondrial genome and its utility for the development of novel therapeutics, including world-renowned expertise in mitochondrial biology, a broad intellectual property estate with more than 65 patent applications filed, key opinion leaders and disciplined drug discovery and development processes. Our proprietary processes of identifying nucleic acid sequences encoding native peptides in the mitochondrial genome, developing and optimizing novel analogs of these natural mitochondrial derived peptides (“MDPs”), as well as developing and conducting proprietary screens to identify and characterize the activities of these peptides are referred to as our Mito+ platform. We are using our Mito+ platform to identify and develop novel modified versions of natural peptides, which we call analogs, to treat a variety of serious conditions, with a focus on diseases involving inflammation and fibrosis. We believe that the mitochondrial genome may be transformative in the field of drug discovery and that our novel peptide analogs may become a new and major class of drugs with broad therapeutic application.
We are currently advancing a pipeline of novel peptide analogs through varying stages of development. In August 2021, we announced positive topline data from a Phase 1a/1b clinical trial of CB4211, our most advanced compound, which is under development for the treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (“NASH”) and obesity. The study met its primary endpoint as CB4211 was well-tolerated and appeared safe with no serious adverse events. The evaluation of the exploratory endpoints in the Phase 1b portion of the trial, which was conducted in obese subjects with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, showed significant reductions from baseline in key biomarkers of liver damage, ALT and AST, and in glucose levels in the CB4211 group compared to placebo after four weeks of treatment, with a trend towards lower body weight. We believe these positive clinical data are an important validation of our overall approach to drug discovery, serving as a proof point that novel analogs of peptides encoded in the mitochondrial genome can impact systemic biological pathways in humans while having an attractive safety and tolerability profile. Our second clinical candidate, CB5138-3, is a peptide with broad anti-fibrotic and anti-inflammatory properties. This program is currently in IND-enabling studies and we intend to pursue an initial indication of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (“IPF”). In addition, we have multiple preclinical programs, such as a program in acute respiratory distress syndrome (“ARDS”) as well as earlier stage discovery programs.
We have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of our equity securities, including our initial public offering, private placements of our securities, a debt offering, public sales of our securities and the exercise of outstanding warrants and stock options. Since our inception through December 31, 2021, our operations have been funded with an aggregate of approximately $97.4 million from the sale and issuance of equity instruments and debt, including the proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $15.5 million and $16.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We incurred $2.7 million and $5.2 million in non-cash expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our net losses excluding non-cash expenses were $12.8 million and $11.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $84.7 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses over the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and from year to year. Although we anticipate our research and development expenses to increase as we incur the costs related to our IND-enabling studies and potential initial clinical costs for our CB5138-3 program in addition to general program costs and the discovery and evaluation of other MDPs and optimization of novel analogs as potential drug candidates, the extent of that increase is uncertain at this time and subject to change due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and other factors.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration of the outbreak, impact on our preclinical and clinical studies including patient enrollment and retention, employee or industry events, and effect on our suppliers, service providers and manufacturers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects are prevalent in the locations where we, our contract research organizations (“CROs”), suppliers or third-party business partners conduct business and, as a result, we may experience more pronounced disruptions in our operations, liquidity, supply chain, facilities, and clinical trials. With respect to our clinical trials, we have experienced delays due to our clinical sites closing down during the pandemic, we have experienced delays in enrollment due to those closures and weather-related events in the state where our clinical sites are located. We may in the future experience more significant delays in enrollment, participant dosing, distribution of clinical trial materials, study monitoring and data analysis that could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. Specifically, we may experience impact from restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, delays in site activations and enrollment of clinical trials, prioritization of hospital resources toward pandemic effort, delays in review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies, and disruptions in our supply chain for our product candidates. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our financial condition, results of operations or guidance is uncertain. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Financial Operations Review
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the near future. In the future, we will seek to generate revenue from product sales, either directly or under any future licensing, development or similar relationship with a strategic partner.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including CROs that conduct research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf and the cost of consultants;
● the cost of laboratory equipment, supplies and manufacturing test materials; and
● depreciation and other personnel-related costs associated with research and product development.
We record all research and development expenses as incurred.
Our Research Programs
Our research and development programs include activities in support of the clinical development of our most advanced program, CB4211, as well as the operation of our platform technology related to the discovery and development of novel therapeutics, evaluation of newly discovered natural sequences, design of novel improved analogs, evaluation of their therapeutic potential and optimization of their characteristics as potential drug development candidates. Depending on factors of capability, cost, efficiency and intellectual property rights, we conduct our research programs at our laboratory facility, or externally, pursuant to contractual arrangements with CROs or under collaborative arrangements with academic institutions.
The success of our research programs and the timing of those programs and the possible development of research peptides into drug candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing or estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete research and development of a commercial drug. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will receive material net cash inflows from our operations. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing medicines, including the uncertainty of:
● developing appropriate manufacturing processes and formulations;
● establishing an appropriate safety profile with toxicology studies;
● obtaining appropriate regulatory approval for conducting clinical trials;
● successfully designing, enrolling and completing clinical trials;
● receiving marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● obtaining and enforcing patent and trade secret protection for our product candidates;
● launching commercial sales of the products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
● maintaining an acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Most of our potential drug candidates are in early stages of investigational research. Candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase for the foreseeable future as we incur the costs related to our IND-enabling studies and potential initial clinical costs for our CB5138-3 program in addition to general program costs and the discovery and evaluation of other MDPs and optimization of novel analogs as potential drug candidates. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control may impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. Other significant costs include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services and directors’ and officers’ insurance. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will remain relatively constant in the year ending December 31, 2022.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented. The year-to-year comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of financial results to be achieved in future periods.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses were $7.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.9 million in the prior year, a $0.8 million increase, or 11%. The increase in research and development expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1.5 million associated with our research programs focused on continuing the development of our peptides primarily related to the costs of our current IND-enabling studies and the manufacture of cGMP drug substance. This increase was partially offset by a decrease of $0.5 million in clinical trial related costs due to the timing of those expenses and a $0.4 million decrease in stock-based compensation.
General and administrative expenses were $7.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.3 million in the prior year, a $1.4 million increase, or 23%. The increase in general and administrative expenses was due to higher compensation costs of approximately $1.0 million primarily related to higher stock-based compensation costs of $0.7 million and one-time charges related to the departure of our former CEO and a $0.2 million increase in insurance costs related to higher D&O premiums.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $26.2 million in cash, cash equivalents and investments. As of December 31, 2020, we had $21.0 million in cash and cash equivalents. We maintain our cash in a checking and a savings account on deposit with a banking institution in the United States. Our cash equivalent balance as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 included $0.7 million and $0 million, respectively, of U.S. Treasury Bills that had maturity dates of less than three months at the date of purchase. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital and stockholders’ equity of $25.3 million and $25.6 million, respectively, and incurred a net loss of $15.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In November 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of our securities (the “2021 Public Offering”) pursuant to which we sold 20.8 million shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase 20.8 million shares of common stock for proceeds of $13.8 million, net of commissions and professional fees of approximately $1.2 million. The warrants issued in the 2021 Public Offering were immediately exercisable and have a term of five years and a per share exercise price of $0.72.
On May 27, 2020, we entered into an At-the-Market Offering Sales Agreement (“ATM”) with Virtu Americas, LLC, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may sell shares of common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $20 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had sold 1.7 million shares of our common stock under the ATM program for proceeds of $2.9 million, net of commissions and incurred professional fees of approximately $21,000. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had sold 2.4 million shares of our common stock under the ATM program for proceeds of $4.3 million, net of commissions and professional fees of $0.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $12.5 million available in our ATM program.
In August 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our securities (the “2020 Public Offering”) pursuant to which we sold 12.3 million shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase 10.6 million shares of common stock for proceeds of $13.7 million, net of commissions and professional fees of $1.4 million. The warrants issued in the 2020 Public Offering were immediately exercisable and have a term of five years and a per share exercise price of $1.44.
As reflected in the financial statements, we had an accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as recurring losses and negative cash flows from operating activities from inception. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the issuance of these financial statements. However, based on current budget assumptions, projected cash burn and our latitude to manage that cash burn and the cash and investments on hand as of December 31, 2021, we believe that we have sufficient capital to meet our operating expenses and obligations for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. However, if unanticipated difficulties or circumstances arise, we may require additional capital sooner to support our operations. If we are unable to raise additional capital whenever necessary, we may be forced to decelerate or curtail our research and development activities and/or other operations until such time as additional capital becomes available. Such limitation of our activities would allow us to slow our rate of spending and extend our use of cash until additional capital is raised. There can be no assurance that such a plan would be successful. There is no assurance that additional financing will be available when needed or that we will be able to obtain such financing on reasonable terms.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $14.4 million and $9.8 million, respectively. Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our net loss of $15.5 million, which was partially offset by the non-cash item of stock based-compensation and decrease in accrued liabilities due to the timing of those expenses. Cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss of $16.3 million, which was partially offset by non-cash items of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of the debt discount totaling $5.2 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.1 million and net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $18.2 million. The cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was due to the timing of the purchases and maturities of our investments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $19.7 million and $18.3 million, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to net proceeds of $13.8 million from our underwritten public, $2.9 million received from our ATM offering, $2.1 million received from the exercise of warrants and $1.2 million from the exercise of employee stock options. Cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to net proceeds of $13.7 million and $4.3 million received from our underwritten public and ATM offering, respectively, and the exercise of stock options and warrants for total proceeds of $0.3 million.
Operating Leases
We are a party to a lease agreement for laboratory space leased on a month-to month basis that is part of a shared facility in Menlo Park, California. In September 2021, we renewed our lease for office space in Fairfield, New Jersey for an additional year at the same annual cost of $13,080 per annum.
Rent expense amounted to $0.4 million in each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 “Summary of Significant Account Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” to our Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, for a summary of the relevant recent accounting pronouncements.
Other recent accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by the FASB or other standards-setting bodies that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements upon adoption.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates and judgments that can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the dates of the financial statements, the disclosure of contingencies as of the dates of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected. See “Risk Factors” for certain matters that may affect our future financial condition or results of operations. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if the changes in estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact the financial statements. Our management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors.
The following critical accounting estimates reflect significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements:
● Fair value of financial instruments
● Share-based payments
● Valuation of deferred tax assets
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
We measure the fair value of financial assets and liabilities based on the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. We utilize three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
● Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
● Level 2 - quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable.
● Level 3 - inputs that are unobservable (for example, cash flow modeling inputs based on assumptions).
The carrying amounts of cash, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and debt approximate fair value due to the short-term nature of these instruments.
Share-based Payments
We account for share-based payments using the fair value method. For employees and directors, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date. For non-employees, fair value is generally measured based on the fair value of the services provided or the fair value of the common stock on the measurement date, whichever is more readily determinable. We have historically granted stock options at exercise prices no less than the fair market value as determined by the board of directors, with input from management.
See Note 3 “Summary of Significant Account Policies - Share-Based Payment” to our Financial Statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 regarding the specific assumptions used with respect to stock-based compensation for the periods presented.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of items that have been included or excluded in the financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the difference between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their respective financial reporting amounts (“temporary differences”) at enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse.
The benefit of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns are recognized in the financial statements if such positions are more likely than not of being sustained. We have evaluated and concluded that there were no material uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in the Company’s financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company does not expect any significant changes in the unrecognized tax benefits within twelve months of the reporting date.