Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following sections include a discussion of results for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as well as certain 2019 results. The comparative results for fiscal 2020 with fiscal 2019 generally have not been included in this Form 10-K, but may be found in “Part II - Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
Net Income Attributable to California Water Service Group
In 2021 and 2020, net income attributable to California Water Service Group was $101.1 million and $96.8 million, respectively. Earnings per diluted common share decreased $0.01 to $1.96 or 0.5% from 2020 to 2021. The $4.3 million increase in net income attributable to California Water Service Group was driven by general rate increases of $14.0 million, a reduction in operating income tax expense of $8.6 million, and a decrease in credit losses of $4.6 million. These positive factors were partially offset by increases in depreciation and amortization expenses of $10.2 million, employee wages of $3.2 million, uninsured loss expense of $1.9 million, property and other taxes of $2.4 million, and financing costs of $1.4 million.
Additionally, certain factors outside the Company's immediate control decreased net income attributable to California Water Service Group, including a $0.5 million reduction in accrued unbilled revenue and $0.5 million decrease in unrealized gain on certain benefit plan investments as compared to the prior year. Seasonal weather patterns and the number of unbilled days are the primary influences of accrued unbilled revenue.
We continue to seek rate relief to recover our operating cost increases and receive reasonable returns on invested capital. We expect to fund our long-term capital needs through a combination of debt, common stock offerings, and cash flow from operations.
COVID-19
During the course of 2021, because of the COVID-19 pandemic, shelter-in-place and social distancing ordinances of varying durations and scope were in effect in all of the states in which we operate. Such governmental public health orders continued to result in temporary closures of non-essential businesses and self-quarantining on non-essential workers. As an “essential business” during times of emergencies pursuant to the U.S. Critical Infrastructures Protection Act of 2001, we are working to continue to provide high quality water and wastewater services to our two million customers. During 2021 and through February 24, 2022, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant impact on our business or operations. We have ceased all shutoffs for non-payment during the pandemic and anticipate this situation will continue until further notice. We are expecting segments of our customer base to continue to experience employment layoffs and businesses to run at less than full capacity, which negatively impact their ability to pay utility bills. We have also incurred costs to promote the health and safety of our employees and facilities.
If we need to close any of our facilities due to outbreaks of COVID-19 or if a critical number of our employees become too ill to work, our business operations could be materially adversely affected in a rapid manner. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is fluid and continues to evolve, and therefore, we cannot predict the extent to which our business, results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity will ultimately be impacted.
California Water and Wastewater Arrearages Payment Program
The California Water and Wastewater Arrearages Program was created by the California Legislature to be administered by the State Water Resources Control Board (Water Board) in order to provide relief to community water and wastewater systems for unpaid bills (arrearages) related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Legislature allocated $985 million in American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 funds to pay down residential and commercial arrearages accrued between March 4, 2020 and June 14, 2021. In response to the Water Board’s survey, Cal Water reported $20.8 million in eligible customer arrearages and program administrative costs. Cal Water received 100% of the requested amount from the program in January 2022. Cal Water will apply these funds to identified past due customer balances during the first quarter of 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We maintain our accounting records in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and as directed by the Commissions to which our operations are subject. The process of preparing financial statements requires the use of estimates on the part of management. The estimates used by management are based on historic experience and an understanding of current facts and circumstances. A summary of our significant accounting policies is listed in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following sections describe those policies where the level of subjectivity, judgment, and variability of estimates could have a material impact on the financial condition, operating performance, and cash flows of the business.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from contracts with customers
The Company principally generates operating revenue from contracts with customers by providing regulated water and wastewater services at tariff-rates authorized by the Commissions in the states in which they operate and non-regulated water and wastewater services at rates authorized by contracts with government agencies. Revenue from contracts with customers reflects amounts billed for the volume of consumption at authorized per unit rates, for a service charge, and for other authorized charges.
The Company satisfies its performance obligation to provide water and wastewater services over time as services are rendered. The Company applies the invoice practical expedient and recognizes revenue from contracts with customers in the amount for which the Company has a right to invoice. The Company has a right to invoice for the volume of consumption, for the service charge, and for other authorized charges. The measurement of sales to customers is generally based on the reading of their meters, which occurs on a systematic basis throughout the month.
Contract terms are generally short-term and at will by customers and, as a result, no separate financing component is recognized for the Company's collections from customers, which generally require payment within 30 days of billing. The Company applies judgment, based principally on historical payment experience, in estimating its customers’ ability to pay.
Certain customers are not billed for volumetric consumption, but are instead billed a flat rate at the beginning of each monthly service period. The amount billed is initially deferred and subsequently recognized over the monthly service period, as the performance obligation is satisfied. The deferred revenue balance or contract liability, which is included in "other accrued liabilities" on the consolidated balance sheets, is inconsequential.
Regulatory balancing account revenue
The Company’s ability to recover revenue requirements authorized by the CPUC in its triennial GRC is decoupled from the volume of the sales. Regulatory balancing account revenue is revenue related to rate mechanisms authorized in California by the CPUC, which allow the Company to recover the authorized revenue and are not considered contracts with customers. These mechanisms include the following:
The Water Revenue Adjustment Mechanism (WRAM) allows the Company to recognize the adopted level of volumetric revenues. The variance between adopted volumetric revenues and actual billed volumetric revenues for metered accounts is recorded as regulatory balancing account revenue.
Cost-recovery rates, such as the Modified Cost Balancing Account (MCBA), Conservation Balancing Account (CEBA), Pension Cost Balancing Account (PCBA), and Health Cost Balancing Account (HCBA), provide for recovery of the adopted levels of expenses for purchased water, purchased power, pump taxes, water conservation program costs, pension, and health care. Variances between adopted and actual costs are recorded as regulatory balancing account revenue.
Due to the delay in the resolution of the 2018 GRC, the CPUC authorized Cal Water to track the effect of the delay on customer billings in an interim rates memorandum account (IRMA) effective January 1, 2020. Variances between actual customer billings and those that would have been billed assuming the GRC had been effective January 1, 2020 are recorded as regulatory balancing account revenue. Rates for the 2018 GRC were implemented on February 1, 2021; as a result, Cal Water recorded an IRMA regulatory asset for all of 2020 and for January of 2021.
Each district's WRAM and MCBA regulatory assets and liabilities are allowed to be netted against one another. The Company recognizes regulatory balancing account revenues that have been authorized for rate recovery, are objectively determinable and probable of recovery, and are expected to be collected within 24 months. To the extent that regulatory balancing account revenue is estimated to be collectible beyond 24 months, recognition is deferred.
The CPUC issued a decision effective August 27, 2020 requiring that Class A companies submitting GRC filings after the effective date be (i) precluded from proposing the use of a full decoupling WRAM and (ii) allowed the use of Monterey-Style Water Revenue Adjustment Mechanisms (MWRAM) and Incremental Cost Balancing Accounts (ICBA). The MWRAM tracks the difference between the revenue received for actual metered sales through the tiered volumetric rate and the revenue that would have been received with the same actual metered sales if a uniform rate had been in effect. The ICBA tracks differences in the authorized prices of water production costs and actual prices of water production costs. Cal Water has complied with this decision in its recent 2021 GRC filing.
Regulated Utility Accounting
Because we operate almost exclusively in a regulated business, we are subject to the accounting standards for regulated utilities. The Commissions in the states in which we operate establish rates that are designed to permit the recovery of the cost of service and a return on investment. We capitalize and record regulatory assets for costs that would otherwise be charged to expense if it is probable that the incurred costs will be recovered in future rates. Regulatory assets are amortized over the future periods that the costs are expected to be recovered. If costs expected to be incurred in the future are currently being recovered through rates, we record those expected future costs as regulatory liabilities. In addition, we record regulatory liabilities when the Commissions require a refund to be made to our customers over future periods.
Determining probability requires significant judgment by management and includes, but is not limited to, consideration of testimony presented in regulatory hearings, proposed regulatory decisions, final regulatory orders, and the strength or status of applications for rehearing or state court appeals.
If we determine that a portion of our assets used in utility operations is not recoverable in customer rates, we would be required to recognize the loss of the assets disallowed.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We recognize the effect on the deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rate in the period that includes the enactment date. We also assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered in future taxable income and, to the extent recovery is not probable, a valuation allowance would be recorded. In management's view, a valuation allowance was not required as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
We anticipate that future rate actions by the regulatory commissions will reflect revenue requirements for the tax effects of temporary differences recognized, which have previously been passed through to customers. The regulatory commissions have granted the Company permission to reflect the normalization of the tax benefits of the federal accelerated methods and available Investment Tax Credits (ITCs) for all assets placed in service after 1980. ITCs are deferred and amortized over the lives of the related properties for book purposes. The CPUC requires flow through accounting for state deferred taxes.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted expansive tax legislation commonly referred to as the TCJA. Among other provisions, the TCJA reduces the federal income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent beginning on January 1, 2018 and eliminated bonus depreciation for utilities. The TCJA required the Company to re-measure all existing deferred income tax assets and liabilities to reflect the reduction in the federal tax rate.
During 2021, the Company analyzed its deferred tax balances, tax regulatory asset and tax regulatory liability based on 2018 GRC approved rates. As of December 31, 2021, the unamortized TCJA refund was $91.5 million. The Company continued working with other state regulators to finalize the refund to ensure compliance with federal normalization rules.
Pension and Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions (PBOP)
We incur costs associated with our pension and PBOP plans. To measure the expense of these benefits, our management must estimate compensation increases, mortality rates, future health cost increases and discount rates used to value related liabilities and to determine appropriate funding. Different estimates used by our management could result in significant variances in the cost recognized for pension and PBOP plans. The estimates used are based on historical experience, current facts, future expectations, and recommendations from independent advisors and actuaries. We use an investment advisor to provide advice in managing the plan's investments. We anticipate any increases in funding for the pension benefits plans will be recovered in future rate filings, thereby mitigating the financial impact. We believe it is probable that future costs will be recovered in future rates and therefore have recorded a regulatory asset in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Changes to the pension benefits actuarial assumptions can significantly affect pension costs, regulatory assets, and liabilities.
In 2020, we changed both the yield curve used to develop the discount rate and the method used to estimate the service and interest cost components of net periodic pension and benefit costs for 2021. The new yield curve used a higher-yielding subset of bonds that we believe will better approximate the rate at which the obligations could be effectively settled, currently. The change in the yield curve led to a decrease of $12.2 million and $1.2 million in net periodic pension cost and net periodic benefit cost, respectively, for 2021. The new method uses the spot rate approach to estimate the service and interest costs by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used to determine the benefit obligation to the relevant projected cash outflows. The change in method led to a decrease of $6.2 million and $1.1 million in net periodic pension cost and net periodic benefit cost, respectively, for 2021. This change does not affect the measurement of the projected benefit obligation. We made this change to provide a more precise measurement of service and interest costs by improving the correlation between projected benefit cash flows to the corresponding spot rates. We have accounted for this change as a change in accounting estimate and accordingly has accounted for it prospectively. In California, where the majority of our net periodic pension and benefit costs are recorded, a corresponding decrease to balancing account revenue was recorded in 2021 for the changes in yield curve and method as Cal Water has regulatory mechanisms that mitigate changes in net periodic pension and benefits costs. For 2020, the service and interest cost components of net periodic pension and benefit costs were determined using a single-weighted average discount rate.
The following table reflects the sensitivity of pension amounts reported for the year ended December 31, 2021, to changes in actuarial assumptions:______________________________________________________________________________
1.The cost of living adjustment was assumed at 2.2% and has a floor of 2.0%.
Results of Operations
Operating Revenue
Operating revenue in 2021 was $790.9 million, a decrease of $3.4 million, or 0.4%, over 2020. Operating revenue in 2020 was $794.3 million, an increase of $79.7 million, or 11.2%, over 2019. The sources of changes in operating revenue were:
_______________________________________________________________________________
(1)In 2021, the net change due to WRAM, service charges, usage, and other in the above table was mainly driven by rate increases (the components of which are set forth in the table in Rates and Regulation section below), and partially offset by a $0.5 million decrease in accrued unbilled revenue.
(2)MCBA revenue is the variance between adopted water production costs and actual water production costs. In 2021, we recognized $3.8 million of MCBA revenue as compared to $11.7 million in MCBA revenue in 2020, for a decrease of $7.9 million in 2021. The MCBA revenue decrease in 2021 as compared to 2020 resulted from a decrease in actual water production costs relative to adopted water production costs. The actual water production costs decreased relative to adopted water production costs in 2021 as compared to 2020, due to a shift in water production mix from purchased water to well water in certain of our service territories. As required by the MCBA mechanism, the decrease in actual water production costs relative to adopted water production costs in California also decreased operating revenue for the same amount.
(3)The other balancing account revenue consists of the pension, conservation, and health care balancing account revenues. Pension and conservation balancing account revenues are the differences between actual expenses and adopted rate recovery. Health care balancing account revenue is 85% of the difference between actual health care expenses and adopted rate recovery. In 2021, we recognized a reduction to revenue of $6.1 million for these balancing accounts as compared to a net $7.4 million of revenue in 2020. The decrease in revenue was mainly due to a decrease in actual pension and health care expenses relative to adopted in 2021 as compared to 2020, which was partially offset by an increase in actual conservation expenses relative to adopted in 2021 as compared to 2020.
(4)The deferral of revenue consists of amounts that are expected to be collected from customers beyond 24 months following the end of the accounting period in which these revenues were recorded. The deferral decreased in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to an increase in the balancing account revenue expected to be collected beyond 24 months.
Water Production Expenses
Water production expenses, which consist of purchased water, purchased power, and pump taxes, comprise the largest segment of total operating expenses. Water production costs accounted for 41.8% and 42.1%, of total operating costs in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The rates charged for wholesale water supplies, electricity, and pump taxes are established by various public agencies. As such, these rates are beyond our control.
The table below provides the change in water production expenses during the past 2 years:
The principal factors affecting water production expenses are the quantity, price, and source of the water. Generally, water pumped from wells costs less than water purchased from wholesale suppliers.
The table below provides the amounts, percentage change, and source mix for the respective years:
Purchased water expenses are affected by changes in quantities purchased, supplier prices, and cost differences between wholesale suppliers. The MCBA mechanism is designed to recover all incurred purchased water expenses.
For 2021, the $5.1 million decrease in purchased water expenses is due to a 4.2% decrease in purchased quantities offset by an overall blended water wholesaler rate increase of 4.6%.
Purchased power expenses are affected by the quantity of water pumped from wells and moved through the distribution system, rates charged by electric utility companies, and rate structures applied to usage during peak and non-peak times of the day or season. In 2021, purchased power expenses increased $3.1 million mainly due to a 6.9% increase in well production.
Changes in climate change regulations could increase the cost of power that in turn would result in an increase in the rates our power suppliers charge us. Any change in pricing of our purchased power expenses in California would be recovered from our customers through the MCBA mechanism. Any change in power costs in other states would be requested to be recovered by the customers in those states. The impact of such regulations is dependent upon the enacted date, the factors that affect our suppliers' cost structure, and their ability to pass the costs to us in their approved tariffs. These items are not known at this time.
Administrative and General Expenses
Administrative and general expenses include payroll related to administrative and general functions, all employee benefits charged to expense accounts, insurance expenses, legal fees, expenses associated with being a public company, and general corporate expenses.
During 2021, administrative and general expense increased $9.6 million, or 8.2%, as compared to 2020. The increase was mainly due to increases in employee wages of $6.2 million, uninsured loss costs of $1.9 million, outside consulting service costs of $1.2 million, and employee healthcare costs of $1.2 million. These cost increases were partially offset by a $1.5 million decrease in employee pension and retiree healthcare benefit costs. Changes in employee pension benefits and employee and retiree medical costs for regulated California operations generally do not affect net income attributable to California Water Service Group, as the Company has been allowed by the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) to record these costs in balancing accounts for future recovery, creating a corresponding change to revenue.
Other Operations Expenses
The components of other operations expenses include payroll, material and supplies, and contract service costs of operating the regulated water systems, including the costs associated with water transmission and distribution, pumping, water quality, meter reading, billing, operations of district offices, and water conservation programs.
During 2021, other operations expense decreased $9.5 million, or 9.9%, compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to reductions of $9.5 million in expenses associated with the deferral of operating revenue, $4.6 million reduction in credit losses, and $2.1 million in employee wages. These were partially offset by increases in wastewater treatment expenses of $1.9 million from recently acquired subsidiaries, customer account expenses of $1.1 million, chemical and carbon filter costs of $0.9 million, and conservation program costs of $0.8 million. Changes in conservation program costs for regulated California operations generally do not affect net income attributable to California Water Service Group, as the Company has been allowed by the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) to record these costs in balancing accounts for future recovery, creating a corresponding change to revenue.
Maintenance
Maintenance expenses increased $1.6 million, or 5.7%, in 2021, compared to 2020 due to increased costs for repairs of transmission and distribution mains, reservoirs and tanks, and amortization of reservoir coating projects in accordance with CPUC orders.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $10.2 million, or 10.4%, in 2021 primarily due to utility plant placed in service in 2020.
Income Taxes
For 2021, income taxes decreased $8.6 million, or 75.5%, to $2.8 million as compared to 2020. The decrease was mainly due to a $9.9 million increase in customer refunds of excess deferred federal income taxes in 2021 as compared to 2020, and was partially offset by a reduction in the tax benefit from the flow-through method of accounting for “repairs” deductions on state corporate income tax filings. The Company’s effective combined income tax rate for 2021 was 3.89% as compared to 11.04% for 2020.
Property and Other Taxes
For 2021, property and other taxes increased $2.4 million, or 8.0%, as compared to 2020. The increase was due to an increase in our assessed property values for utility plant placed in service during the year.
Other Income and Expenses
In 2021, net other income increased $15.4 million from net other income of $2.0 million in 2020. The increase was due primarily to a $5.8 million increase in non-regulated revenue and $14.9 million decrease in other components of net periodic benefit costs. These increases were partially offset by a $2.4 million increase in non-regulated expenses, $1.8 million decrease in allowance for funds used during construction, and $0.5 million decrease in the unrealized gain from certain benefit plan investments due to market conditions. Changes in other components of net periodic benefit costs for regulated California operations generally do not affect net income attributable to California Water Service Group, as the CPUC has allowed the Company to record these costs in balancing accounts for future recovery, creating a corresponding change to revenue.
Net Interest Expense
In 2021, net interest expense increased $1.4 million as compared to 2020. The increase was due primarily to an increase in financing to support the capital investment program from the 2018 GRC.
Rates and Regulation
The following is a summary of 2021 rate filings. A description of the "Type of Filing" can be found in the "Item 1 - Rates and Regulation" section above. California decisions and resolutions may be found on the CPUC website at www.cpuc.ca.gov.
The estimated impact of current and prior year rate changes on operating revenues compared to prior years is listed in the following table:
Water Supply
Our source of supply varies among our operating districts. Certain districts obtain all of their supply from wells; some districts purchase all of their supply from wholesale suppliers; and other districts obtain supply from a combination of wells and wholesale suppliers. A small portion of supply comes from surface sources and is processed through Company-owned water treatment plants. To the best of management's knowledge, we are meeting water quality, environmental, and other regulatory standards for all Company-owned systems.
California's normal weather pattern yields little precipitation between mid-spring and mid-fall. The Washington Water service areas receive precipitation in all seasons, with the heaviest amounts during the winter. New Mexico Water's rainfall is heaviest in the summer monsoon season. Hawaii Water receives precipitation throughout the year, with the largest amounts in the winter months. Water usage in all service areas is highest during the warm and dry summers and declines in the cool winter months. Rain and snow during the winter months replenish underground water aquifers and fill reservoirs, providing the water supply for subsequent delivery to customers. Management believes that supply pumped from underground aquifers and purchased from wholesale suppliers will be adequate to meet customer demand during 2022 and thereafter. However, water rationing may be required in future periods, if declared by the state or local jurisdictions. Long-term water supply plans are developed for each of our districts to help assure an adequate water supply under various operating and supply conditions. Some districts have unique challenges in meeting water quality standards, but management believes that supplies will meet current standards using current treatment processes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flow from Operations
During 2021, we generated cash flow from operations of $231.7 million, compared to $117.9 million during 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to the billing of the IRMA receivable in 2021 for which a receivable was recorded in 2020 and a decrease in the funding for pension and other post-retirement benefits in 2021.
The water business is seasonal. Billed revenue is lower in the cool, wet winter months when less water is used compared to the warm, dry summer months when water use is highest. This seasonality results in the possible need for short-term borrowings under the bank lines of credit in the event cash is not sufficient to cover operating costs during the winter period. The increase in cash flow during the summer allows for a pay down of short-term borrowings. Customer water usage can be lower than normal in years when more than normal precipitation falls in our service areas or temperatures are lower than normal, especially in the summer months. The reduction in water usage reduces cash flow from operations and increases the need for short-term bank borrowings.
Investing Activities
During 2021 and 2020 we used $293.2 million and $298.7 million, respectively, of cash for capital expenditures, both Company-funded and developer-funded. Capital expenditures in 2021 were slightly below the high end of budgeted capital expenditures of $300.0 million. Cash used in investing activities fluctuates each year largely due to the availability of construction resources and our ability to obtain construction permits in a timely manner.
We also paid $6.5 million and $40.5 million for the acquisition of Kapalua Water and BVRT Utility Holding Company, LLC in 2021 and for the acquisitions of Rainier View Water Company and Kalealoa Water Company in 2020, respectively.
Financing Activities
During 2021, we borrowed $200.0 million, and paid down $535.0 million on our unsecured revolving credit facilities to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes. We also received $28.2 million of advances and contributions in aid of construction, which was reduced by refunds to developers of $10.6 million. We issued $280.0 million of First Mortgage Bonds to pay down our unsecured revolving credit facilities, to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes, and we repaid $5.4 million of First Mortgage Bonds that matured in 2021 and other long-term debt obligations. In addition, we issued $197.7 million of Company common stock through our at-the-market equity plan and our employee stock purchase plan.
On March 29, 2019, the Company and Cal Water entered into certain syndicated credit agreements, which provide for unsecured revolving credit facilities of up to an initial aggregate amount of $550.0 million for a term of five years. The revolving credit facilities amend, expand, and replace the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ prior credit facilities originally entered into on May 10, 2015. The new credit facilities extended the terms until March 29, 2024, and increased Cal Water’s unsecured revolving line of credit. The Company and subsidiaries that it designates may borrow up to $150.0 million under the Company’s revolving credit facility. Cal Water may borrow up to $400.0 million under its revolving credit facility. All borrowings must be repaid within 24 months unless a different period is required or authorized by the CPUC. Additionally, the credit facilities may be increased by up to an incremental $150.0 million under the Cal Water facility and $50.0 million under the Company facility, subject in each case to certain conditions. The proceeds from the revolving credit facilities may be used for working capital purposes. Borrowings under the credit facilities typically have maturities varying between one and nine months and will bear interest annually at a rate equal to (i) the base rate or (ii) the Eurodollar rate, plus an applicable margin of 0.650% to 0.875%, depending on the Company and its subsidiaries’ consolidated total capitalization ratio.
The under-collected net WRAM and MCBA receivable balances were $72.8 million and $67.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $5.0 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was primarily due lower than adopted customer usage. The under-collected net WRAM and MCBA receivable balances were primarily financed by Cal Water with short-term and long-term financing arrangements to meet operational cash requirements. Interest on the under-collected net WRAM and MCBA receivable balances, the interest recoverable from customers, is limited to the current 90-day commercial paper rate, which is significantly lower than Cal Water's short and long-term financing rates.
At the January 2022 meeting, the Board of Directors declared the quarterly dividend, increasing it for the 55th consecutive year. The quarterly dividend was raised from $0.23 to $0.25 per common share. This represents an indicated annual rate of $1.00 per common share. Dividends have been paid for 76 consecutive years. The annual dividends paid per common share in 2021, 2020, and 2019 were $0.92, $0.85, and $0.79, respectively. Earnings not paid as dividends are reinvested in the business for the benefit of stockholders. The dividend payout ratio was 46.9% in 2021, 43.1% in 2020, and 60.3% in 2019 for an average of 48.7% over the 3-year period. Our long-term targeted dividend payout ratio is 60%.
Short-Term Financing
Short-term liquidity is provided by the bank lines of credit described above and by internally generated funds. As of December 31, 2021, there were borrowings of $35.0 million outstanding on our unsecured revolving lines of credit, compared to $370.0 million outstanding on our unsecured revolving lines of credit as of December 31, 2020.
Given our ability to access our lines of credit on a daily basis, cash balances are managed to levels required for daily cash needs and excess cash is invested in short-term or cash equivalent instruments. Minimal operating levels of cash are maintained for Washington Water, New Mexico Water, Hawaii Water, and Texas Water.
The Company and certain designated subsidiaries may borrow up to $150.0 million under its credit facility. Cal Water may borrow up to $400.0 million under its credit facility; however, all borrowings currently need to be repaid within 24 months unless otherwise authorized by the CPUC.
Both credit agreements contain affirmative and negative covenants and events of default customary for credit facilities of this type including, among other things, limitations, and prohibitions relating to additional indebtedness, liens, mergers, and asset sales. In addition, these unsecured credit agreements contain financial covenants governing the Company and its subsidiaries' "consolidated total capitalization ratio" not to exceed 66.7% and "interest coverage ratio" of three or more (each as defined in the respective credit agreements). As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated total capitalization ratio was 49.5% and the interest coverage ratio was greater than five. In summary, as of such date, we met all of the covenant requirements and were eligible to use the full amounts of these credit agreements.
Long-Term Financing
Long-term financing is accomplished using both debt and equity. Cal Water was authorized to issue $700.0 million of debt and common stock to finance capital projects and operations by a CPUC decision dated November 5, 2020. In addition, the decision retained approximately $94.0 million of prior financing authority and determined that refinancing long-term debt did not count against the authorization. The CPUC requires that any loans from Cal Water to the Company be at arm’s length. This restriction did not materially affect the Company's ability to meet its cash obligations in 2021. Management does not expect this restriction to have a material impact on the Company's ability to meet its cash obligations in 2022 and beyond.
On May 11, 2021, Cal Water issued $280.0 million of First Mortgage Bonds (see Note 9) in a private placement. Cal Water used the net proceeds from the sale of the Bonds to refinance existing indebtedness and for general corporate purposes. Long-term financing, which includes First Mortgage Bonds, senior notes, other debt securities, and common stock, has typically been used to replace short-term borrowings and fund capital expenditures. Internally generated funds, after making dividend payments, provide positive cash flow, but have not been at a level to meet the needs of our capital expenditure requirements. Management expects this trend to continue given our capital expenditures plan for the next four years. Some capital expenditures are funded by payments received from developers for contributions in aid of construction or advances for construction. Funds received for contributions in aid of construction are non-refundable, whereas funds classified as advances in construction are refundable. Management believes long-term financing is available to meet our cash flow needs through issuances in both debt and equity instruments.
Additional information regarding the bank borrowings and long-term debt is presented in Notes 8 and 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Equity Issuance
On October 31, 2019, the Company entered into an equity distribution agreement to sell shares of its common stock having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $300.0 million from time to time depending on market conditions through an at-the-market equity program. The equity distribution agreement concluded in the fourth quarter of 2021. The Company used the net proceeds from these sales, after deducting commissions on such sales and offering expenses, for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, construction and acquisition expenditures, investments and repurchases and redemptions of securities. Additional information regarding this program is presented in Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Summarized Financial Information for Guarantors and the Issuer of Guaranteed Securities.
On April 17, 2009, Cal Water (Issuer) issued $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.500% First Mortgage Bonds due 2040, all of which are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Company (Guarantor). Certain subsidiaries of the Company do not guarantee the security and are referred to as Non-guarantors. The Guarantor fully, absolutely, irrevocably and unconditionally guarantees the due and punctual payment when due, whether at stated maturity, by acceleration, by notice of prepayment or otherwise, of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the bonds. The bonds rank equally among Cal Water's other first mortgage bonds.
The following tables present summarized financial information of the Issuer subsidiary and the Guarantor. All intercompany balances and transactions between Issuer and Guarantor have been eliminated. The information presented below excludes eliminations necessary to arrive at the information on a consolidated basis. In presenting the summarized financial statements, the equity method of accounting has been applied to the Guarantor interests in the Issuer. The summarized information excludes financial information of the Non-issuers, including earnings from and investments in these entities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have commitments or obligations, including contingent obligations, arising from arrangements with unconsolidated entities or persons that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, cash requirements, or capital resources even when the arrangement results in no obligation being reported in our consolidated balance sheets.
Contractual Obligations
The contractual obligations presented in the table below represent our estimates of future payments under fixed contractual obligations and commitments. Changes in our business needs, cancellation provisions and changes in interest rates, as well as action by third parties and other factors, may cause these estimates to change. Therefore, our actual payments in future periods may vary from those presented in the table below.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
_______________________________________________________________________________
a.Long-term debt payments include annual sinking fund payments on First Mortgage Bonds, maturities of long-term debt, and annual payments on other long-term obligations, exclusive of unamortized debt issuance costs of $5.3 million.
b.Pension and postretirement benefits include $2.1 million of short-term pension obligations.
c.Finance lease obligations represent total cash payments to be made in the future and includes interest expense of $0.9 million.
d.Estimated annual contractual obligations are based on the same payment levels as 2021.
For pension and postretirement benefits other than pensions obligations, see Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Advances for construction represent annual contract refunds to developers for the cost of water systems paid for by the developers. The contracts are non-interest bearing, and refunds are generally on a straight-line basis over a 40-year period. System and facility leases include obligations associated with leasing water systems and rents for office space.
For finance and operating lease obligations, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cal Water has water supply contracts with wholesale suppliers in 13 of its operating districts and for the two leased systems in Hawthorne and Commerce. For each contract, the cost of water is established by the wholesale supplier and is generally beyond our control. The amount paid annually to the wholesale suppliers is charged to purchased water expense on our statement of income. Most contracts do not require minimum annual payments and vary with the volume of water purchased. For more details related to water supply contracts, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Capital Requirements
Capital requirements consist primarily of new construction expenditures for expanding and replacing utility plant facilities and the acquisition of water systems. They also include refunds of advances for construction.
Company-funded and developer-funded utility plant expenditures were $293.2 million and $298.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. A majority of capital expenditures was associated with mains and water treatment equipment.
For 2022, the Company's capital program will be dependent in part on the timing and nature of regulatory approvals in connection with Cal Water's 2021 GRC filing. The Company proposed to the CPUC spending $1.0 billion on water infrastructure investments in 2022-2024. Capital expenditures in California are evaluated in the context of the pending GRC and may change as the case moves forward. We expect our annual capital expenditure to increase during the next five years due to increasing needs to replace and maintain infrastructure.
Management expects developer-funded expenditures in 2022. These expenditures will be financed by developers through refundable advances for construction and non-refundable contributions in aid of construction. Developers are required to deposit the cost of a water construction project with us prior to our commencing construction work, or the developers may construct the facilities themselves and deed the completed facilities to us. Funds are generally received in advance of incurring costs for these projects. Advances are normally refunded over a 40-year period without interest. Future payments for advances received are listed under contractual obligations above. Because non-Company-funded construction activity is solely at the discretion of developers, we cannot predict the level of future activity. The cash flow impact is expected to be minor due to the structure of the arrangements.
Capital Structure
Total equity was $1,183.0 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $921.3 million at December 31, 2020. The Company sold 3,286,865 and 1,710,779 shares of its common stock in 2021 and 2020, respectively through its at-the-market equity program.
Total capitalization, including the current portion of long-term debt, was $2,244.0 million at December 31, 2021 and $1,707.6 million at December 31, 2020. Cal Water repaid $5.4 million of other long-term debt obligations in 2021 and $22.1 million for matured First Mortgage Bonds and other long-term debt obligations in 2020. In future periods, the Company intends to issue common stock and long-term debt to finance our operations. The capitalization ratios will vary depending upon the method we choose to finance our operations.
At December 31, capitalization ratios were:
The return (from both regulated and non-regulated operations) on average equity was 9.6% in 2021 compared to 11.4% in 2020. Cal Water does not include construction work in progress in its regulated rate base; instead, Cal Water was authorized to record AFUDC on construction work in progress, effective January 1, 2017. Construction work in progress for Cal Water was $200.7 million at December 31, 2021 and $156.6 million at December 31, 2020.
Acquisitions
Refer to "Note 16 - Acquisitions" for 2021 and 2020 acquisition activity.
Real Estate Program
We own real estate. From time to time, certain parcels are deemed no longer used or useful for water utility operations. Most surplus properties have a low cost basis. We developed a program to realize the value of certain surplus properties through sale or lease of those properties. The program will be ongoing for a period of several years. There were no significant sales in 2021 and 2020. As sales are dependent on real estate market conditions, future sales, if any, may or may not be at prior year levels.