ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, or this Annual Report. In this Annual Report, we use the term, the "Company," "CoreCivic," "we," "us," and "our" to refer to CoreCivic, Inc. and its subsidiaries unless context indicates otherwise. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those described under Item 1A, "Risk Factors" and included in other portions of this report.
OVERVIEW
We are a diversified government solutions company with the scale and experience needed to solve tough government challenges in flexible, cost-effective ways. Through three segments, CoreCivic Safety, CoreCivic Community, and CoreCivic Properties, we provide a broad range of solutions to government partners that serve the public good through corrections and detention management, a network of residential reentry centers to help address America's recidivism crisis, and government real estate solutions. We have been a flexible and dependable partner for government for nearly 40 years. Our employees are driven by a deep sense of service, high standards of professionalism and a responsibility to help government better the public good.
As of December 31, 2021, through our CoreCivic Safety segment, we operated 46 correctional and detention facilities, 41 of which we owned, with a total design capacity of approximately 69,000 beds. Through our CoreCivic Community segment, we owned and operated 26 residential reentry centers with a total design capacity of approximately 5,000 beds. In addition, through our CoreCivic Properties segment, we owned 10 properties for lease to third parties and used by government agencies, totaling 1.8 million square feet. We are the nation's largest owner of partnership correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities and one of the largest prison operators in the United States. We also believe we are the largest private owner of real estate used by government agencies in the U.S. Our size and experience provide us with significant credibility with our current and prospective customers, and enable us to generate economies of scale in purchasing power for food services, health care and other supplies and services we offer to our government partners.
See Item 1, "Business - Overview" for a description of how we are organized.
Our Business
Through our CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community segments, we are compensated for providing bed capacity and correctional, detention, and residential reentry services at a per diem rate based upon actual or minimum guaranteed occupancy levels. Federal, state, and local governments are constantly under budgetary constraints putting pressure on governments to control correctional budgets, including per diem rates our customers pay to us as well as pressure on appropriations for building new prison capacity.
The solutions we provide to our federal customers continue to be a significant component of our business. We believe our ability to provide flexible solutions and fulfill emergent needs of our federal customers would be very difficult and costly to replicate in the public sector.
On January 26, 2021, President Biden issued the Executive Order on Reforming Our Incarceration System to Eliminate the Use of Privately Operated Criminal Detention Facilities, or the Private Prison EO. The Private Prison EO directs the Attorney General to not renew United States Department of Justice, or DOJ, contracts with privately operated criminal detention facilities. Two agencies of the DOJ, the United States Federal Bureau of Prisons, or BOP, and the United States Marshals Service, or USMS, utilize our services. The BOP houses inmates who have been convicted, and the USMS is generally responsible for detainees who are awaiting trial. The BOP has experienced a steady decline in inmate populations over the last eight years, a trend that has been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently have one prison contract with the BOP at our 1,978-bed McRae Correctional Facility, accounting for 2% ($40.6 million) of our total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, which expires in November 2022. The Private Prison EO only applies to agencies that are part of the DOJ, which includes the BOP and USMS. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, facilities are not covered by the Private Prison EO, as ICE is an agency of the Department of Homeland Security, not the DOJ, although it is possible that the federal government could choose to take similar action on ICE facilities in the future. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, USMS and ICE accounted for 23% ($433.6 million) and 30% ($552.2 million), respectively, of our total revenue.
Unlike the BOP, the USMS does not own detention capacity and relies on the private sector, along with various government agencies, for its detainee population. The USMS has been advised by the Office of the Deputy Attorney General not to renew existing contracts, or enter into new contracts for private detention facilities. During the second quarter of 2021, we had direct contracts with the USMS for up to 992 detainees at our 2016-bed Northeast Ohio Correctional Center and for up to approximately 96 detainees at our 664-bed Crossroads Correctional Center in Montana that expired and were not renewed. On May 28, 2021, we entered into a new three-year contract with Mahoning County, Ohio to utilize up to 990 beds at our Northeast Ohio Correctional Center. Mahoning County is responsible for County inmates and federal detainees, including USMS detainees, and the County is using the Northeast Ohio facility to address its population needs. During the third quarter of 2021, we entered into an amendment to the contract with the state of Montana to utilize all of the capacity at the Crossroads Correctional Center, including the space vacated by the USMS, and to extend the existing contract to June 30, 2023, with additional renewal options by mutual agreement through August 31, 2029. We had a direct contract with the USMS to care for detainees at our 600-bed West Tennessee Detention Facility that expired on September 30, 2021 and was not renewed. In addition, we had a direct contract with the USMS to care for detainees at our 1,033-bed Leavenworth Detention Center that expired on December 31, 2021 and was not renewed. We are actively marketing the West Tennessee and Leavenworth facilities to other government agencies, and in August 2021, we submitted a formal response to a government agency's request for proposal to utilize the West Tennessee facility. We are also currently in discussions with, and have submitted proposals to, other potential government partners to utilize the Leavenworth facility. However, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to reach agreements for the utilization of the West Tennessee or Leavenworth facilities.
We currently have six detention facilities that have separate contracts where the USMS is the primary customer within the facility that all expire at various times over the next several years, with the exception of two contracts that have indefinite terms. As of December 31, 2021, one of the aforementioned six contracts, a contract with a government agency at our 2,672-bed Tallahatchie County Correctional Facility in Mississippi that allows the USMS to utilize available capacity, expires in June 2022. Non-renewal of these contracts, or the expansion of the Private Prison EO to ICE, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations if we are unable to replace the cash flows with new management contracts like we did at our Northeast Ohio and Crossroads facilities.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic. As a result, in the first quarter of 2020, the federal government decided to deny entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority in an effort to contain the spread of COVID-19, a policy known as Title 42, continued by the Biden administration. This policy resulted in a reduction to the number of people ICE detained, including in our detention facilities.
In February 2021, President Biden announced plans to allow certain migrants to pursue asylum in the United States while awaiting their proceedings in immigration courts, reversing the MPP, commonly referred to as the "Remain in Mexico Policy," enacted by the Trump administration. The MPP required asylum seekers to wait in Mexico during the pendency of their immigration court proceedings.
Both Title 42 and MPP have been subject to legal challenges. On August 13, 2021, a federal court ordered the Biden administration to reinstate the MPP finding that terminating MPP would be illegal "until the Department of Homeland Security has the capacity and willingness to detain immigrants." On August 24, 2021, the Supreme Court refused to block implementation of that order. On October 29, 2021, Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro N. Mayorkas issued a memorandum asserting the termination of MPP, which was structured to be implemented if the decision reinstating MPP is vacated. The memorandum also provides that the Biden administration will continue to comply with the injunction requiring the reinstatement and enforcement of MPP until a final judicial decision, if any, to vacate such injunction is issued. In early December 2021, the Department of Homeland Security began the court-ordered re-implementation of the MPP, and on December 13, 2021, a federal appeals court rejected the Biden administration’s attempts to terminate MPP. On December 29, 2021, the Biden administration appealed this decision to the Supreme Court. Separately, on September 16, 2021, a federal judge prohibited the Biden administration from expelling migrant families pursuant to Title 42 finding that public health law does not authorize the expulsion of migrants. On September 30, 2021, a federal appeals court issued a temporary stay on the prohibition on expelling migrant families pursuant to Title 42. On February 4, 2022, the federal government extended Title 42. As a result, the Biden administration has been able to expel migrant families pursuant to public health concerns over the spread of COVID-19 while the litigation of such policy continues. The number of people apprehended by ICE could increase upon the reversal of Title 42, and if the Biden administration prevails in its efforts to terminate MPP.
We cannot predict government responses to an increase in staff or residents testing positive for COVID-19 within public and private correctional, detention and reentry facilities, nor can we predict COVID-19 related restrictions on individuals, businesses, and services that disrupt the criminal justice system. Further, we cannot predict government policies on prosecutions and legal restrictions as a result of COVID-19 that affect the number of people placed in correctional, detention, and reentry facilities.
COVID-19 notwithstanding, we believe the long-term growth opportunities of our business remain attractive as government agencies consider their emergent needs (including capacity to help mitigate the spread of infectious disease), as well as the efficiency and offender programming opportunities we provide as flexible solutions to satisfy our partners' needs. Further, although disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, several of our existing federal and state partners, as well as prospective state partners, have been experiencing growth in offender populations and overcrowded conditions, as well as an increase in violent crime. Governments are now assessing their need for correctional space in light of COVID-19, and several are considering alternative correctional capacity for their aged or inefficient infrastructure, or are seeking cost savings by utilizing the private sector, which could result in increased future demand for the solutions we provide. For example, in December 2021, the state of Arizona awarded us a new contract for up to 2,706 inmates at our 3,060-bed La Palma Correctional Center in Arizona, which we expect to commence late in the first quarter or early in the second quarter of 2022. We are not aware of a larger prison contract awarded to the private sector by any state in over a decade. Competing budget priorities, which have become more challenging because of COVID-19, often impede our customers' ability to construct new prison beds of their own or update their older facilities, which we believe could result in further demand for private sector prison capacity solutions in the long-term.
Governments continue to experience many significant spending demands which have constrained correctional budgets limiting their ability to expand existing facilities or construct new facilities. We believe the outsourcing of corrections and detention management services to private operators allows governments to manage increasing inmate populations while simultaneously controlling costs. We believe our customers discover that partnering with private operators to provide residential services to their offenders introduces competition to their correctional system, resulting in improvements to the quality and cost of services throughout their correctional system. Further, the use of facilities owned and managed by private operators allows governments to expand correctional capacity without incurring large capital commitments and allows them to avoid long-term pension obligations for their employees.
We also believe that having beds immediately available to our partners provides us with a distinct competitive advantage when bidding on new contracts. We believe the most significant opportunities for growth are in providing our government partners with available beds within facilities we currently own or that we will develop. Over the long-term, we would like to see meaningful utilization of our available capacity and better visibility from our customers into their potential future needs before we develop new correctional or detention capacity on a speculative basis. We will, however, respond to customer demand and may develop or expand correctional and detention facilities when we believe potential long-term returns justify the capital deployment. We also believe that owning the facilities in which we provide management services enables us to more rapidly replace business lost compared with managed-only facilities, since we can offer the same beds to new and existing customers and, with customer consent, may have more flexibility in moving our existing populations to facilities with available capacity. Our management contracts generally provide our customers with the right to terminate our management contracts at any time without cause.
We are actively engaged in marketing our available capacity as solutions to meet the needs of potential customers. Historically, we have been successful in substantially filling our inventory of available beds and the beds that we have constructed. For example, in the second quarter of 2019, we announced that we entered into new contracts under inter-governmental service agreements, or IGSAs, with ICE at our previously idled 910-bed Torrance County Detention Facility in New Mexico and with the USMS at our previously idled 1,422-bed Eden Detention Center in Texas. In the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS, to utilize our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility in Oklahoma. We had previously announced our intention to idle the Cimarron facility during the third quarter of 2020, predominantly due to a lower number of inmate populations from the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19, combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget. The new management contract commenced on September 15, 2020. More recently, in the second quarter of 2021, we entered into a new contract with Mahoning County, Ohio to utilize up to 990 beds at our Northeast Ohio Correctional Center, and in the third quarter of 2021, we entered into an amended contract with the state of Montana to utilize all of the capacity at our Crossroads Correctional Center, as previously discussed herein. Filling our available beds could provide substantial growth in revenues, cash flow, and earnings per share. However, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to fill our available beds.
We also offer our customers an attractive portfolio of correctional, detention, and reentry facilities that can be leased for various needs as an alternative to providing "turn-key" correctional, detention, and residential reentry bed space and services to our government partners. In September 2021, we announced that we had entered into a three-year lease agreement with the state of New Mexico at our 596-bed Northwest New Mexico Correctional Center. We previously operated the Northwest New Mexico facility in our Safety segment under a contract with the state of New Mexico. The new lease agreement commenced on November 1, 2021 and includes extension options that could extend the term of the lease through October 31, 2041. We will retain responsibility for facility maintenance throughout the term of the lease. The lease of this facility, along with the lease of our 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex to the Kentucky Department of Corrections, or KYDOC, originating in 2019, the lease of our 2,400-bed North Fork Correctional Facility to the Oklahoma Department of Corrections, or ODOC, originating in 2016 and the lease of our 2,560-bed California City Correctional Center to the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation originating in 2013, exemplify our ability to react quickly to our partners' needs with innovative and flexible solutions that make the best use of taxpayer dollars. We previously operated these four correctional facilities for various state and federal partners. We intend to pursue additional opportunities to lease prison facilities to government and other third-party operators in need of correctional capacity.
In January 2018, we entered into a 20-year lease agreement with the Kansas Department of Corrections, or KDOC, for a 2,432-bed correctional facility to be constructed in Lansing, Kansas. This transaction represented the first development of a privately owned, build-to-suit correctional facility to be operated by a government agency through a long-term lease agreement. We commenced construction of the facility in the first quarter of 2018. In December 2019, the Lansing facility began accepting offenders into the 512-bed minimum security complex ahead of schedule, with the remaining 1,920-bed medium/maximum security complex completed in January 2020. The new facility replaced the Lansing Correctional Facility, Kansas' largest correctional complex for adult male inmates, originally constructed in 1863. We are responsible for facility maintenance throughout the 20-year term of the lease, at which time ownership will revert to the state of Kansas. We believe we can bring solutions like this to other government agencies in need of new correctional capacity.
We also remain steadfast in our efforts to contain costs. Approximately 59% of our operating expenses consist of salaries and benefits. The turnover rate for correctional officers for our company, and for the corrections industry in general, remains high, and staffing challenges have recently been exacerbated by labor shortages and wage pressures in the marketplace. We are making investments in systems and processes intended to help manage our workforce more efficiently and effectively, especially with respect to overtime and costs of turnover. We are also focused on workers' compensation and medical benefits costs for our employees due to continued rising healthcare costs throughout the country. Effectively managing these staffing costs requires a long-term strategy to control such costs, and we continue to dedicate resources to enhance our benefits, provide specialized training and career development opportunities to our staff in order to attract and retain quality personnel. Finally, we are evaluating cost savings opportunities in areas such as inmate medical expenses, utilities, and maintenance, among others. Through ongoing company-wide initiatives, we continue to focus on efforts to manage costs and improve operating efficiencies.
Through the combination of our operational initiatives to (i) provide valuable and critically needed services that could increase our revenues and increase the utilization of our available beds, (ii) deliver new bed capacity through new facility construction and expansion opportunities, (iii) expand our real estate-only solutions, (iv) grow the utilization of our community corrections facilities, (v) develop or acquire new business offerings that expand the range of solutions we provide to government partners and diversify our cash flows, and (vi) contain our operating expenses, we believe we will be able to maintain our competitive advantage and continue to diversify the range of services we provide to our customers at an attractive price, thereby producing value for our stockholders. As further explained under Liquidity and Capital Resources hereafter, through the revocation of our REIT election and revised capital allocation strategy, following our first priority of reducing debt, we expect to allocate a substantial portion of our free cash flow to returning capital to shareholders, which could include share repurchases and future dividends, further enhancing stockholder value.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The consolidated financial statements in this report are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. As such, we are required to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. A summary of our significant accounting policies is described in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report. The significant accounting policies and estimates which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Asset impairments. The primary risk we face for asset impairment charges is associated with facilities we own. As of December 31, 2021, we had $2.3 billion in property and equipment, including $148.9 million in long-lived assets at six idled CoreCivic Safety correctional facilities. The carrying values of the six idled facilities as of December 31, 2021 were as follows (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, we also had one idled non-core facility in our Safety segment containing 240 beds with a total net book value of $3.1 million, and four idled facilities in our Community segment, containing an aggregate of 740 beds with an aggregate net book value of $11.4 million, one of which is a community facility classified as held for sale as described herein.
We incurred operating expenses at these idled facilities of approximately $8.0 million, $7.4 million, and $7.1 million during the period they were idle for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The 2021 amount excludes the expenses incurred at our West Tennessee Detention Facility during the fourth quarter of 2021. As more fully described hereafter, the West Tennessee facility was idled upon the expiration of a USMS contract on September 30, 2021. However, we have retained a certain staffing level at the facility in order to quickly respond should we enter into a new contract with a government agency in the near-term.
On May 24, 2021, we completed the sale of an idled 12,000 square foot non-core property located in St. Louis, Missouri, with a net book value of $0.8 million at the time of the sale, for net proceeds of $0.6 million. In addition, on June 25, 2021, we completed the sale of an idled 18,000 square foot non-core property, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, for a price of $2.0 million, generating net proceeds of $1.8 million. Pursuant to an agreement to sell the Philadelphia property, in the first quarter of 2021, we recognized an impairment charge of $1.3 million associated with this facility, based on its estimated net realizable value less costs to sell. Both the St. Louis and Philadelphia properties were formerly leased to third-party lessees in our Properties segment.
We had a direct contract with the USMS to care for detainees at our 600-bed West Tennessee Detention Facility that expired on September 30, 2021 and was not renewed. We have been actively marketing the facility to other government agencies, and in August 2021, submitted a formal response to a government agency's request for proposal to utilize the West Tennessee facility. We can provide no assurance that we will be successful in entering into a new contract with the government agency. As of December 31, 2021, the West Tennessee facility had a net book value of $20.6 million.
We had a direct contract with the USMS to care for detainees at our 1,033-bed Leavenworth Detention Center that expired on December 31, 2021 and was not renewed. We have been actively marketing the facility and are currently in discussions with, and have submitted proposals to, other potential government partners to utilize the Leavenworth facility. We can provide no assurance that we will be successful in entering into a new contract with another government agency. As of December 31, 2021, the Leavenworth facility had a net book value of $54.2 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we entered into separate purchase and sale agreements for our 120-bed Fox Facility and Training Center and our 90-bed Ulster Facility, two residential reentry facilities in our Community segment. The two facilities are located in Denver, Colorado and have recently been under-utilized by Denver County. We concluded the sale of these two properties met the criteria for classification as assets held for sale as of December 31, 2021, requiring the properties to be valued at the lower of current carrying value or fair value less costs to sell. The aggregate gross sales price of the two properties is expected to be $9.9 million, resulting in a gain on sale of approximately $2.0 million to be recognized upon completion of the sales expected to occur in the first quarter of 2022, after recognizing an impairment in the fourth quarter of 2021 of $2.0 million for one of the facilities to reflect the lower fair value less costs to sell upon its recognition as an asset held for sale.
We evaluate the recoverability of the carrying values of our long-lived assets, other than goodwill, when events suggest that an impairment may have occurred. Such events primarily include, but are not limited to, the termination of a management contract, a significant decrease in populations within a facility we own in our Safety and Community segments that we believe will be longer than short-term, and the expiration and non-renewal of lease agreements in our Properties segment.
We perform the impairment analyses for each of our idle facilities as well as any other properties with indicators of impairment. Our estimates of recoverability are based on projected undiscounted cash flows that are comparable to historical cash flows from management contracts or lease agreements at facilities similar to the idled facilities, including historical operations for the idled facilities when such facilities were operating. Our undiscounted cash flows factor in assumptions around when idle facilities will commence generating revenues based on our best estimates around contract negotiations and market conditions. Our impairment evaluations also take into consideration our historical experience in securing new management contracts to utilize correctional facilities that had been previously idled for substantial periods of time. Such previously idled correctional facilities are currently being operated under contracts that continue to generate cash flows resulting in the recoverability of the net book value of the previously idled facilities by material amounts. We also perform sensitivity analyses that consider reductions to such cash flows. Our sensitivity analyses include reductions in projected cash flows compared to historical cash flows generated by the respective facility as well as prolonged periods of vacancies.
We also evaluate on a quarterly basis market developments for the potential utilization of each of our idle facilities in order to identify events that may cause us to reconsider our most recent assumptions. Such events could include negotiations with a prospective customer for the utilization of an idle facility at terms significantly less favorable than those used in our most recent impairment analysis, or changes in legislation surrounding a particular facility that could impact our ability to care for certain types of populations at such facility, or a demolition or substantial renovation of a facility. Further, a substantial increase in the number of available beds at other facilities we own could lead to a deterioration in market conditions and cash flows that we might be able to obtain under a new contract at our idle facilities. Although they are not frequent, an unsolicited offer to purchase any of our idle facilities at amounts that are less than the carrying value could also cause us to reconsider the assumptions used in our most recent impairment analysis.
We can provide no assurance that we will be able to secure agreements to utilize our idle properties, or that we will not incur impairment charges in the future. By their nature, these estimates contain uncertainties with respect to the extent and timing of the respective cash flows due to potential delays or material changes to historical terms and conditions in contracts with prospective customers that could impact the estimate of cash flows. With respect to idle correctional facilities, we believe the long-term trends favor an increase in the utilization of our correctional facilities and management services. This belief is based on our experience in working with governmental agencies faced with significant budgetary challenges, which is a primary contributing factor to the lack of appropriated funding over the past decade to build new bed capacity by the federal and state governments with which we partner, as well as the extensively aged criminal justice infrastructure in the U.S. today. Due to a variety of factors, the lead time to negotiate contracts with our federal and state partners to utilize idle bed capacity at correctional facilities is generally lengthy.
Self-funded insurance reserves. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $47.3 million and $46.3 million, respectively, in accrued liabilities for employee health, workers' compensation, and automobile insurance claims. We are self-insured for employee health, workers' compensation, and automobile liability insurance claims. As such, our insurance expense is largely dependent on claims experience and our ability to control our claims. We have consistently accrued the estimated liability for employee health insurance claims based on our history of claims experience and the estimated time lag between the incident date and the date we pay the claims. We have accrued the estimated liability for workers' compensation claims based on an actuarial valuation of the outstanding liabilities, discounted to the net present value of the outstanding liabilities, using a combination of actuarial methods used to project ultimate losses, and our automobile insurance claims based on estimated development factors on claims incurred. The liability for employee health, workers' compensation, and automobile insurance includes estimates for both claims incurred and for claims incurred but not reported. In recent history, our methods for determining our exposure have remained consistent, and our historical trends have been appropriately factored into our estimates and reserves. As we obtain additional information and refine our methods regarding the assumptions and estimates we use to recognize liabilities incurred, we will adjust our reserves accordingly. Arriving at these estimates, however, requires a significant amount of subjective judgment by management, and as a result these estimates are uncertain, and our actual exposure may be different from our estimates. It is possible that future cash flows and results of operations could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions, new developments, or by the effectiveness of our strategies.
Legal reserves. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $6.8 million and $5.9 million, respectively, in accrued liabilities under the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Subtopic 450-20, "Loss Contingencies," related to certain claims and legal proceedings in which we are involved. We have accrued our best estimate of the probable costs for the resolution of these claims, if estimable. In addition, we are subject to current and potential future claims and legal proceedings for which little or no accrual has been reflected because our current assessment of the potential exposure is nominal, or because we cannot reasonably estimate the amount of loss or range of loss, if any, that may result. These estimates have been developed in consultation with our General Counsel's office and, as appropriate, outside counsel handling these matters, and are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. It is possible that future cash flows and results of operations could be materially affected by changes in our assumptions, new developments, or by the effectiveness of our litigation and settlement strategies.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our results of operations are impacted by the number of correctional and detention facilities we operated, including 41 we owned and five owned by our government partners (CoreCivic Safety), the number of residential reentry centers we owned and operated (CoreCivic Community), the number of facilities we leased to other operators (CoreCivic Properties), and the facilities we owned that were not in operation. The following table sets forth the changes in the number of facilities operated for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net loss attributable to common stockholders was $51.9 million, or $0.43 per diluted share, compared with net income attributable to common stockholders of $54.2 million, or $0.45 per diluted share, for the previous year. Financial results for 2021 reflected $11.4 million of asset impairments, $56.3 million of expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions, and $54.3 million of charges related to the settlement agreement reached during April 2021 in connection with shareholder litigation, partially offset by a gain on the sale of real estate assets amounting to $38.8 million. In addition, financial results for 2021 included an income tax charge of $138.0 million, including $114.2 million for income taxes associated with the change in corporate tax structure and other special tax items, compared with income tax expense of $4.4 million during 2020, when the Company qualified as a REIT.
Financial results for 2020 included $13.8 million of incremental expenses directly associated with COVID-19 (reflected in operating expenses) and $5.2 million of expenses associated with changes in our corporate tax structure (reflected in general and administrative expenses). In addition, financial results in 2020 reflected several special items, including $60.6 million of asset impairments, a net loss of $13.0 million on sale of real estate assets, $7.1 million of expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions, and a charge of $0.6 million for contingent consideration associated with an acquisition of a business. Financial results in 2020 also reflected non-recurring deferred tax expense of $3.1 million reported during the first quarter of 2020.
Our Current Operations
Our ongoing operations are organized into three principal business segments:
•
CoreCivic Safety segment, consisting of the 46 correctional and detention facilities that are owned, or controlled via a long-term lease, and managed by CoreCivic, as well as those correctional and detention facilities owned by third parties but managed by CoreCivic. CoreCivic Safety also includes the operating results of our subsidiary that provides transportation services to governmental agencies, TransCor America, LLC, or TransCor.
•
CoreCivic Community segment, consisting of the 26 residential reentry centers that are owned, or controlled via a long-term lease, and managed by CoreCivic. CoreCivic Community also includes the operating results of our electronic monitoring and case management service.
•
CoreCivic Properties segment, consisting of the 10 real estate properties owned by CoreCivic for lease to third parties and used by government agencies.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our total segment net operating income, which we define as facility revenue (including interest income associated with finance leases) less operating expenses, was divided among our three business segments as follows:
Facility Operations
A key performance indicator we use to measure the revenue and expenses associated with the operation of the correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities we own or manage is expressed in terms of a compensated man-day, which represents the revenue we generate and expenses we incur for one offender for one calendar day. Revenue and expenses per compensated man-day are computed by dividing facility revenue and expenses by the total number of compensated man-days during the period. A compensated man-day represents a calendar day for which we are paid for the occupancy of an offender. We believe the measurement is useful because we are compensated for operating and managing facilities at an offender per diem rate based upon actual or minimum guaranteed occupancy levels. We also measure our costs on a per compensated man-day basis, which is largely dependent upon the number of offenders we accommodate. Further, per compensated man-day measurements are also used to estimate our potential profitability based on certain occupancy levels relative to design capacity. Revenue and expenses per compensated man-day for all of the correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities placed into service that we owned or managed, exclusive of those held for lease, and for TransCor were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
Total revenue consists of management revenue we generate through CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community in the operation of correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities, as well as the revenue we generate from TransCor and our electronic monitoring and case management services. Total revenue also consists of lease revenue we generate through CoreCivic Properties from facilities we lease to third-party operators. The following table reflects the components of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
The $18.8 million, or 1.0%, decrease in total management revenue was primarily a result of a decrease in revenue of approximately $121.7 million caused primarily by a decrease in the average daily compensated population from 2020 to 2021, including the effect of one fewer day of operations in 2021 due to a leap year in 2020. The decrease in management revenue was partially offset by an increase in revenue of approximately $100.9 million driven primarily by an increase of 6.1% in average revenue per compensated man-day. The increase in average revenue per compensated man-day resulted from (i) lower population levels which are charged at a higher average per diem for contracts under a tiered structure, (ii) compensation for the assumption of medical services at one of our detention facilities, (iii) the effect of per diem increases at several of our facilities, as well as (iv) a higher mix of federal populations at higher per diem rates. These increases were net of the effect of the amended IGSA associated with our South Texas Family Residential Center, which was effective beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, as further described hereafter. Revenue generated from our electronic monitoring and case management services increased $2.0 million from the prior year.
Average daily compensated population decreased 3,779, or 6.6%, to 53,613 in 2021 compared to 57,392 in 2020. Average daily compensated population decreased primarily as a result of government actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19, which has impacted all of 2021 but only impacted a portion of 2020. The decrease in average daily compensated population was also a result of the contract terminations at the 1,348-bed Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility and the 1,046-bed Silverdale Detention Center, both managed-only facilities, in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The solutions we provide to our federal customers, including primarily ICE, the USMS, and the BOP, continue to be a significant component of our business. The federal customers in our Safety and Community segments generated approximately 56% and 52% of our total revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively, increasing $51.5 million, or 5.2%, in 2021 from 2020.
The decision near the end of the first quarter of 2020 by the federal government to deny entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority in an effort to contain the spread of COVID-19 resulted in a reduction in people being apprehended and detained by ICE. Revenue from ICE declined to $542.0 million during 2020 from $579.5 million during 2019. The financial impact was somewhat mitigated by fixed monthly payments from ICE at certain facilities, to ensure ICE has adequate bed capacity in the event of a surge in the future. Since February 2021, however, we have experienced modest increases in the number of people detained by ICE in our facilities. During 2021, revenue from ICE was $552.2 million compared to $542.0 million during 2020. The number of people apprehended by ICE could increase once the policy of denying entry at the United States southern border to asylum-seekers and anyone crossing the southern border without proper documentation or authority is reversed. The number of people apprehended by ICE could also increase if the federal government prevails over its attempt to reverse the MPP implemented by the Trump administration. As previously described, litigation over both of these policies is ongoing.
State revenues from contracts at correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities that we operate decreased $34.2 million, or 5.4%, from 2020 to 2021. State revenues primarily decreased as a result of the effect of an overall decline in state inmate populations resulting from government actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19. In addition, the decrease in state revenues was also a result of the decrease in Oklahoma state inmate populations, primarily at our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility, as further described hereafter, and due to the anticipated transfer of Mississippi state inmate populations from our Tallahatchie County Correctional Facility occupied under an emergency contract signed during the first quarter of 2020 back to the state of Mississippi during the first quarter of 2021, also as further described hereafter. The decrease in state revenues was partially offset by the revenue generated by a new contract with the state of Idaho at our Saguaro Correctional Facility in Arizona, as further described hereafter, as well as per diem increases under numerous state contracts.
During the third quarter of 2020, largely due to a lower number of inmate populations in the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19, combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget, we agreed with the State to idle our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility. We also transferred the remaining resident populations at our 390-bed Tulsa Transitional Center to Oklahoma's system, idling the Tulsa facility during the third quarter of 2020. We ultimately did not idle the Cimarron facility because we subsequently entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS to repurpose the facility to serve a federal need. From the beginning of the pandemic at the end of the first quarter of 2020 to December 31, 2021,
excluding the closure of our Cimarron facility to Oklahoma inmate populations, our state populations declined by approximately 4,100 inmates, or 12.9%, predominantly due to government actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Local revenues from contracts at correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities that we operate decreased $30.2 million, or 37.0%, from 2020 to 2021. The decrease in local revenues is primarily a result of the contract terminations at the 1,348-bed Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility and the 1,046-bed Silverdale Detention Center, both managed-only facilities, in the fourth quarter of 2020. These two facilities contributed to the reduction in local revenues of $26.2 million, but had a positive impact on facility net operating income as these facilities incurred net operating losses in 2020, as further described hereafter. Local revenues also decreased as a result of an overall decline in local inmate populations resulting from government actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19, mostly at our CoreCivic Community facilities.
The $24.2 million, or 26.0%, decrease in lease revenue from 2020 to 2021 was primarily a result of the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties in December 2020 and the sale of three additional actively leased properties during the second quarter of 2021, both as further described hereafter. The decrease in lease revenue was partially offset by the lease revenue generated from the commencement of the lease of the 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex in Wheelwright, Kentucky in the third quarter of 2020, also as further described hereafter. The new lease agreement at our Northwest New Mexico facility, also as further described hereafter, also contributed to new lease revenue in 2021 and will further benefit lease revenue in 2022.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses totaled $1,337.1 million and $1,406.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Operating expenses consist of those expenses incurred in the operation and management of correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities, as well as those expenses incurred in the operations of TransCor and our electronic monitoring and case management services. Operating expenses also consist of those expenses incurred in the operation of facilities we lease to third-party operators.
Expenses incurred by CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community in connection with the operation and management of our correctional, detention, and residential reentry facilities, as well as those incurred in the operations of TransCor and our electronic monitoring and case management services, decreased $59.3 million, or 4.3%, during 2021 compared with 2020. There were several factors that contributed to the decrease in operating expenses incurred in these segments. Operating expenses decreased primarily as a result of lower staffing and service levels that were consistent with the lower occupancy levels during the COVID-19 pandemic. Incremental expenses associated with COVID-19 also decreased, as further described hereafter. The decrease in operating expenses was also a result of the contract terminations at the 1,348-bed Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility and the 1,046-bed Silverdale Detention Center, both managed-only facilities, in the fourth quarter of 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was also a result of one fewer day of operations in 2021 due to a leap year in 2020.
Total expenses per compensated man-day increased to $65.67 during 2021 from $64.06 during 2020. Fixed expenses per compensated man-day increased to $47.51 during 2021 from $47.20 during 2020. We have experienced labor shortages and wage pressures in many markets across the country, and have provided wage increases to remain competitive, including increases to most of our facility staff during the third quarters of both 2021 and 2020. Recruiting has been particularly challenging during the pandemic due to the front-line nature of the services we provide. The challenges of recruiting and retaining staff could be exacerbated by actions taken or contemplated to be taken by government authorities intended to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 such as vaccine mandates, health and safety directives or other requirements that apply to us and our facilities. Further, we have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, incremental expenses to help ensure sufficient staffing levels under unique and challenging working conditions. Incremental expenses include, but may not be limited to, incentive payments to our front-line and field staff, additional paid time off, off-cycle wage increases in certain markets to remain competitive, as well as expenses to procure personal protective equipment and other supplies. During 2020, we incurred $13.8 million of incremental expenses associated with COVID-19. The incremental expenses associated with COVID-19 during 2020 included $6.3 million of hero bonuses paid in the second quarter of 2020. There were no hero bonuses associated with COVID-19 paid during 2021, although we continue to incur operating expenses
associated with COVID-19 for personal protective equipment and other supplies. The absence of hero bonuses partially offset the increase in fixed expenses per compensated man-day.
We continually monitor compensation levels very closely along with overall economic conditions and will set wage levels necessary to help ensure the long-term success of our business. Further, we continually evaluate the structure of our employee benefits package and training programs to ensure we are better able to attract and retain our employees. As mentioned, recruiting and retaining staff has become particularly challenging in the current employment market for us and for the corrections and detention industry as a whole. An inability to attract and retain sufficient personnel could prevent us from caring for additional residential populations for government agencies in need of additional capacity due to over-crowding or an inability to adequately staff their facilities. An inability to attract and retain sufficient personnel in our existing facilities could also cause our government partners to assess liquidated damages, reduce our residential populations, or in extreme circumstances, cancel our contracts. Salaries and benefits represent the most significant component of our operating expenses, representing approximately 59% of our total operating expenses during 2021 and 61% of our total operating expenses during 2020.
Operating expenses incurred by CoreCivic Properties in connection with facilities we lease to third-party operators decreased $10.0 million, or 35.5%, during 2021 when compared to 2020. The decrease in expenses in this segment was primarily a result of the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties in December 2020 and the sale of an additional three actively leased properties in the second quarter of 2021, both as further described hereafter.
Facility Management Contracts
We enter into facility management contracts to provide bed capacity and management services to governmental entities in our CoreCivic Safety and CoreCivic Community segments for terms typically ranging from three to five years, with additional renewal periods at the option of the contracting governmental agency. Accordingly, a substantial portion of our facility management contracts are scheduled to expire each year, notwithstanding contractual renewal options that a government agency may exercise. Although we generally expect these customers to exercise renewal options or negotiate new contracts with us, one or more of these contracts may not be renewed by the corresponding governmental agency. Further, our government partners can generally terminate our management contracts for non-appropriation of funds or for convenience.
Additionally, the Private Prison EO issued by President Biden on January 26, 2021, directs the Attorney General to not renew DOJ contracts with privately operated criminal detention facilities. Two agencies of the DOJ, the BOP and the USMS utilize our services. The BOP houses inmates who have been convicted, and the USMS is generally responsible for detainees who are awaiting trial. The BOP has experienced a steady decline in inmate populations over the last eight years, a trend that has been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. We currently have one prison contract with the BOP at our 1,978-bed McRae Correctional Facility, accounting for 2% ($40.6 million) of our total revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, which expires in November 2022. The Private Prison EO only applies to agencies that are part of the DOJ, which includes the BOP and USMS. ICE facilities are not covered by the Private Prison EO, as ICE is an agency of the Department of Homeland Security, not the DOJ, although it is possible that the federal government could choose to take similar action on ICE facilities in the future. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, USMS and ICE accounted for 23% ($433.6 million) and 30% ($552.2 million), respectively, of our total revenue.
Unlike the BOP, the USMS does not own detention capacity and relies on the private sector, along with various government agencies, for its detainee population. The USMS has been advised by the Office of the Deputy Attorney General not to renew existing contracts, or enter into new contracts for private detention facilities. We currently have six detention facilities that have separate contracts where the USMS is the primary customer within the facility that all expire at various times over the next several years, with the exception of two contracts that have indefinite terms. Non-renewal of these contracts, or the expansion of the Private Prison EO to ICE, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations if we are unable to replace the cash flows with new management contracts like we did at our Northeast Ohio and Crossroads facilities. As of December 31, 2021, one of the aforementioned six contracts, a contract with a government agency at our 2,672-bed Tallahatchie County Correctional Facility in Mississippi that allows the USMS to utilize available capacity, expires in June 2022. During 2021, we generated management revenue of $30.3 million from the USMS under this contract.
Our managed-only contract for the 1,030-bed Marion County Jail in Indianapolis, Indiana terminated and operations transitioned to Marion County effective January 31, 2022. Marion County constructed a replacement facility that became fully operational in January 2022. The County intends to redevelop the property where the Marion County Jail was located, and we received notice in the second quarter of 2021 that the County intended to terminate the contract effective December 31, 2021. The contract was subsequently amended and extended through January 31, 2022 to allow the County more time to prepare for the transition. As a result of this expected contract termination, during the second quarter of 2021, we recognized an asset impairment charge of $2.9 million for goodwill and other assets associated with this managed-only facility's reporting unit. During 2021 and 2020, facility net operating income, or facility revenues less operating expenses, from this contract was $3.9 million and $2.8 million, respectively.
Based on information available as of the date of this Annual Report, other than the previously mentioned contract with the USMS at our Tallahatchie facility and the contract with the BOP at our McRae facility, for which future utilization by the USMS and the BOP, respectively, is uncertain, and at the managed-only Marion County Jail, we believe we will renew all other contracts with our government partners that have expired or are scheduled to expire within the next twelve months that could have a material adverse impact on our financial statements. We believe our renewal rate on existing contracts remains high due to a variety of reasons including, but not limited to, the constrained supply of available beds within the U.S. correctional system, our ownership of the majority of the beds we operate, and the cost effectiveness of the services we provide. However, we cannot assure we will continue to achieve such renewal rates in the future.
CoreCivic Safety
CoreCivic Safety includes the operating results of the correctional and detention facilities that we operated during each period. Total revenue generated by CoreCivic Safety decreased $12.3 million, or 0.7%, from $1,706.2 million during 2020 to $1,694.0 million during 2021. CoreCivic Safety's facility net operating income increased $39.7 million, or 9.5%, from $417.3 million during 2020 to $457.0 million during 2021. During 2021 and 2020, CoreCivic Safety generated 85.5% and 82.2%, respectively, of our total segment net operating income.
The following table displays the revenue and expenses per compensated man-day for CoreCivic Safety's correctional and detention facilities placed into service that we own and manage and for the facilities we manage but do not own, inclusive of the transportation services provided by TransCor:
As previously mentioned, the government's actions to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 were the primary reason for the reduction of average compensated occupancy in the CoreCivic Safety segment from 2020 to 2021. The improvement in operating margins during 2021 primarily resulted from a reduction in salaries and benefits, including as a result of reduced staffing levels during 2021 due to COVID-19 health and safety measures, including occupancy restrictions, labor shortages in many of our markets, and the absence of hero bonuses in 2021, which we paid in the second quarter of 2020, as previously described herein. Further, in an effort to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and at the direction of our government partners, we significantly reduced the level of movement within our facilities, enabling us to more efficiently manage our staffing. We intend to work with our government partners and follow national and local health standards in reinstating normal movement within our facilities. The improvement in operating margins also resulted from an increase in average revenue per compensated man-day during 2021 of 6.1% compared with 2020. Average revenue per compensated man-day increased as a result of the factors previously described herein. The factors contributing to an improvement in our operating margins were partially offset by the impact of lower occupancy levels. A combination of incremental staffing levels and higher wage rates in the future could result in a reduction to operating margins to the extent they are not offset by higher occupancy and per diem rates.
On September 15, 2020, we announced that we entered into a new contract under an IGSA between the city of Cushing, Oklahoma and the USMS to utilize our 1,600-bed Cimarron Correctional Facility. We had previously announced our intention to idle the Cimarron facility during the third quarter of 2020, predominantly due to a lower number of inmate populations from the state of Oklahoma resulting from COVID-19, combined with the consequential impact of COVID-19 on the State's budget. The new management contract commenced on September 15, 2020, and has an initial term of three years, with unlimited 24-month extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we cared for 1,213 USMS detainees at the Cimarron facility. During 2021, this facility generated facility net operating income of $8.8 million, and during 2020, this facility incurred a net operating loss of $1.4 million.
On January 9, 2020, we announced that we entered into a new emergency contract with the state of Mississippi to care for up to 375 of Mississippi's inmates at our Tallahatchie facility, to assist the State with significant challenges in its correctional system. The contract had a term of ninety days, which the State could extend for up to two additional ninety-day terms. The State subsequently expanded the contract to 1,000 inmates during the second quarter of 2020, and extended the contract through April 2021, but no longer needed the capacity and transferred the inmates back to the State during the first quarter of 2021. During 2021 and 2020, management revenue from this contract was $0.2 million and $12.8 million, respectively.
Effective August 1, 2019, we were awarded a new contract with the Kansas Department of Corrections, or KDOC, to care for offenders at our 1,896-bed Saguaro Correctional Facility in Arizona, where we also care for inmates from Hawaii and Nevada. We accepted 120 offenders from the KDOC in October 2019. During 2020, we generated $3.1 million of revenue from the KDOC under this contract. During the second quarter of 2020, this contract was extended through July 2021. However, due to available capacity in the state of Kansas, partially as a result of the completion of construction of our Lansing Correctional Facility, these inmates were returned to the State in December 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, we were also awarded a new contract with the Idaho Department of Correction, or IDOC, to care for up to 1,200 adult male offenders at the Saguaro facility. Subject to available capacity, we may also care for IDOC offenders at our 4,128-bed Central Arizona Florence Correctional Complex under terms of the contract. The new management contract with the IDOC commenced on August 18, 2020, and has an initial term of five years, with unlimited extension options thereafter upon mutual agreement. During 2021 and 2020, we generated $11.4 million and $4.0 million, respectively, of revenue from the IDOC under this contract. As of December 31, 2021, we cared for 476 IDOC offenders at our Saguaro facility.
In September 2020, the term of the amended IGSA between the city of Dilley, Texas and ICE to care for up to 2,400 individuals at our South Texas Family Residential Center, a facility we lease in Dilley, Texas, was extended from September 2021 to September 2026. ICE's termination rights, which permit ICE to terminate the agreement for convenience or non-appropriation of funds, without penalty, by providing us with at least a 60-day notice, were unchanged under the extension. As a result of extending the amortization period for the deferred revenue associated with the amended IGSA over the extended term of the agreement, the non-cash revenue associated with the amended IGSA decreased by approximately $2.7 million per quarter, from $3.4 million to $0.7 million, effective beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020. Concurrent with the extension of the amended IGSA, the lease with the third-party lessor for the site was also extended through September 2026. Other terms of the extended lease agreement were unchanged and provide us with the ability to terminate the lease if ICE terminates the amended IGSA associated with the facility.
During the third quarter of 2020, we provided notice to the local counties utilizing the Silverdale Detention Center and the Metro-Davidson County Detention Facility, both in Tennessee, of our intent to terminate the contracts at these managed-only facilities. We transitioned operations of the Metro facility in October 2020, and transitioned operations of the Silverdale facility in December 2020. During the time we operated these two facilities in 2020, they collectively incurred a net operating loss of $4.7 million. As a result of these expected contract terminations, during the second quarter of 2020, we also recognized goodwill impairments of $2.0 million associated with these two managed-only facilities' reporting units.
California Assembly Bill 32, or AB32, became effective January 1, 2020. AB32 generally prohibits new contracts and renewals of existing contracts between private, for-profit entities and government agencies for the operation of detention facilities within the state of California, and prohibits the utilization of detention centers operated by private, for-profit entities by the state of California effective January 1, 2028. AB32 does not apply to facilities leased from private, for-profit entities, such as our California City Correctional Center. The U.S. Government and The GEO Group, Inc. both filed lawsuits against the state of California challenging the enforceability of AB32 under applicable law. On October 8, 2020, US District Judge Janis Sammartino allowed AB32 to block future BOP and ICE contracts and renewals, while determining that AB32 could not block future USMS contracts and renewals. Judge Sammartino also acknowledged that the State has agreed it will not use AB32 to block federal, state, or local residential reentry center contracts. Both the U.S. Government and The GEO Group, Inc. appealed Judge Sammartino's ruling to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. On October 3, 2021, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed Judge Sammartino’s decision, finding AB32 impermissibly interferes with the federal government’s operation of immigration detention. California has announced its intention to appeal. If the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decision is reversed and AB32 is implemented so as to prohibit ICE-contracted private detention facilities, the federal government could be prohibited from renewing its contract for us to operate our 1,994-bed Otay Mesa Detention Center, which is currently scheduled to expire in December 2024. A potential non-renewal of our contract to operate the Otay Mesa Detention Center could have a significant impact on our results of operations and cash flows at the time of non-renewal.
The Private Prison EO could have a negative impact on our future results of operations and cash flows, to the extent we are unable to replace the cash flows with new management contracts like we did at our Northeast Ohio and Crossroads facilities, as previously described herein. We had direct contracts with the USMS to care
for detainees at our 600-bed West Tennessee Detention Facility that expired on September 30, 2021 and was not renewed and our 1,033-bed Leavenworth Detention Center that expired on December 31, 2021 and was not renewed. We are actively marketing the West Tennessee and Leavenworth facilities to other government agencies, and in August 2021, we submitted a formal response to a government agency's request for proposal to utilize the West Tennessee facility. We are also currently in discussions with, and have submitted proposals to, other potential government partners to utilize the Leavenworth facility. However, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to reach an agreement for the utilization of the West Tennessee and Leavenworth facilities. During 2021 and 2020, the contract with the USMS at our West Tennessee facility generated management revenue of $14.7 million and $18.4 million, respectively. During the time the facility was active for the nine-month period ended September 30, 2021, the West Tennessee facility generated facility net operating income of $0.4 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the West Tennessee facility incurred a facility net operating loss of $1.4 million. During 2021 and 2020, the contract with the USMS at our Leavenworth facility generated management revenue of $36.4 million and $37.1 million, respectively, and generated facility net operating income of $4.8 million and $7.0 million, respectively.
In December 2021, we were awarded a new management contract from the state of Arizona for up to 2,706 inmates at our 3,060-bed La Palma Correctional Center in Arizona. The State will close an outdated public-sector prison and transfer the inmate populations to our La Palma facility. The transfer is expected to begin late in the first quarter or early in the second quarter of 2022, and is expected to be completed in the fourth quarter of 2022. Before the new award, the La Palma facility supported the mission of ICE by caring for approximately 1,800 detainees. As the new contract with Arizona commences and state inmates are accepted at the facility, we are working closely with ICE to transfer their detainee populations to other facilities, including at facilities where we have available capacity within the region. We expect the transition of population from ICE detainees to inmates from the state of Arizona will result in the disruption of earnings and cash flows until the occupancy of inmates from the state of Arizona reaches stabilization. Upon full utilization of the new contract, we expect to generate approximately $75.0 million to $85.0 million in annualized revenue at the La Palma facility.
CoreCivic Community
CoreCivic Community includes the operating results of the residential reentry centers that we operated during each period, along with the operating results of our electronic monitoring and case management services. Total revenue generated by CoreCivic Community decreased $6.6 million, or 6.2%, from $106.0 million during 2020 to $99.4 million during 2021. CoreCivic Community's facility net operating income increased $0.7 million, or 4.3%, from $17.1 million during 2020 to $17.8 million during 2021. During 2021 and 2020, CoreCivic Community generated 3.3% and 3.4%, respectively, of our total segment net operating income.
The following table displays the revenue and expenses per compensated man-day for CoreCivic Community's residential reentry facilities placed into service that we own and manage, but exclusive of the electronic monitoring and case management services given that revenue is not generated on a per compensated man-day basis for these services:
The improvement in operating margins in the CoreCivic Community segment during 2021 primarily resulted from a reduction in salaries and benefits, including as a result of the absence of hero bonuses in 2021, which were paid in the second quarter of 2020, as previously described herein. The improvement in operating margins also resulted from an increase in average revenue per compensated man-day during 2021 of 2.8% compared with 2020. Average revenue per compensated man-day increased primarily as a result of per diem increases at several of our facilities. The factors contributing to an improvement in our operating margins were partially offset by the impact of lower occupancy levels. The average compensated population reduction was primarily driven by COVID-19, including a decline in utilization from the states of Oklahoma and Colorado because of COVID-19, which led to the consolidation of residents located in the respective states, and the closure of several of our residential reentry facilities. The 200-bed Oklahoma City Transitional Center in Oklahoma and the 60-bed Columbine Facility in Colorado closed in the second quarter of 2020, the 390-bed Tulsa Transitional Center in Oklahoma closed in the third quarter of 2020, and the 90-bed Ulster Facility in Colorado closed in the second quarter of 2021. We have entered into an agreement to sell the Ulster facility, which is expected to be sold in March 2022.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the BOP awarded a new contract to us for residential reentry and home confinement services pursuant to a solicitation for capacity and services to be provided in the state of Oklahoma. As a result of this new contract, during the first quarter of 2021, we reactivated the Turley Residential Center, which closed during the second quarter of 2019, and provide the BOP additional reentry services at our owned and operated Oklahoma Reentry Opportunity Center, which supplements the existing utilization by the state of Oklahoma.
During the third quarter of 2020, Adams County, Colorado, notified us that, pursuant to a re-bid of the contract at the 184-bed Henderson Transitional Center, a facility we leased from the County, it awarded the contract to another operator. We transitioned operations to the other operator upon expiration of the contract in January 2021. During 2020, this facility generated facility net operating income of $0.7 million.
As previously described herein, during the fourth quarter of 2021, we entered into a purchase and sale agreement for our 120-bed Fox Facility and Training Center in Denver, Colorado, which was sold in February 2022. This facility generated a facility net operating loss of $0.2 million and $0.3 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Like the CoreCivic Safety segment, our CoreCivic Community segment has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of our government partners have transferred certain residents assigned to our reentry facilities to non-residential status, home confinement or early releases, to create additional space for enhanced social distancing within our reentry facilities. Additionally, similar to our CoreCivic Safety segment, the CoreCivic Community segment has been adversely impacted by the disruption in court hearings, resulting in a reduction in the number of referrals to our community facilities. However, it is possible that in the future, government agencies will increase the utilization of our community facilities or home confinement services, as an alternative to incarceration.
CoreCivic Properties
CoreCivic Properties includes the operating results of the properties we leased to third parties and that were used by government agencies during each period. Total revenue generated by CoreCivic Properties decreased $24.2 million, or 26.0%, from $93.1 million during 2020 to $68.9 million during 2021. CoreCivic Properties' facility net operating income decreased $14.2 million, or 21.8%, from $65.0 million during 2020 to $50.8 million during 2021. The decreases in total revenue and facility net operating income in 2021 were primarily the result of the portfolio of 42 properties we sold in December 2020 and the three actively leased properties we sold in the second quarter of 2021, both as further described hereafter. During 2021 and 2020, CoreCivic Properties generated 11.2% and 14.4%, respectively, of our total segment net operating income.
On December 9, 2019, we entered into a lease with the Commonwealth of Kentucky Department of Corrections, or KYDOC, for our previously idled 656-bed Southeast Correctional Complex in Wheelwright, Kentucky. The lease commenced July 1, 2020, has an initial term of ten years and includes five two-year renewal options. The KYDOC has the option to purchase the facility at its fair market value at any time during the term of the lease. Facility net operating income at the Southeast Correctional Complex increased $2.4 million from 2020 to 2021. This facility had previously been idle since 2012.
On January 2, 2020, we completed the acquisition of a portfolio of 28 properties, all of which were built-to-suit and leased to the federal government through the General Services Administration, or GSA, 24 of which the counter-party contributed to Government Real Estate Solutions, LLC, or GRES, a subsidiary we controlled. The 445,000 square foot portfolio serves numerous federal agencies, including primarily the Social Security Administration, or SSA, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Office of Hearings Operations. On December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties, including this portfolio of 28 properties, in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $106.5 million, generating net proceeds of $27.8 million after the repayment of non-recourse mortgage notes associated with some of the properties and other transaction-related costs. During 2020, these 42 properties generated facility net operating income of $9.3 million. After considering tax protection payments required to be paid to the contributing partners of GRES in connection with the sale, we reported a net loss on this sale of $17.9 million during the fourth quarter of 2020. During June 2021, we provided notice to the partners of GRES of our intent to distribute the remaining assets and terminate the partnership. During the third quarter of 2021, we distributed the remaining assets, terminated the partnership, and extinguished the operating partnership units for no consideration, which resulted in an increase to stockholders' equity upon termination of the partnership of $17.4 million. As part of the distribution of assets, we transferred the deed of an idled property located in Detroit, Michigan to the partners of GRES. The Detroit property was previously a government-leased property in our Properties segment.
On May 28, 2021, we completed the sale of two leased properties, the 277,000 square foot Capital Commerce Center, primarily leased to an agency of the State of Florida in Tallahassee, Florida, and a 217,000 square foot warehouse property leased to the GSA in Dayton, Ohio, in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $73.0 million, generating net proceeds of $46.2 million after the repayment of the debt related to the Capital Commerce Center and other transaction-related costs. In addition, on June 29, 2021, we completed the sale of a 541,000 square foot property leased to the GSA in Baltimore, Maryland to a third party for a price of $253.0 million, generating net proceeds of $76.4 million after the repayment of the debt related to the Baltimore property and other transaction-related costs. During our period of ownership in 2021 and 2020, these three properties generated facility net operating income of $9.5 million and $20.2 million, respectively. We reported an aggregate net gain on the sales of these three properties of $38.9 million during the second quarter of 2021.
As previously described herein, on May 24, 2021, we completed the sale of an idled 12,000 square foot non-core property located in St. Louis, Missouri, with a net book value of $0.8 million at the time of the sale, for net proceeds of $0.6 million. In addition, on June 25, 2021, we completed the sale of an idled 18,000 square foot non-core property, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, for a price of $2.0 million, generating net proceeds of $1.8 million. Net proceeds from the sales of these 47 properties, totaling $152.8 million after the repayment of non-recourse mortgage notes associated with some of these properties and other transaction-related costs, were used to pay down a portion of the amounts outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility.
On September 20, 2021, we entered into a three-year lease agreement with the state of New Mexico at our 596-bed Northwest New Mexico Correctional Center. We previously operated the Northwest New Mexico facility in our Safety segment under a contract with the state of New Mexico. We transitioned facility operations to the New Mexico Corrections Department upon commencement of the new lease agreement on November 1, 2021. We will retain responsibility for facility maintenance throughout the term of the lease. The new lease agreement includes extension options that could extend the term of the lease through October 31, 2041. The average annual rent for the initial three-year lease term is $3.2 million, including annual rent of $4.2 million in the second and third years of the lease, with annual escalators thereafter. During the time the facility operated in our Safety segment during 2021, the Northwest New Mexico facility generated revenue of $9.2 million and incurred a facility net operating loss of $2.3 million.
General and administrative expense
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses totaled $135.8 million and $124.3 million, respectively. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of corporate management salaries and benefits, professional fees, and other administrative expenses. General and administration expenses increased from the prior year primarily as a result of an increase in incentive compensation, partially offset by a decline in consulting and other fees related to the evaluation of our change in corporate tax structure from the prior year.
Depreciation and Amortization
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, depreciation and amortization expense totaled $134.7 million and $150.9 million, respectively. The decrease in depreciation and amortization expense is primarily due to the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties in December 2020, as well as the sale of an additional three actively leased properties in the second quarter of 2021, each as previously described herein. Depreciation on the three properties sold in the second quarter 2021 had been suspended as they were classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2020.
Contingent consideration for acquisition of businesses
As a result of better than estimated financial performance of two residential reentry centers acquired in 2019, during the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a charge of $0.6 million for the maximum contingent consideration estimated as owed to the seller associated with the acquisition. The contingent consideration was paid during the first quarter of 2021.
Shareholder litigation expense
On April 16, 2021, we reached an agreement in principle to settle a purported securities class action lawsuit that was filed on August 23, 2016 in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee, or the District Court, captioned Grae v. Corrections Corporation of America et al. The monetary terms of the settlement included a payment of $56.0 million in return for a dismissal of the case with prejudice and a full release of all claims against all defendants. The settlement agreement, which was approved by the District Court on November 8, 2021, contains no admission of liability, wrongdoing, or responsibility by any of the defendants, including us. As a result of the settlement, we recognized an expense of $54.3 million during 2021, which was net of the remaining insurance available under the Company's policies.
Asset impairments
In February 2021, we entered into two 30-year lease agreements with the Alabama Department of Corrections, or ADOC, for the development of two correctional facilities in Alabama, which were subject to the successful completion of financing we were pursuing on behalf of the state of Alabama. Pursuant to the terms of the leases, ADOC staff would have operated both facilities, and we would have retained ownership of the facilities and been responsible for facility maintenance throughout the term of the leases. In the third quarter of 2021, we received notice from the state of Alabama of its decision to terminate the leases effective August 6, 2021 so that the State could pursue financing approval through the Alabama Legislature, and utilize COVID-19 relief funds potentially available to the State for prison construction. As a result of the lease terminations, during the third quarter of 2021, we reported asset impairment charges of $5.2 million for pre-development activities. Asset impairment charges during 2021 also include the aforementioned impairment of $2.9 million for goodwill and other assets associated with the anticipated termination of a managed-only contract in our Safety segment recognized during the second quarter of 2021, $1.3 million for the impairment of real estate assets recognized during the first quarter of 2021 for a facility in our Properties segment that was sold during the second quarter of 2021, and $2.0 million recognized during the fourth quarter of 2021 for the impairment of real estate for a facility in our Community segment that was classified as held for sale as of December 31, 2021.
Asset impairment charges in 2020 include the impairment of $44.6 million of goodwill related to our Community segment and two managed-only facilities in our Safety segment, $11.1 million for the impairment of real estate and other intangible assets for three facilities in our Community segment, $4.2 million of impairment charges for the abandonment of certain development costs and $0.7 million of other intangible assets associated with the cancellation of a lease in our Properties segment.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was reported net of interest income and capitalized interest for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Gross interest expense, net of capitalized interest, was $95.5 million and $93.5 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross interest expense is based on outstanding borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, our Term Loan A, our Term Loan B, our outstanding senior notes, and our outstanding non-recourse mortgage notes, as well as the amortization of loan costs and unused facility fees. A decrease in gross interest expense resulting from a decrease in the average outstanding balance on our Revolving Credit Facility and the repayment of certain non-recourse mortgage notes, as further described hereafter, was offset by the interest expense associated with the issuance of 8.25% senior unsecured notes in April and September 2021, also as further described hereafter.
We have benefited from relatively low interest rates on our Bank Credit Facility (Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan A), which is largely based on the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR. Based on our total leverage ratio, borrowings under our Bank Credit Facility during 2020 and most of 2021 were at the base rate plus a margin of 0.50% or at LIBOR plus a margin of 1.50%, and a commitment fee equal to 0.35% of the unfunded balance. Based on our current total leverage ratio, borrowings under our Bank Credit Facility are at the base rate plus a margin of 0.25% or at LIBOR plus a margin of 1.25%, and a commitment fee equal to 0.30% of the unfunded balance. Our Bank Credit Facility matures in April 2023. We intend to pursue a new or amended credit facility in the short-term, which will use a different interest rate benchmark than LIBOR due to the phase-out of LIBOR by the Financial Conduct Authority. We currently expect the effective interest rate under a new or amended credit facility to increase, but do not yet know to what extent, which could depend on, among other things, the benchmark used as well as the interest rate spreads pursuant to the terms of such new or amended credit facility.
On January 2, 2020, we completed the acquisition of a portfolio of 28 properties, 24 of which the counter-party contributed to GRES, for total consideration of $83.2 million. In connection with the acquisition, a wholly-owned subsidiary of GRES, an unrestricted subsidiary we control, assumed $52.2 million of in-place financing. The assumed non-recourse mortgage notes, or collectively, the GRES Note, carried a fixed interest rate of 4.91% and required monthly principal and interest payments, with a balloon payment of $46.2 million due at maturity in November 2025. The GRES Note was fully-secured by the same 24 properties originally pledged as collateral at the time the debt was issued. The GRES Note was fully repaid as part of the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties, including this portfolio of 28 properties, in December 2020, as previously described herein.
The 2018 acquisition of the Capital Commerce Center located in Tallahassee, Florida was partially financed with a non-recourse mortgage note, or the Capital Commerce Note, which was fully-secured by the Capital Commerce property. The Capital Commerce Note carried a fixed interest rate of 4.5%, required monthly principal and interest payments, and was scheduled to mature in January 2033. The Capital Commerce Note was fully repaid as part of the sale of the Capital Commerce Center on May 28, 2021.
In connection with the acquisition of the SSA-Baltimore office building in 2018, a wholly-owned unrestricted subsidiary of ours assumed $157.3 million of in-place financing. The assumed non-recourse mortgage note, or the SSA Baltimore Note, carried a fixed interest rate of 4.5% and required monthly principal and interest payments, with a balloon payment of $40.0 million due at maturity in February 2034. The SSA-Baltimore Note was fully-secured by the SSA-Baltimore property. The SSA-Baltimore Note was fully repaid as part of the sale of the SSA-Baltimore property on June 29, 2021.
On April 14, 2021, we completed an underwritten registered offering of $450.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.25% senior unsecured notes due 2026, or the Original 8.25% Senior Notes, which are guaranteed by our existing and future subsidiaries that guarantee the Bank Credit Facility. The Original 8.25% Senior Notes were priced at 99.0% of face value and as a result have an effective yield to maturity of 8.50%. We used a significant amount of the net proceeds from the offering of the Original 8.25% Senior Notes (i) to redeem all of our $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.0% senior unsecured notes due 2022, or the 5.0% Senior Notes, including the payment of the applicable "make-whole" redemption amount of $15.5 million and accrued interest, and (ii) to repurchase $149.0 million of our $350.0 million principal amount of 4.625% senior unsecured notes due 2023, or the 4.625% Senior Notes, at an aggregate purchase price of $151.2 million in privately negotiated transactions, reducing the outstanding balance of the 4.625% Senior Notes to $201.0 million. In the second and fourth quarters of 2021, we purchased an additional aggregate $27.3 million of our 4.625% Senior Notes at par in open market purchases, further reducing the outstanding balance of the 4.625% Senior Notes to $173.7 million. The "make-
whole" redemption amount paid in connection with the redemption of the 5.0% Senior Notes and the aggregate price paid for the 4.625% Senior Notes in excess of the principal amount of the notes repurchased resulted in charges of approximately $19.2 million during the second quarter of 2021, including costs associated with the repurchases and the proportionate write-off of existing debt issuance costs. The remaining net proceeds were used to pay down a portion of the amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility and for general corporate purposes. We experienced increased interest expense during 2021 related to the continued accrual of interest related to the 5.0% Senior Notes until the redemption date on May 14, 2021, thereby incurring interest expense on both the Original 8.25% Senior Notes and the 5.0% Senior Notes for the 30-day notice period for redemption commencing on April 14, 2021.
On September 29, 2021, we completed an underwritten registered tack-on offering of $225.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 8.25% Senior Notes due 2026, or the Additional 8.25% Senior Notes at an issue price of 102.25% of their aggregate principal amount, plus accrued interest from the April 14, 2021 issue date for the Original 8.25% Senior Notes, resulting in an effective yield to maturity of 7.65% for the Additional 8.25% Senior Notes. The Additional 8.25% Senior Notes and the Original 8.25% Senior Notes, or, collectively, 8.25% Senior Notes, constitute a single class of securities and have identical terms, other than issue date and issue price. The issuance of the Additional 8.25% Senior Notes increased the total aggregate principal amount of the 8.25% Senior Notes outstanding to $675.0 million. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Additional 8.25% Senior Notes totaled approximately $225.5 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses and including the original issuance premium. We used the net proceeds from the offering of the Additional 8.25% Senior Notes to pay down our Revolving Credit Facility and for general corporate purposes. Further, in October 2021, we repaid $90.0 million of the outstanding balance on our Term Loan B.
Issuance of the $675.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 8.25% Senior Notes is expected to result in an increase in interest expense because of an increase in the interest rate applicable to our outstanding debt. The increase in interest expense is expected to be partially offset by the repayment of $90.0 million of the outstanding balance of the Term Loan B during October 2021. The repayment was made using cash on hand and was made in accordance with the terms of the Term Loan B.
Gross interest income was $10.0 million and $10.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross interest income is earned on notes receivable, investments, cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash. Interest income also includes interest income associated with the 20-year finance receivable associated with the Lansing Correctional Facility lease to the KDOC, which commenced in January 2020, and amounted to $8.8 million and $8.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Total capitalized interest was $0.4 million and $0.5 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions
As previously described, during the second quarter of 2021, we completed the sales of three non-core actively leased properties in two separate transactions for a collective aggregate price of $326.0 million, generating total net proceeds of $122.6 million after the repayment of two non-recourse mortgage notes associated with two of the properties and other transaction-related costs. In connection with the sales, we incurred charges of $32.5 million associated with the prepayment of the two non-recourse mortgage notes and non-cash charges of $0.5 million associated with the write-off of existing debt issuance costs. Expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions during the second quarter of 2021 also included $19.2 million associated with the redemption of the 5.0% Senior Notes originally due in October 2022, as well as the aggregate price paid for the 4.625% Senior Notes in excess of the principal amount of the 4.625% Senior Notes repurchased, costs associated with the repurchases, and the proportionate write-off of existing debt issuance costs. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we also reported a charge of $4.1 million for the pro-rata write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and the original issue discount associated with the repayment of $90.0 million of the outstanding balance of the Term Loan B in October 2021.
As previously described, on December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $106.5 million, generating net proceeds of $27.8 million after the repayment of non-recourse mortgage notes associated with some of the properties and other transaction-related costs. In connection with the sale, we incurred a debt defeasance cost of $10.5 million associated
with the prepayment of the non-recourse mortgage notes. This defeasance charge was partially offset by the reversal of a corresponding intangible debt liability, which was recorded upon acquiring the debt in January 2020, and was derecognized upon the repayment of the debt in December 2020 upon sale of the properties.
Income tax expense
During the years we elected REIT status, we were entitled to a deduction for dividends paid, resulting in a substantial reduction in the amount of federal income tax expense we recognize. Substantially all of our income tax expense during the years we elected REIT status was incurred based on the earnings generated by our TRSs, and our overall effective tax rate was based on the taxable income primarily generated by our TRSs.
On August 5, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors, or BOD, unanimously approved a plan to revoke our REIT election and become a taxable C Corporation, effective January 1, 2021. As a result, we are no longer required to operate under REIT rules, including the requirement to distribute at least 90% of our taxable income to our stockholders, which provides us with greater flexibility to use our free cash flow. We continued to operate as a REIT for the remainder of the 2020 tax year, and existing REIT requirements and limitations, including those established by our organizational documents, remained in place until January 1, 2021. Effective January 1, 2021, we are subject to federal and state income taxes on our taxable income at applicable tax rates, and are no longer entitled to a tax deduction for dividends paid. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our financial statements reflected an income tax expense of $138.0 million and $4.4 million, respectively. Income tax expense for 2021 included $114.2 million primarily resulting from the revaluation of our net deferred tax liabilities due to the completion of all significant actions necessary to revoke our REIT election. Income tax expense related to operations for 2021 was partially offset by an income tax benefit of $21.2 million associated with asset impairments, the settlement agreement reached on April 16, 2021 in connection with the shareholder litigation, and expenses associated with debt repayments and refinancing transactions, net of an income tax expense associated with the gain on sale of real estate assets.
Income tax expense during 2020 included $3.1 million that had been deferred during the construction period of our Lansing Correctional Facility, which was owned by a TRS of ours until it converted to a qualified REIT subsidiary, or QRS, upon completion of construction in the first quarter of 2020. Because ownership of this facility reverts to the state of Kansas upon expiration of the twenty-year lease, the construction and subsequent lease of the facility to the State was a deemed sale for federal and state income tax purposes. The gain on sale was reported as a deferred tax asset based on the percentage of completion method over the construction period. This deferred tax asset was revalued to zero upon conversion of the TRS to a QRS.
Our effective tax rate could fluctuate in the future based on changes in estimates of taxable income, the implementation of additional tax planning strategies, changes in federal or state tax rates or laws affecting tax credits available to us, changes in other tax laws, changes in estimates related to uncertain tax positions, or changes in state apportionment factors, as well as changes in the valuation allowance applied to our deferred tax assets that are based primarily on the amount of state net operating losses and tax credits that could expire unused.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Pursuant to Regulation S-K item 303, a detailed review of our performance for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to our performance for the year ended December 31, 2019 is set forth in "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, on February 22, 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal capital requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures, and debt service payments, as well as outstanding commitments and contingencies, as further discussed in the notes to our financial statements.
As a result of the BOD decision to revoke our REIT election and become a taxable C Corporation effective January 1, 2021, we are no longer required to operate under REIT rules, including the requirement to distribute at least 90% of our taxable income to our stockholders, which will provide us with greater flexibility to use our free cash flow.
Effective January 1, 2021, we are subject to federal and state income taxes on our taxable income at applicable tax rates, and are no longer entitled to a tax deduction for dividends paid. However, we believe this conversion in corporate tax structure will improve our overall credit profile and lower our overall cost of capital, as we are able to allocate our free cash flow toward the repayment of debt, which may include the purchase of our outstanding debt in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Any such debt repurchases will depend upon prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual requirements, applicable securities laws requirements, and other factors. Following our first priority of utilizing free cash flow to reduce debt, we expect to allocate a substantial portion of our free cash flow to returning capital to our shareholders, which could include share repurchases and future dividends. Any future dividend is subject to the BOD's determinations as to the amount of distributions and the timing thereof, as well as limitations under the Company's debt covenants. We were not able to implement a meaningful share repurchase program under the REIT structure without increasing our debt because a substantial portion of our free cash flow was required to satisfy the distribution requirements under the REIT structure. We will also pursue attractive growth opportunities, including new development opportunities in our Properties segment to meet the need to modernize outdated correctional infrastructure across the country, and explore potential opportunities to expand the scope of non-residential correctional alternatives we provide in our Community segment that were not available under the REIT structure. As a REIT, we depended on the capital markets to provide resources we could deploy toward acquisition and development opportunities. This capital was not always available to us and came at an increasing cost. The revocation of our REIT election provides us with significantly more liquidity and financial flexibility, which will enable us to reduce our reliance on the capital markets and reduce the size of our Bank Credit Facility in the future.
With the extensively aged criminal justice infrastructure in the U.S. today, we believe we can bring real estate and financing solutions to government agencies like we did in connection with the construction of the Lansing Correctional Facility that was brought online in January 2020. We believe we can also provide other real estate solutions to government agencies faced with extensively aged criminal justice infrastructure, including "turn-key" solutions like those we will provide to the state of Arizona in connection with a new contract awarded to us during the fourth quarter of 2021 at our La Palma Correctional Center, as well as real estate only solutions to government agencies that need correctional capacity where they prefer to perform the operations. We financed the construction of the Lansing Correctional Facility 100% with project specific financing, requiring no equity commitment from us. We do not expect to incur material capital expenditures for the award from the state of Arizona, and most real estate only solutions would not require material capital expenditures if we have existing capacity. However, in the future we could incur capital expenditures to provide replacement capacity for government agencies that have extensively aged criminal justice infrastructure and are in need of new capacity.
As of December 31, 2021, our liquidity was provided by cash on hand of $299.6 million, and $786.1 million available under our Revolving Credit Facility. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated $263.2 million and $355.5 million, respectively, in cash through operating activities. We currently expect to be able to meet our cash expenditure requirements for the next year and beyond utilizing cash on hand, cash flows from operations, and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility or a new or amended credit facility. Some banks that are party to our Bank Credit Facility have announced that they do not expect to continue to provide credit or financial services to private entities that own or operate correctional and detention facilities, including CoreCivic, or to otherwise participate in the provision of credit or financial services in connection with the development or operation of correctional and detention facilities that are associated with private companies. The banks that are currently parties to the Bank Credit Facility are obligated to honor their commitments under our Bank Credit Facility, which expires in April 2023. These decisions have currently affected the capital markets for our securities, and we can provide no assurance that additional banks that are party to our Bank Credit Facility will not make similar decisions, or that new banks will be willing to become party to our Bank Credit Facility, or that the capital markets for our securities will improve. As previously mentioned, upon our revocation of our REIT election, we believe we will not be as reliant on the Revolving Credit Facility under the Bank Credit Facility or any new or amended credit facility, as we will be able to retain our cash flows to use at our general discretion and, therefore, believe we can operate with a smaller Bank Credit Facility. Following the completion of the offering of the Original 8.25% Senior Notes and redemption of our 5.0% Senior Notes in the second quarter of 2021, we have no debt maturities beyond the Bank Credit Facility until May 2023, when $173.7 million of the 4.625% Senior Notes matures. We currently anticipate that we will have sufficient liquidity to repay the 4.625% Senior Notes upon maturity.
Our cash flow is subject to the receipt of sufficient funding of and timely payment by contracting governmental entities. If the appropriate governmental agency does not receive sufficient appropriations to cover its contractual obligations, it may terminate our contract or delay or reduce payment to us. Delays in payment from our major customers or the termination of contracts from our major customers could have an adverse effect on our cash flow and financial condition. Although our revenue has been negatively impacted by COVID-19, we have not experienced any unusual delays in payments from our major customers.
Debt and equity
As of December 31, 2021, we had $173.7 million principal amount of unsecured notes outstanding with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.625%, $250.0 million principal amount of unsecured notes outstanding with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.75%, and $675.0 million principal amount of unsecured notes outstanding with a fixed stated interest rate of 8.25%. In addition, we had $154.5 million outstanding under the Kansas Notes with a fixed stated interest rate of 4.43%, $170.0 million outstanding under our Term Loan A with a variable interest rate of 1.4%, and $128.8 million outstanding under our Term Loan B with a variable interest rate of 5.5%. There was no amount outstanding under our Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our total weighted average effective interest rate was 6.5%, while our total weighted average maturity was 5.1 years.
As previously described, during 2021, we issued $675.0 million aggregate principal amount of 8.25% Senior Notes in two separate transactions, resulting in combined net proceeds of approximately $660.6 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and estimated offering expenses and including the original net issuance discount. The 8.25% Senior Notes were offered pursuant to a shelf registration statement on Form S-3ASR, which became effective on April 6, 2021. We used the net proceeds to (i) redeem all of our $250.0 million 5.0% Senior Notes, including the payment of the applicable "make-whole" redemption amount of $15.5 million and accrued interest, (ii) repurchase $176.3 million of our 4.625% Senior Notes, at an aggregate purchase price of $178.5 million in privately negotiated transactions, reducing the outstanding balance of the 4.625% Senior Notes to $173.7 million, (iii) pay down a portion of the amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility and (iv) for general corporate purposes. Further, in October 2021, we repaid $90.0 million of the outstanding balance of our Term Loan B.
The 2018 acquisition of the Capital Commerce Center located in Tallahassee, Florida was partially financed with the Capital Commerce Note, which was fully-secured by the Capital Commerce property. The Capital Commerce Note carried a fixed interest rate of 4.5%, required monthly principal and interest payments, and was scheduled to mature in January 2033. The Capital Commerce Note was fully repaid as part of the sale of the Capital Commerce Center on May 28, 2021, as previously described herein.
In connection with the acquisition of the SSA-Baltimore office building in 2018, a wholly-owned unrestricted subsidiary of ours assumed $157.3 million of in-place financing. The SSA Baltimore Note carried a fixed interest rate of 4.5% and required monthly principal and interest payments, with a balloon payment of $40.0 million due at maturity in February 2034. The SSA-Baltimore Note was fully-secured by the SSA-Baltimore property. The SSA-Baltimore Note was fully repaid as part of the sale of the SSA-Baltimore property on June 29, 2021, as previously described herein.
On August 25, 2021, we terminated our Amended and Restated ATM Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or ATM Agreement, with multiple sales agents, which permitted us to offer and sell to or through the agents, from time to time, shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $200.0 million. No sales of our common stock were made under the ATM Agreement. During the third quarter of 2021, we decided to terminate the ATM Agreement in connection with the expiration of the registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-227078) that we filed with the SEC on August 28, 2018 because we had no plans to issue shares of our common stock.
Facility transactions, development, and capital expenditures
On December 23, 2020, we completed the sale of 42 non-core government-leased properties in a single transaction to a third party for an aggregate price of $106.5 million, generating net proceeds of $27.8 million after the repayment of the GRES Note, which was associated with some of the properties, and other transaction-related costs.
During the second quarter of 2021 and in two separate transactions, we completed the sales of an additional three non-core actively leased properties to third parties for an aggregate price of $326.0 million, generating net proceeds of $122.6 million after the repayments of the Capital Commerce Note and the SSA-Baltimore Note, and other transaction-related costs. These assets were previously classified as held for sale. Also during the second quarter of 2021, we completed the sale of two idle properties for an aggregate price of $2.7 million, generating net proceeds of $2.4 million after transaction-related costs.
With the successful consummation of the sale of these assets, we generated net proceeds from our sales of these 47 non-core assets of $152.8 million after the repayment of mortgage debt associated with some of the properties and other transaction-related costs. We used the net proceeds from these property sales to pay down a portion of the amounts outstanding on our Revolving Credit Facility, accelerating our debt reduction and revised capital allocation strategy announced in August 2020.
Although disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, several of our existing federal and state partners, as well as prospective state partners, had been experiencing growth in offender populations and overcrowded conditions, as well as an increase in violent crime. Governments are now assessing their need for correctional space in light of COVID-19, and several are considering alternative correctional capacity for their aged or inefficient infrastructure, or are seeking cost savings by utilizing the private sector. Competing budget priorities, which will likely become more challenging because of COVID-19, often impede our customers' ability to construct new prison beds of their own or update their older facilities, which we believe could result in further need for private sector prison capacity solutions in the long-term. Over the long-term, we would like to see meaningful utilization of our available capacity and better visibility from our customers into their potential future needs before we develop new prison capacity on a speculative basis. We will, however, respond to customer demand and may develop or expand correctional and detention facilities when we believe potential long-term returns justify the capital deployment.
Operating Activities
Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $263.2 million compared with $355.5 million in 2020. Cash provided by operating activities represents our net income (loss) plus depreciation and amortization, changes in various components of working capital, various non-cash charges, and partially offset in 2021 by the cash payments required to settle the shareholder litigation, as described herein.
Investing Activities
Our cash flow provided by investing activities was $238.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was primarily attributable to $320.8 million in net proceeds from the sale of assets, partially offset by capital expenditures for facility development and expansions of $18.6 million and $62.3 million for facility maintenance and information technology capital expenditures.
Our cash flow provided by investing activities was $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily attributable to $113.6 million in net proceeds from the sale of assets, partially offset by capital expenditures for facility development and expansions of $27.6 million and $56.2 million for facility maintenance and information technology capital expenditures. Our cash flow provided by investing activities was also net of $8.8 million primarily attributable to the acquisition of the aforementioned portfolio of 28 properties in January 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash flow used in financing activities was $327.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was primarily attributable to net repayments under our Revolving Credit Facility of $219.0 million. In addition, cash flow used in financing activities included $35.3 million of scheduled principal repayments under our Term Loan A, Term Loan B, and non-recourse mortgage notes, as well as $516.4 million for the aforementioned repayments of senior notes and our Term Loan B, $161.9 million for the repayment of non-recourse mortgage notes in connection with the aforementioned sale of assets, and $65.0 million for debt defeasance, issuance, and other refinancing and related costs. Cash flow used in financing activities also included $1.0 million of contingent consideration associated with the acquisition of a business acquired in 2019 and $1.6 million for the purchase and retirement of common stock that was issued in connection with equity-based compensation. These payments were partially offset by the $445.5 million of gross proceeds from the aforementioned issuance of the Original 8.25% Senior Notes that were issued in the second quarter of 2021 at a 99.0% discount of face value and the $230.1 million of gross proceeds from the aforementioned issuance of the Additional 8.25% Senior Notes that were issued in the third quarter of 2021 at a 102.25% premium of face value.
Cash flow used in financing activities was $350.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily attributable to net repayments under our Revolving Credit Facility of $146.0 million, dividend payments of $106.0 million and $3.6 million for the purchase and retirement of common stock that was issued in connection with equity-based compensation. In addition, cash flow used in financing activities included $32.3 million of scheduled principal repayments under our Term Loan A, Term Loan B, and non-recourse mortgage notes, as well as $51.3 million for the defeasance of non-recourse mortgage notes in connection with the aforementioned sale of assets and other refinancing related costs.
Supplemental Guarantor Information
On March 2, 2020, the SEC adopted final rules that amended and simplified the financial disclosure requirements for subsidiary issuers and guarantors of registered debt securities under Rules 3-10 and 3-16 of SEC Regulation S-X. The rules permit registrants to provide certain alternative financial disclosures and non-financial disclosures in lieu of separate consolidating financial statements for subsidiary issuers and guarantors of registered debt securities (which we previously included within the notes to our financial statements included in our Annual Reports on Form 10-K and Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q) if certain conditions are met. Although the disclosures required by the amendments did not become mandatory until January 4, 2021, voluntary early compliance was permitted. We elected to voluntarily comply beginning with the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020.
All of the domestic subsidiaries of CoreCivic (as the parent corporation) that guarantee the Credit Agreements have provided full and unconditional guarantees of our 4.625% senior notes due 2023, 8.25% senior notes due 2026, and 4.75% senior notes due 2027, collectively referred to as our Senior Notes. All of CoreCivic's subsidiaries guaranteeing the Senior Notes are 100% owned direct or indirect subsidiaries of CoreCivic; and the subsidiary guarantees are full and unconditional and are joint and several obligations of the guarantors.
As of December 31, 2021, neither CoreCivic nor any of its subsidiary guarantors had any material or significant restrictions on CoreCivic's ability to obtain funds from its subsidiaries by dividend or loan or to transfer assets from such subsidiaries.
The indentures governing our Senior Notes contain certain customary covenants that, subject to certain exceptions and qualifications, restrict CoreCivic's ability to, among other things, create or permit to exist certain liens and consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of CoreCivic's assets. In addition, if CoreCivic experiences specific kinds of changes in control, CoreCivic must offer to repurchase all or a portion of the Senior Notes. The offer price for the Senior Notes in connection with a change in control would be 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the notes repurchased to the date of purchase. The indenture related to our 8.25% senior notes due 2026 additionally limits our ability to incur indebtedness, make restricted payments and investments and prepay certain indebtedness.
The following tables present summarized information for CoreCivic and the subsidiary guarantors, on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among CoreCivic and the subsidiary guarantors and (ii) equity in earnings from, and any investments in, any subsidiary that is a non-guarantor (in thousands).
Funds from Operations
Funds From Operations, or FFO, is a widely accepted supplemental non-GAAP measure utilized to evaluate the operating performance of real estate companies. The National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, or NAREIT, defines FFO as net income computed in accordance with GAAP, excluding gains or losses from sales of property and extraordinary items, plus depreciation and amortization of real estate and impairment of depreciable real estate and after adjustments for unconsolidated partnerships and joint ventures calculated to reflect funds from operations on the same basis. We believe FFO is an important supplemental measure of our operating performance and believe it is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of REITs and other real estate operating companies, many of which present FFO when reporting results.
We also present Normalized FFO as an additional supplemental measure as we believe it is more reflective of our core operating performance. We may make adjustments to FFO from time to time for certain other income and expenses that we consider non-recurring, infrequent or unusual, even though such items may require cash settlement, because such items do not reflect a necessary or ordinary component of our ongoing operations. Normalized FFO excludes the effects of such items.
FFO and Normalized FFO are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures of real estate companies' operating performance, which do not represent cash generated from operating activities in accordance with GAAP and therefore should not be considered an alternative for net income or as a measure of liquidity. Our method of calculating FFO and Normalized FFO may be different from methods used by other REITs and real estate operating companies and, accordingly, may not be comparable to such REITs and other real estate operating companies.
Our reconciliation of net income to FFO and Normalized FFO for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 is as follows (in thousands):
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our material cash requirements related to borrowings, contracts and leases by the indicated period as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
The cash obligations in the table above do not include future cash obligations for variable interest expense associated with our Term Loan A, Term Loan B or the balance on our outstanding Revolving Credit Facility, if any, as projections would be based on future outstanding balances as well as future variable interest rates, and we are unable to make reliable estimates of either. We have two renovation projects, totaling approximately $23.0 million, with $9.0 million remaining to be incurred as of December 31, 2021, for which we have entered into a contract with a customer that obligates us to complete the projects. However, the federal government has agreed to reimburse us over a twelve-month period for these two projects. Certain of our other ongoing construction projects are not
currently under contract and thus are not included as a contractual obligation above as we may generally suspend or terminate such projects without substantial penalty. With respect to the South Texas Family Residential Center, the cash obligations included in the table above reflect the full contractual obligations of the lease of the site, excluding contingent payments, even though the lease agreement provides us with the ability to terminate if ICE terminates the amended IGSA associated with the facility.
We had $13.9 million of letters of credit outstanding at December 31, 2021 primarily to support our requirement to repay fees and claims under our self-insured workers' compensation plan in the event we do not repay the fees and claims due in accordance with the terms of the plan, and for a debt service reserve requirement under terms of the Kansas Notes. The letters of credit are renewable annually. We did not have any draws under these outstanding letters of credit during 2021, 2020, or 2019.
INFLATION
Many of our contracts include provisions for inflationary indexing, which may mitigate an adverse impact of inflation on net income. However, a substantial increase in personnel costs, workers' compensation or food and medical expenses could have an adverse impact on our results of operations in the future to the extent that these expenses increase at a faster pace than the per diem or fixed rates we receive for our management services. As previously described herein, we have experienced increases in personnel costs and expect the labor market to remain challenging, which could have a material adverse effect on our operations. We outsource our food service operations to a third party. The contract with our outsourced food service vendor contains certain protections against increases in food costs.
SEASONALITY AND QUARTERLY RESULTS
Certain aspects of our business are subject to seasonal fluctuations. Because we are generally compensated for operating and managing correctional, detention, and reentry facilities at a per diem rate, our financial results are impacted by the number of calendar days in a fiscal quarter. Our fiscal year follows the calendar year and therefore, our daily profits for the third and fourth quarters include two more days than the first quarter (except in leap years) and one more day than the second quarter. Further, salaries and benefits represent the most significant component of operating expenses. Significant portions of our unemployment taxes are recognized during the first quarter, when base wage rates reset for unemployment tax purposes. Quarterly results are also affected by government funding initiatives, acquisitions, the timing of the opening of new facilities, or the commencement of new management contracts and related start-up expenses which may mitigate or exacerbate the impact of other seasonal influences. Because of seasonality factors, and other factors described herein, results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be achieved for the full fiscal year.