Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our Financial Conditions and Results of Operations.
Introduction
We were incorporated on July 15, 2002, under the laws of the State of Nevada.
Results of Operations - Year Ended July 31, 2022, and 2021
We have not earned any significant revenue from our operations during the year-ended July 31, 2022, and 2021. During the year ended July 31, 2022, we incurred net losses of $1,498,311 consisting entirely of general and administrative fees. The increase in general and administrative fees during the year-ended July 30,2022 primarily from a $1,350,000 impairment loss on our goodwill and software development balance and from increased business activity relating to software development
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to complete our proposed business plan. For these reasons our auditors believe that there is substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern.
Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of July 31, 2022, our current assets consisted of $7,972 in cash and deposits and our total liabilities were $206,567 which consisted of convertible notes payable of $77,200, loans payable of $11,597, and accounts payable and accrued expenses of $117,770.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
We have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities. For the year ended July 31, 2022, net cash flows used in operating activities were $215,865 consisting of our net loss for the period of $1,498,311, adjusted for impairment loss incurred in the period of $1,350,000, accounts payable of $102,554 and deposits of $35,000.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
We have financed our operations primarily from either third-party or the issuance of equity and debt instruments. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022, net cash from financing activities was $216,869, which consisted of proceeds from issuance of additional shares of our common and preferred stock, offset by convertible notes payable of $392,550 and loans payable of $43,482, which were converted into our shares pursuant to the terms of convertible promissory notes.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022, we spent $70,866 of our cash for software development.
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon obtaining financing to pursue exploration activities. For these reasons, there is substantial doubt that we will be able to continue as a going concern
Since our incorporation, we have financed our operations through advances from our shareholders, and by payments made by a third party. We expect to finance operations through the sale of equity or other investments for the foreseeable future, as we do not receive significant revenue from our business operations. There is no guarantee that we will be successful in arranging financing on acceptable terms.
Our ability to raise additional capital is affected by trends and uncertainties beyond our control. We do not currently have any arrangements for financing, and we may not be able to find such financing if required. Obtaining additional financing would be subject to a number of factors, including investor sentiment. Market factors may make the timing, amount, terms or conditions of additional financing unavailable to us.
Our auditors are of the opinion that our continuation as a going concern is in doubt. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon continued financial support from our shareholders and other related parties.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of the date of this annual report, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, inventories, adequacy of allowances for doubtful accounts, valuation of long-lived assets and goodwill, income taxes, litigation and warranties. We base its estimates on historical and anticipated results and trends and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, including assumptions as to future events. The policies discussed below are considered by management to be critical to an understanding of our financial statements. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. By their nature, estimates are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation of property and equipment are accounted for by accelerated methods over the following estimated useful lives:
Evaluation of Long-Lived Assets
We review property and equipment for potential impairment whenever significant events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable in accordance with the guidance in ASC 360-15-35 “Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets”. An impairment exists when the carrying amount of the long-lived assets is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. If an impairment exists, the resulting write-down would be the difference between the fair market value of the long-lived asset and the related net book value.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Basic loss per common share is computed based on the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the year. Diluted earnings per common share is computed by dividing net earnings (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares and potential common shares during the specified periods. The Company has no outstanding options, warrants or other convertible instruments that could affect the calculated number of shares.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets or liabilities are computed based on the temporary differences between the financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using the statutory marginal income tax rate in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred income tax expenses or credits are based on the changes in the deferred income tax assets or liabilities from period to period. A valuation allowance against deferred tax assets is required if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The valuation allowance should be sufficient to reduce the deferred tax asset to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.