Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The objective of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis is to allow investors to view the Company from management’s perspective, considering items that would have a material impact on future operations. The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our results of operations and financial condition as of and during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section captioned “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this report. See also the section captioned “Forward-Looking Statements” in this report.
Overview
We are an autonomous vehicle (AV) technology company that is focused on addressing industrial uses for autonomous vehicles. We believe that technological innovation is needed to enable adoption of autonomous industrial vehicles that will address the substantial industry challenges that exist today. These challenges include labor shortages, lagging technological advancements from incumbent vehicle manufacturers, and high upfront investment commitment.
Industrial sites are typically rigid environments with consistent standards as opposed to city streets that have more variable environmental and situational conditions and diverse regulations. These differences in operational design domains (ODD) will be major factors that make proliferation of industrial AVs in private settings achievable with less time and resources than AVs on public roadways. Namely, safety and infrastructure challenges are cited as roadblocks that have delayed AVs from operating on public roadways at scale. Our focus on industrial AVs simplifies these challenges because industrial facilities (especially those belonging to a single end customer that operates similarly at different sites) share much more in common than different cities do. Furthermore, our end customers own their infrastructure and can make changes more easily than governments can on public roadways.
With these challenges in mind, we are developing an EAS that leverages advanced in-vehicle autonomous driving technology and incorporates leading supporting technologies like data analytics, fleet management, cloud, and connectivity. EAS provides a differentiated solution that we believe will drive pervasive proliferation of industrial autonomy and create value for customers at every stage of their journey towards full automation and the adoption of Industry 4.0.
EAS is a suite of technologies and tools that we divide into three complementary categories:
1. DriveMod, our modular industrial vehicle autonomous driving software;
2. Cyngn Insight, our customer-facing tool suite for monitoring and managing AV fleets (including remotely operating vehicles) and aggregating/analyzing data; and
3. Cyngn Evolve, our internal tool suite and infrastructure that facilitates artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) training to continuously enhance our algorithms and models and provides a simulation framework (both record/rerun and synthetic scenario creation) to ensure that data collected in the field can be applied to validating new releases.
Legacy automation providers manufacture specialized industrial vehicles with integrated robotics software for rigid tasks, limiting automation to narrow uses. Unlike these specialized vehicles, EAS can be compatible with the existing vehicle assets in addition to new vehicles that have been purpose built for autonomy by vehicle manufacturers. EAS is operationally expansive, vehicle agnostic, and compatible with indoor and outdoor environments. By offering flexible autonomous services, we aim to remove barriers to industry adoption.
We understand that scaling of autonomy solutions will require an ecosystem made up of different technologies and services that are enablers for AVs. Our approach is to forge strategic collaborations with complementary technology providers that accelerate AV development and deployment, provide access to new markets, and create new capabilities. Our focus on designing DriveMod to be modular will combine with our experience deploying AV technology on diverse industrial vehicle form factors, which will be difficult for competitors to replicate.
We expect our technology to generate revenue through two main methods: deployment and EAS subscriptions. Deploying our EAS requires us and our integration partners to work with a new client to map the job site, gather data, and install our AV technology within their fleet and site. We anticipate that new deployments will yield project-based revenues based on the scope of the deployment. After deployment, we expect to generate revenues by offering EAS through a Software as a Service (SaaS) model, which can be considered the AV software component of Robotics as a Service (RaaS). Although we have not offered, and have no present intention to offer, the robotic assets ourselves directly to the end customer, our software can be part of a combined offering with third parties, such as an OEM.
RaaS is a subscription model that allows customers to use robots/vehicles without purchasing the hardware assets upfront. We will seek to achieve sustained revenue growth largely from ongoing SaaS-style EAS subscriptions that enable companies to tap into our ever-expanding suite of AV and AI capabilities as organizations transition into full industrial autonomy.
Although EAS is not yet commercially available and both the components and the combined solution are still under development, components of EAS have already been used for a paid customer trial and pilot deployments. We have not yet derived any recurring revenues from EAS and intend to start marketing EAS to customers in 2022. We expect EAS to continually be developed and enhanced according to evolving customer needs, which will take place concurrently while other completed features of EAS are commercialized. We expect annual R&D expenditures in the foreseeable future to equal or exceed that of 2019 and 2020. We also expect that limited paid pilot deployments in 2022 and 2023 will offset some of the ongoing R&D costs of continually developing EAS. We target scaled deployments to begin in 2024.
Our go-to-market strategy is to acquire new customers that use industrial vehicles in their mission-critical and daily operations by (a) leveraging the relationships and existing customers of our network of strategic partners, (b) bringing AV capabilities to industrial vehicles as a software service provider, and (c) executing a robust in-house sales and marketing effort to nurture a pipeline of industrial organizations. Our focus is on acquiring new customers who are either looking (a) to embed our technology into their vehicle product roadmaps or (b) to apply autonomy to existing fleets with our vehicle retrofits. In turn, our customers are any organizations that could utilize our EAS solution, including OEMs that supply industrial vehicles, end customers that operate their own industrial vehicles, or service providers that operate industrial vehicles for end customers.
As OEMs and leading industrial vehicle users seek to increase productivity, reinforce safer working environments, and scale their operations, we believe we are uniquely positioned to deliver a dynamic autonomy solution via our EAS to a wide variety of industrial uses. Our long-term vision is for EAS to become a universal autonomous driving solution with minimal marginal cost for companies to adopt new vehicles and expand their autonomous fleets across new deployments. We have already deployed DriveMod software on nine different vehicle form factors that range from stockchasers and stand-on floor scrubbers to 14-seat shuttles and 5-meter-long cargo vehicles demonstrating the extensibility of our AV building blocks. These deployments were prototypes or part of proof-of-concept projects. Of these deployments, two were at customer sites. For one deployment we were paid $166,000 and the other was part of our normal R&D activities.
Our strategy upon establishing a customer relationship with an OEM, is to seek to embed our technology into their vehicle roadmap and expand our services to their many clients. Once we solidify an initial AV deployment with a customer, we intend to seek to expand within the site to additional vehicle platforms and/or expand the use of similar vehicles to other sites operated by the customer. This “land and expand” strategy can repeat iteratively across new vehicles and sites and is at the heart of why we believe industrial AVs that operate in geo-fenced, constrained environments are poised to create value.
Meanwhile, over $16 billion has been invested into passenger AV development over the last several years with negligible revenues generated and constant delays. The $200B annual industrial equipment market (projected by 2027) is substantial, but it does not justify billions of dollars of annual research & development spend. These leading passenger AV companies will need to take the approach of first capturing the trillion-dollar markets of passenger AV to achieve their desired returns.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates and Judgements
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known. Besides the estimates identified below that are considered critical, we make many other accounting estimates in preparing our financial statements and related disclosures. All estimates, whether or not deemed critical, affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as disclosures of contingent liabilities. These estimates and judgments are also based on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known, even for estimates and judgments that are not deemed critical.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Warrants
The Company issued to its lead underwriter in the IPO, warrants to purchase up to 140,000 shares of its common stock. The Company accounts for warrants in accordance with ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreement. The Company determined the fair value of the warrants using the Black-Scholes pricing model and treated the valuation as equity instruments in consideration of the cashless settlement provisions in the warrant agreement.
The Company also applied the guidance in ASC 340-10-S99-1, Other Assets and Deferred Costs, that states specific incremental costs directly attributable to a proposed or actual offering of equity securities may properly be deferred and charged against the gross proceeds of the offering. The Company treated the valuation of the warrants as directly attributable to the issuance of an equity contract and accordingly, classified the warrants as additional paid-in capital.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company recognizes the cost of share-based awards granted to employees and directors based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Cost is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service period, which is generally the vesting period of the award. The Company recognizes stock-based compensation cost and reverses previously recognized costs for unvested awards in the period forfeitures occur. The Company determines the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the fair value of common stock, expected price volatility of common stock, expected term, risk-free interest rates, and expected dividend yield.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consist primarily of outsourced engineering services, internal engineering and development expenses, materials, labor and stock-based compensation related to development of the Company’s products and services. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
General, and Administrative Expense
General, and administrative expense consist primarily of personnel costs, facilities expenses, depreciation and amortization, travel, and advertising costs.
Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company has not generated any revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $0.1 million or 2.5% to $5.0 million from $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to the decrease in personnel engaged in the research and development of our AV technology in 2021 compared to pre-COVID-19 headcount levels in 2020. The Company plans to continue to restore the appropriate level of engineering and other personnel to support its research and development efforts and expects research and development costs to increase over time.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.2 million or 36.5% to $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The majority of the increase was attributed to the increase in stock-based compensation expense, legal and professional fees, and personnel related costs as the Company increased staff to support being a public company during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income, net, increased by approximately $1.6 million to $1.6 million from approximately $35,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is attributed to the increase in other income of $1.6 million representing gains recognized on the forgiveness of the PPP Notes by the SBA during the fourth quarter of 2021 and the disposal of assets, offset by the increase in interest expense recognized on the second PPP Note for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to interest expense on a single PPP Note for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In recent years, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts toward the development of EAS and toward raising capital. We have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of equity securities for cash consideration and through bank debt. At December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $22.1 million, compared to working capital of $6.1 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital is primarily due to the IPO proceeds of $23.3 million in October, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $21.9 million and $6.1 million respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $116.5 million. Largely as a result of significant research and development activities related to our advanced technology, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. We have incurred net losses of $7.8 million and $8.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Company’s liquidity is based on its ability to enhance its operating cash flow position, obtain capital financing from equity interest investors and borrow funds to fund its general operations, research and development activities and capital expenditures. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on management’s ability to successfully execute its business plan, which includes increasing revenue while controlling operating costs and expenses to generate positive operating cash flows and obtaining funds from outside sources of financing to generate positive financing cash flows.
Based on cash flow projections from operating and financing activities and existing balance of cash and cash equivalents, management is of the opinion that the Company has sufficient funds for sustainable operations and it will be able to meet its payment obligations and commitments from operations for at least one year from the issuance date of this report. Based on the above considerations, the Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities during the normal course of operations (see Initial Public Offering above).
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.6 million, an increase of $0.7 million or 9.1% compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributed to the level of increases in administrative personnel-related costs and professional services as the Company increased staff to support being a public company.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $20,000, consisting of $62,000 in purchases of equipment and fixtures offset by $42,000 in asset disposals.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $24.2 million consisting of proceeds from the IPO of $23.3 million, the February 2021 PPP Note proceeds of $0.9 million from the SBA, and stock option exercises of approximately $14,000. The Company expects to experience increases in proceeds from option exercises to supplement the public listing of its common stock shares in future periods.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging-growth company”, as defined in the JOBS Act, and, for as long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may choose to take advantage of exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies but not to emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, not being required to have our independent registered public accounting firm audit our internal control over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. As an emerging growth company we can also delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We intend to avail ourselves of these options. Once adopted, we must continue to report on that basis until we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company.
We will cease to be an emerging growth company upon the earliest of: (i) the end of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the initial public offering; (ii) the first fiscal year after our annual gross revenue are $1.07 billion or more; (iii) the date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities; or (iv) the end of any fiscal year in which the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700 million as of the end of the second quarter of that fiscal year. We cannot predict if investors will find our common stock less attractive if we choose to rely on these exemptions. If, as a result of our decision to reduce future disclosure, investors find our common shares less attractive, there may be a less active trading market for our common shares and the price of our common shares may be more volatile.
We are also a “smaller reporting company”, meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of the IPO is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation