ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements due to a number of factors. See “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Form 10-K.
For further discussion and analysis regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to “Part II, Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
General Overview
Cryoport provides integrated temperature-controlled supply-chain solutions supporting the biopharma, animal health, and reproductive medicine markets. With over 850 employees spread across 33 locations worldwide we are focused on developing, implementing, and leveraging an industry-leading, comprehensive supply chain platform in support of the storage and distribution of critical, irreplaceable products and materials for the life sciences industry. Our supply chain solutions platform is focused on delivering unparalleled, highly differentiated temperature-controlled logistics, packaging, storage, and informatics services for products, therapies, and treatments that require unique, specialized cold chain management. Our primary focus is on addressing the critical temperature-controlled supply chain needs within the biopharmaceutical space with an emphasis on serving the rapidly growing cell and gene therapy, or C&GT, market.
See the “Business” section in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Impact of COVID-19
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus that causes coronavirus disease (COVID-19) was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China, which has since spread globally. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. The pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and reduced workforce participation. Further, the COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in government authorities around the world implementing numerous measures to try to reduce the impact of COVID-19, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter in place or total lock-down orders. Many countries around the world have also implemented the temporary closure of non-essential businesses and other material limitations on the conduct of business. As a provider of life saving therapies, Cryoport is deemed to be an essential business and has remained fully open and operational. However, the full extent and duration of this pandemic is still unknown at this point and the related governmental, business and travel restrictions in order to contain this virus are continuing to evolve globally. Accordingly, there is significant uncertainty related to the ultimate duration and impact that this global pandemic will have on future results of our operations.
Several life sciences companies, including some of our clients, announced during 2020 the temporary suspension of clinical studies and trials as well as other COVID-19 related risks that may impact their preclinical and clinical trials, including delays in patient enrollment or difficulties in initiating or expanding clinical trials, interruption of clinical trial activity, and diversion of healthcare resources to focus on COVID-19 activities. While these temporary suspensions and restrictions have been lifted such actions negatively impacted our revenue in the markets we serve during 2020. More recently, new variants of COVID-19 such as the Delta and Omicron variants, that are significantly more contagious than previous strains, have emerged. The spread of these new strains are causing many government authorities and businesses to reimplement prior restrictions, or impose new restrictions, in an effort to lessen the spread of COVID-19 and its variants. Accordingly, while we have experienced revenue ramping back up gradually over time, this may be curtailed to the extent we or our clients are affected by such restrictions in the future. Further, virus containment efforts as a result of governmental actions or policies or other initiatives have led to the disruption in the global supply chain and as a result, we have experienced difficulties sourcing materials and equipment and may incur additional direct costs to provide our solutions in the future. See “Risk Factors-Risk Related to Our Business-We depend on the availability of certain component products used in our solutions; delays or increased costs in the procurement of components manufactured by third parties could adversely affect our business operations, financial performance and results of operations, and we may experience customer dissatisfaction and harm to our reputation” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K for additional information.
While longer-term client demand for our services overall remains strong, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the measures taken by some of our clients , as described above, have adversely impacted our revenue growth. We continue to monitor the evolving situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and we may take further actions required by governmental authorities or that we determine are prudent to support the well-being of our employees, customers, suppliers, business partners and others. The degree to which COVID-19 impacts our business operations, financial performance and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, continuously evolving and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the COVID-19 outbreak and its variants; its severity; the actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, such as the availability and efficacy of vaccines (particularly with respect to emerging strains of the virus), and the potential hesitancy to utilize them; and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. See “Risk Factors-Risk Related to Our Business-The recent global pandemic caused by COVID-19 has already and may continue to adversely affect our business operations, financial performance and results of operations, the extent of which is uncertain and difficult to predict” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K for additional information
Segment Reporting
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing operating performance. The chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) is our Chief Executive Officer. We previously reported results based on two reportable operating segments: Global Logistics Solutions and Global Bioservices. During the fourth quarter of 2020, our CODM changed how he makes operating decisions, assesses the performance of the business and allocates resources in a manner that caused our operating segments to change as a result of the MVE and CRYOPDP acquisitions. In consideration of the FASB ASC 280, Segment Reporting, we determined that we are not organized around specific products and services, geographic regions or regulatory environments. Accordingly, beginning with the fourth quarter of 2020, we operate in one reportable operating segment.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or U.S. GAAP. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we have identified the policies and estimates below as being critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. These policies require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgements, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The impact of and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition,” including in the “Results of Operations” section, where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgements are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and most demanding of our judgment. We consider the following policies to be critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties associated with the complex judgments made by us that could impact our results of operations, financial position and cash flows: Revenue Recognition, Business Combinations, Intangible Assets and Goodwill, Series C Preferred Stock, Stock-based Compensation, Convertible Senior Notes and Income Taxes. See Note 2: “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods and services. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
Performance Obligations
At contract inception, an assessment of the goods and services promised in the contracts with customers is performed and a performance obligation is identified for each distinct promise to transfer to the customer a good or service (or bundle of goods or services). To identify the performance obligations, the Company considers all of the goods or services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices. Revenue is recognized when our performance obligation has been met. The Company considers control to have transferred upon delivery because the Company has a present right to payment at that time, the Company has transferred use of the asset, and the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset.
For arrangements under which the Company provides biological specimen storage services and logistics support and management to the customer, the Company satisfies its performance obligations as those services are performed whereby the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of such services under the agreement.
Revenue generated from short-term logistics and engineering consulting services provided to customers is recognized when the Company satisfies the contractually defined performance obligations. When a contract includes multiple performance obligations, the contract price is allocated among the performance obligations based upon the stand-alone selling prices. Approved contract modifications are accounted for as either a separate contract or as part of the existing contract depending on the nature of the modification.
Our performance obligations on our orders and under the terms of agreements with customers are generally satisfied within one year from a given reporting date and, therefore, we omit disclosure of the transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations on open orders.
Shipping and handling activities related to contracts with customers are accounted for as costs to fulfill our promise to transfer the associated products pursuant to the accounting policy election allowed under Topic 606 and are not considered a separate performance obligation to our customers. Accordingly, the Company records amounts billed for shipping and handling as a component of revenue. Shipping and handling fees and costs are included in cost of revenues in the accompanying condensed consolidated statements of operations.
Revenues are recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental agencies.
Business Combinations
Amounts paid for acquisitions are allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, if any, based on their fair values at the dates of acquisition. This purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions with respect to intangible assets. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations that use information and assumptions determined by management. Any excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. While we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
We use the income approach to determine the fair value of certain identifiable intangible assets such as customer relationships. This approach determines fair value by estimating after-tax cash flows attributable to these assets over their respective useful lives and then discounting these after-tax cash flows back to a present value. We base our assumptions on estimates of future cash flows, expected growth rates, expected trends in technology, etc. We base the discount rates used to arrive at a present value as of the date of acquisition on the time value of money and certain industry-specific risk factors. We believe the estimated purchased customer relationships, agent networks, software, developed technologies, and trademarks/tradenames so determined represent the fair value at the date of acquisition and do not exceed the amount a third party would pay for the assets.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Intangible assets
Intangible assets with a definite life are amortized over their useful lives using the straight-line method, which is the best estimate of the value we are receiving over the useful life of the intangible asset and another systematic method was not deemed more appropriate. The amortization expense is recorded within selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Intangible assets and their related useful lives are reviewed at least annually to determine if any adverse conditions exist that would indicate the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable. More frequent impairment assessments are conducted if certain conditions exist, including a change in the competitive landscape, any internal decisions to pursue new or different technology strategies, a loss of a significant customer, or a significant change in the marketplace, including changes in the prices paid for the Company’s products or changes in the size of the market for the Company’s products. If impairment indicators are present, the Company determines whether the underlying intangible asset is recoverable through estimated future undiscounted cash flows. If the asset is not found to be recoverable, it is written down to the estimated fair value of the asset based on the sum of the future discounted cash flows expected to result from the use and disposition of the asset. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, the remaining carrying amount of the intangible asset is amortized prospectively over the revised remaining useful life. The Company continues to believe that its definite-lived intangible assets are recoverable at December 31, 2021. There has been no impairment of our intangible assets for the periods presented.
Goodwill
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter or more frequently if management believes indicators of impairment exist. Events that would indicate impairment and trigger an interim impairment assessment include, but are not limited to, current economic and market conditions, including a decline in market capitalization, a significant adverse change in legal factors, business climate or operational performance of the business, and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Accounting guidance also permits an optional qualitative assessment for goodwill to determine whether it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value. If, after this qualitative assessment, we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then no further quantitative testing would be necessary. A quantitative assessment is performed if the qualitative assessment results in a more likely than not determination or if a qualitative assessment is not performed. The quantitative assessment considers whether the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, in which case an impairment charge is recorded to the extent the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value. As a result of our 2021 quantitative assessment, we concluded that goodwill is not impaired as of December 31, 2021.
Series C Preferred Stock
On the October 1, 2020 issuance date, the effective conversion price per share was less than the fair value of the underlying common stock and, as a result, the Company determined that there was a beneficial conversion feature on that date. Accordingly, the Company recognized the resulting beneficial conversion feature amount of approximately $39.5 million as a deemed dividend, equal to the number of common shares into which the Series C Preferred Stock is convertible multiplied by the difference between the fair value of the common stock and the effective conversion price per share on that date. Because the Series C Preferred Stock does not have a stated conversion date and was immediately convertible at the issuance date, the dividend is reflected as a one-time, non-cash, deemed dividend to the holders of the Series C Preferred Stock on the date of issuance.
Additionally, the Company determined that the nature of the Series C Preferred Stock is more akin to an equity instrument and that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded conversion options are clearly and closely related to the Series C Preferred Stock. As such, the conversion options were not required to be bifurcated from the host under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging.
Since the paid-in-kind dividends are nondiscretionary, the Company measured the beneficial conversion feature in the paid-in-kind dividend on the issuance date of the preferred stock and recorded such amount when the paid-in-kind dividend was accrued. Accordingly, the associated paid-in-kind dividends for the year ended December 31, 2020 generated a beneficial conversion feature amount of $0.3 million. On February 5, 2021, the Company received a waiver and conversion notice from Blackstone Freeze Parent L.P. and Blackstone Tactical Opportunities Fund - FD L.P. and converted an aggregate of 50,000 shares of the Series C Preferred Stock, resulting in the issuance of an aggregate of 1,312,860 shares of common stock. See Note 15: “Stockholders’ Equity” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The Company evaluated the Series C Preferred Stock for liability or equity classification under the applicable accounting guidance including ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and determined that equity treatment was appropriate because the Series C Preferred Stock did not meet the definition of the liability instruments defined thereunder for convertible instruments. Specifically, the convertible preferred shares are not mandatorily redeemable and do not embody an obligation to buy back the shares outside of the Company’s control in a manner that could require the transfer of assets. Additionally, the Company determined that the Series C Preferred Stock would be recorded as permanent equity given that they are not redeemable for cash or other assets (i) on a fixed or determinable date, (ii) at the option of the holder, or (iii) upon the occurrence of an event that is not solely within control of the Company.
The Company also evaluated the embedded put and call options within the Series C Preferred Stock in accordance with the accounting guidance for derivatives to determine if bifurcation is required. The Company determined that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded put and call options are not clearly and closely related to the Series C Preferred Stock. Therefore, the Company assessed the put and call options further and determined they did not meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815.
Under the same analysis, the Company determined that the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded participating dividend feature are considered clearly and closely related to the equity host. Accordingly, the participating dividend feature is not required to be bifurcated under ASC 815. Also, the Company determined that the value of the contingent dividend feature is minimal and insignificant relative to the other components of the Series C Preferred Stock due to the circumstances surrounding the scenarios under which the provision would be triggered.
Convertible Senior Notes
The Convertible Senior Notes are accounted for in accordance with ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (“ASC 470-20”) and ASC 815-40, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”). Under ASC 815-40, to qualify for equity classification (or nonbifurcation, if embedded) the instrument (or embedded feature) must be both (1) indexed to the issuer’s stock and (2) meet the requirements of the equity classification guidance. Based upon the Company’s analysis, it was determined the Convertible Senior Notes do contain embedded features indexed to its own stock, but do not meet the requirements for bifurcation, and therefore do not need to be separately accounted for as an equity component. Since the embedded conversion feature meets the equity scope exception from derivative accounting, and also since the embedded conversion option does not need to be separately accounted for as an equity component under ASC 470-20, the proceeds received from the issuance of the convertible debt was recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet.
Stock-based Compensation
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to calculate the fair value of stock option awards on the grant date. The expected option life assumption is estimated based on the simplified method. Accordingly, the Company has utilized the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted average vesting period for all options to calculate the expected option term. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the expected term of our employee stock options. The expected volatility is based on the average of the historical volatility and the implied volatility of our stock commensurate with the expected life of the stock-based award. We do not anticipate paying dividends on the common stock in the foreseeable future.
We recognize stock-based compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized only for those awards that ultimately vest.
Income Taxes
Deferred taxes are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We account for uncertain tax positions using a “more-likely-than-not” threshold for recognizing and resolving uncertain tax positions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in tax law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position. We evaluate our tax position on a quarterly basis. We also accrue for potential interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Results of Operations
Results of Operations for Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes certain information derived from our consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
Total revenues by market
Revenues. Revenues increased $143.9 million, or 182.9%, to $222.6 million for year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $78.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by revenue from the acquisition of MVE and CRYOPDP on October 1, 2020, which contributed $103.1 million and $59.6 million, respectively. In addition, organic revenue increased by $17.1 million or 39.9%, to $60.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily driven by increased activity from our biopharmaceutical customers. During 2021 we experienced an increase in the number of customers utilizing our services and the number of clinical trials we support.
Service revenues increased by $63.8 million, or 115.3%, from $55.3 million to $119.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was driven by the acquisition of CRYOPDP on October 1, 2020, which contributed $46.6 million in revenue from temperature-controlled specialty courier and supply chain services, including packaging, pick-pack kit preparation, the continuing ramp of revenue from our Cryoport Express® solutions, which increased by 16.2 million, or 43.8%, and revenue from our biostorage services, which increased by $0.7 million, or 13.6%.
Product revenues increased by $80.1 million, or 342.5%, from $23.4 million to $103.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The revenues were for the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2021 were primarily a result of the acquisition of MVE Biological Solutions on October 1, 2020, representing revenue from our portfolio of cryogenic stainless-steel freezers, aluminum dewars and related ancillary equipment used in the storage and transport of life sciences commodities, which includes the rapidly growing Cell and Gene Therapy ("C&GT") market through a global network of distributors and direct client relationships.
Revenues by market
Revenue from the biopharma/pharma market increased $113.8 million, or 171.4%, from $66.4 million to $180.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was driven by revenue from the acquisition of MVE Biological Solutions and CRYOPDP on October 1, 2020, which contributed $67.1 million and $59.6 million, respectively, and the increase in organic revenue by $15.4 million, or 40.4%, to $53.6 million driven by revenue growth from the support of clinical trials. As of December 31, 2021, we supported 602 clinical trials, of which 475 were in the Americas, 93 were in EMEA and 34 were in APAC, compared to 528 clinical trials supported as of December 31, 2020 (419 in the Americas, 84 in EMEA and 25 in APAC). The number of Phase III clinical trials supported increased to 74 trials as of December 31, 2021, of which 51 are in the Americas, 21 are in EMEA, and 2 are in APAC. This compares to 69 Phase III trials (49 in the Americas, 19 in EMEA and 1 in APAC) supported as of December 30, 2020. The activity in the clinical trial space, particularly in the C&GT market is expected to drive future revenue growth as these clinical trials advance and resulting therapies are commercialized on a global basis.
Our revenue from the animal health market increased $25.5 million, or 325.1%, from $7.8 million to $33.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily driven by the acquisition of MVE Biological Solutions on October 1, 2020.
Revenues in the reproductive medicine market increased $4.6 million, or 103.1%, from 4.5 million to $9.1 million the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was driven by an increase in organic revenue of $1.5 million, or 39.2%, to $5.3 million, demonstrating the continued success of our CryoStork®-branded offering, and revenue of $3.7 million contributed by MVE Biological Solutions during 2021.
Gross margin and cost of revenues. Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 43.4% of total revenues, as compared to 46.2% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross margin is impacted by the margin profiles and related margin contributions of the MVE Biological Solutions and CRYOPDP acquisitions completed October 1, 2020. The third quarter 2021 gross margin was impacted by investments in our growth initiatives, as well as increased costs as a result of global supply chain constraints, primarily impacting the MVE Biological Solutions business. Cost of total revenues increased $83.7 million to $126.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $42.4 million in the same period in 2020. The increase in cost of total revenues is commensurate with the increase in business volume and the addition of cost of revenue from the acquisitions of MVE Biological Solutions and CRYOPDP in October 2020.
Gross margin for our service revenues was 41.8% of service revenues, as compared to 46.6% of service revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was a result of the lower margin contribution from the acquisition of CRYOPDP in October 2020. Our cost of revenues is primarily comprised of freight charges, payroll and associated expenses related to our global logistics and supply chain centers, depreciation expenses of our Cryoport Express® Shippers and supplies and consumables used for our solutions.
Gross margin for our product revenues was 45.2% of product revenues, as compared to 45.1% of product revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Product revenues, related cost of revenues and resulting gross margins were primarily a result of the acquisition of MVE Biological Solutions. Our cost of product revenues were primarily comprised of materials, direct and indirect labor, inbound freight charges, purchasing and receiving, inspection, and distribution and warehousing of inventory. In addition, shop supplies, facility maintenance costs and depreciation expense for assets used in the manufacturing process were included in cost of product revenues.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses include the costs associated with selling our products and services and costs required to support our marketing efforts including legal, accounting, patent, shareholder services, amortization of intangible assets and other administrative functions.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, SG&A expenses increased by $40.7 million, or 71.6% as compared to the same period in 2020. This increase is primarily due to the addition of $36.8 million of SG&A expenses from the acquisition of MVE Biological Solutions and CRYOPDP in October 2020, as well as the continued expansion of our infrastructure to support the acquisitions and expected future growth. Wages and associated employee costs increased $20.3 million from $19.0 million in 2020 to $39.3 million in 2021. Intangible asset amortization expense is included in SG&A and consists of charges related to the amortization of intangible assets associated with the acquisitions of CRYOPDP and MVE Biological Solutions in 2020 and CRYOGENE in 2019, in which we acquired definite-lived intangible assets. Intangible asset amortization expense increased by $7.8 million, from $6.7 million in 2020, to $14.4 million in 2021. Facility and other overhead allocations increased $6.0 million, public company related expenses (including legal, audit and internal control audit fees) increased by $4.2 million and stock compensation expense increased by $4.9 million compared to the same period in 2020. These increases were partially offset by a $9.6 million decrease in consulting, legal and other acquisition-related expenses in 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020.
Engineering and development expenses. Engineering and development expenses increased $7.4 million, or 77.6%, for year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $3.0 million in consulting, prototype and development costs directed at further enhancing our logistics and supply chain solutions, $2.8 million in wages and associated employee costs to add software development and engineering resources and $0.5 million stock compensation expense. We continually strive to improve and expand the features of our Cryoport Express® Solutions and portfolio of services and suite of temperature-controlled products. Our primary developments are directed towards facilitating the safe, reliable and efficient transport and storage of life science commodities through innovative and technology-based solutions. This includes significantly enhancing our Cryoportal® Logistics Management Platform and related technology solutions as well as developments to expand our Cryoport Express® and Cryoport ELITE™ shipper fleet, such as the Cryosphere™ shipper, a cryogenic dry-vapor shipper utilizing patent pending technology that passively stabilizes the payload through an internal gravitational sphere, thereby further mitigating transport risks. In addition, engineering and development efforts are also focused on MVE Biological Solutions’ portfolio of advanced cryogenic stainless-steel freezers, aluminum dewars and related ancillary equipment used in the storage and transport of life sciences commodities. We supplement our internal engineering and development resources with subject matter experts and consultants to enhance our capabilities and shorten development cycles.
Investment Income. Investment income increased by $2.5 million, for year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year as a result of higher average invested cash balances offset by lower interest rates on such invested cash balances.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased by $2.1 million, from $2.6 million to $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year due to interest on the convertible senior notes and amortization of the related debt discount.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. The repurchase of the 2025 Senior Notes and issuance of the 2026 Senior Notes were deemed to have substantially different terms based on the present value of the cash flows. Therefore, the repurchase of the 2025 Senior Notes was accounted for as a debt extinguishment, which includes the write off of related deferred financing costs of $2.6 million.
Other expense, net. The increase in other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to realized and unrealized gains and losses on short-term investments and foreign currency fluctuations.
Provision for income taxes. The provision for income taxes increased $1.7 million for the for year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the to the same period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our taxes reflected an effective income tax rate of negative 0.62% and 0.14%, respectively. The negative effective tax rate of 0.62% for the for year ended December 31, 2021 was principally due to our accrual of taxes on our foreign earnings with no offsetting tax benefit for our domestic losses due to the valuation allowance on domestic deferred tax assets. The effective tax rate for the for year ended December 31, 2021 varied significantly from the effective tax rate from the prior year primarily due to our increase in foreign operations as a result of the acquisitions of MVE Biological Solutions and CRYOPDP during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Dividends on Series C preferred convertible stock. Dividends in the aggregate amount of $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 represent a non-cash deemed dividend in the amount of $39.5 million resulting from a beneficial conversion feature and a paid-in-kind deemed dividend $2.8 million both from the private placement of Series C Preferred Stock with Blackstone as compared to $8.2 million paid-in-kind deemed dividend in 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We provide adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, as a supplemental measure to U.S. GAAP measures regarding our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss adjusted for interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, acquisition and integration costs, inventory step-up charges, loss on extinguishment of debt, investment income, and charges or gains resulting from non-recurring events. Adjusted EBITDA is not calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, is not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies. Non-GAAP financial measures, including adjusted EBIDTA, should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Management believes adjusted EBITDA provides a useful measure of our operating results, a meaningful comparison with historical results and with the results of other companies, and insight into our ongoing operating performance. Further, management and our board of directors utilize adjusted EBITDA to gain a better understanding of our comparative operating performance from period-to-period and as a basis for planning and forecasting future periods. Management believes adjusted EBITDA, when read in conjunction with our U.S. GAAP financials, is useful to investors because it provides a basis for meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our ongoing operating results, including results of operations, against investor and analyst financial models, identifying trends in our underlying business and performing related trend analyses, and it provides a better understanding of how management plans and measures our underlying business.
A reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, is presented below.
Cryoport, Inc. and Subsidiaries
Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation
(Unaudited, in thousands)
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $139.1 million, short-term investments of $489.7 million and working capital of $650.9 million. Historically, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity securities and debt instruments. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our operations, including capital expenditures and absent any acquisitions, for at least the next three years.
Cash flows
Operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we provided $8.1 million of cash for operations which included non-cash expenses of $290.6 million comprised of $251.8 million of loss on extinguishment of debt, $20.2 million of depreciation and amortization, $15.3 million of stock-based compensation, $1.4 million of unrealized losses on our equity securities as well as $1.2 million of amortization of debt discount. Also contributing to the cash impact of our net operating loss, excluding non-cash items, was an increase in accounts receivable of $7.3 million, an increase in inventory of $6.0 million, and an increase in accrued compensation of $2.5 million. These increases were partially offset by the net loss of $275.5 million and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.3 million and a decrease in prepaids and other current assets of $3.1 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $469.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the $482.7 million purchase of short-term investments, the acquisition of CTSA and F-airGate for $5.0 million, $24.8 million for the capitalization of software development costs for our Cryoportal® Logistics Management Platform and additional purchases of Cryoport Express® Shippers, Smart Pak IITM Condition Monitoring Systems, freezers and computer equipment, partially offset by the maturity of short-term investments of $44.0 million.
Financing Activity
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $564.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of net proceeds of $389.9 million from the issuance of 2026 convertible senior notes issued in November 2021, $248.9 million in net proceeds from the November 2021 direct placement of common stock, $269.8 million in net proceeds from our February 2021 public offering of common stock and $9.0 million proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants, partially offset by the $349.8 million repayment of the 2025 convertible senior notes.
Convertible Senior Notes
2026 Senior Notes
In November 2021, the Company issues $402.5 million principal amount of its 0.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026. The 2026 Senior Notes issued include $52.5 million principal amount issued pursuant to the full exercise by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase additional 2026 Senior Notes provided by the purchase agreement between the Company and the initial purchasers of the 2025 Senior Notes. The Company received $390.4 million in net proceeds from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commission of $12.1 million and incurred approximately $0.6 million of third party offering related costs. The 2026 Senior Notes will accrue interest at a rate of 0.75% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on June 1, 2022 and will mature on December 1, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted in accordance with the terms of the 2026 Senior Notes.
2025 Senior Notes
In May 2020, the Company issued $115.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.00% convertible senior notes due in 2025, which includes the initial purchasers' exercise in full of their option to purchase an additional $15.0 million principal amount of the 2025 Senior Notes, in a private placement exempt from registration under the Securities Act. The Company received $111.3 million from the offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions of $3.7 million, and incurred approximately $0.3 million in third-party offering related costs. The 2025 Senior Notes bear cash interest at a rate of 3.00%, payable semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year, beginning on December 1, 2020 and will mature on June 1, 2025, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted in accordance with the terms of the 2025 Senior Notes. On November 9, 2021, the Company entered into separate, privately negotiated note purchase agreements with a limited number of holders of its 2025 Senior Notes pursuant to which the Company repurchased approximately $100.7 million principal amount of 2025 Senior Notes for an aggregate cash repurchase price of approximately $351.1 million, which includes accrued and unpaid interest on the repurchased 2025 Senior Notes.
The Convertible Senior Notes comprise the Company’s senior, unsecured obligations and are (i) equal in right of payment with the Company’s existing and future senior, unsecured indebtedness; (ii) senior in right of payment to the Company’s existing and future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Convertible Senior Notes; (iii) effectively subordinated to the Company’s existing and future secured indebtedness, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and (iv) structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, and (to the extent the Company is not a holder thereof) preferred equity, if any, of the Company’s subsidiaries. See Note 10: “Convertible Senior Notes” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
November 2021 Registered Direct Placement and Stock Purchase Agreements
Concurrent with the issuance of the 2026 Senior Notes in November 2021, the Company conducted a registered direct placement of 3,072,038 shares of its common stock at $81.10/share (“Concurrent Placement”). The Company used the net proceeds from the Concurrent Placement, together with a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Senior Notes, to repurchase approximately $100.7 million principal amount of the 2025 Senior Notes in separate, privately negotiated repurchase transactions with a limited number of holders of the 2025 Senior Notes, for a cash repurchase price of approximately $351.1 million. The remainder of the net proceeds of approximately $288.4 million, after deducting banker fees, will be used for general corporate purposes. See Note 10: “Convertible Senior Notes” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Blackstone Private Placement
In connection with the MVE Acquisition, on October 1, 2020, the Company completed a private placement with an investment vehicle of funds affiliated with The Blackstone Group Inc., consisting of (i) 250,000 shares of a newly designated 4.0% Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Series C Preferred Stock”), at a price of $1,000 per share, for $250.0 million, and (ii) 675,536 shares of common stock of the Company, par value $0.001 per share for $25.0 million, for an aggregate purchase price of $275.0 million. The net proceeds of this transaction were $263.6 million. The Series C Preferred Stock ranks senior to the shares of the Company’s common stock, with respect to dividend rights and rights upon the voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution, or winding up of the affairs of the Company. On February 5, 2021, the Company received a waiver and conversion notice from Blackstone Freeze Parent L.P. and Blackstone Tactical Opportunities Fund - FD L.P. and converted an aggregate of 50,000 shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, resulting in the issuance of an aggregate of 1,312,860 shares of common stock. See Note 15: “Stockholders’ Equity-Blackstone Private Placement” of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information.
June 2019 Public Offering
In June 2019, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of 4,312,500 shares of its common stock. The shares were issued and sold pursuant to an underwriting agreement, dated June 19, 2019, by and among the Company, on the one hand, and Jefferies LLC and SVB Leerink LLC, as representatives of certain underwriters at a public offering price per share of $17.00, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. The shares include 562,500 shares issued and sold pursuant to the Underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $68.8 million from the offering after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company.
The Company's management believes that Cryoport's current cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund its operations, including capital expenditures and absent any acquisitions, for at least the next three years. Management recognizes that the Company may need to obtain additional capital in the future to fund its operations until sustained profitable operations are achieved. Additional funding plans may include obtaining additional capital through equity and/or debt funding sources. No assurance can be given that additional capital, if needed, will be available when required or upon terms acceptable to the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements within the meaning of Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation generally impacts us by increasing our costs of labor, material, transportation and pricing from third party manufacturers. While the rates of inflation have not had a material impact on our financial statements in the past, we have seen some impact on gross margins during the second half of 2021. Based on the current economic outlook, inflationary pressures could affect our financial performance in the future if cost increases cannot be offset by net realized annual price increases and productivity gains.