ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this report. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods.
Overview
We are a late-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing and commercializing first-in-class muscle activators and next-in-class muscle inhibitors as potential treatments for debilitating diseases in which muscle performance is compromised and/or declining. We have discovered and are developing muscle-directed investigational medicines that may potentially improve the health span of people with devastating cardiovascular and neuromuscular diseases of impaired muscle function. Our research and development activities relating to the biology of muscle function have evolved from our knowledge and expertise regarding the cytoskeleton, a complex biological infrastructure that plays a fundamental role within every human cell. As a leader in muscle biology and the mechanics of muscle performance, we are developing small molecule drug candidates specifically engineered to impact muscle function and contractility.
Our clinical-stage drug candidates are: omecamtiv mecarbil, a novel cardiac myosin activator, CK-136, a novel cardiac troponin activator, reldesemtiv, a novel fast skeletal muscle troponin activator, aficamten, a novel cardiac myosin inhibitor, and CK-271, our second novel cardiac myosin inhibitor.
For further information regarding our business, refer to Part I, Item 1 (Business) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We review our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration for those goods or services. To recognize revenue from a contract with a customer, we:
(i)
identify our contracts with our customers;
(ii)
identify our distinct performance obligations in each contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price of each contract;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and
(v)
recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligations.
At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and determine those that are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Collaborative Arrangements
We enter into collaborative arrangements with partners that typically include payment to us for one of more of the following: (i) license fees; (ii) milestone payments related to the achievement of developmental, regulatory, or commercial goals; and (iii) royalties on net sales of licensed products. Each of these payments results in collaboration or other revenues. Where a portion of non-refundable up-front fees or other payments received are allocated to continuing performance obligations under the terms of a collaborative arrangement, they are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue when (or as) the underlying performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop estimates and assumptions that require judgment to determine the underlying stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation which determines how the transaction price is allocated among the performance obligation. The stand-alone selling price may include such items as, forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success, to determine the transaction price to allocate to each performance obligation.
For our collaboration agreements that include more than one performance obligation, such as a license combined with a commitment to perform research and development services, we make judgments to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate our progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of a performance obligation and related revenue recognition.
License Fees: If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front license fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: We use judgement to determine whether a milestone is considered probable of being reached. Using the most likely amount method, we include the value of a milestone payment in the consideration for a contract at inception if we then conclude achieving the milestone is more likely than not. Otherwise, we exclude the value of a milestone payment from contract consideration at inception and recognize revenue for a milestone at a later date, when we judge that it is more likely than not that the milestone will be achieved. If we conclude it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone is included in the transaction price. We then allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license, collaboration and other revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Royalties: For contracts that include sales-based royalties, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenues resulting from contracts.
Research and Development Cost Reimbursements: Our now terminated collaboration agreements with Amgen and Astellas, namely the Amgen Agreement and the Astellas OSSA Agreement, included promises of research and development services. We have determined that these services collectively are distinct from the licenses provided to Astellas and Amgen under such agreements, and as such, these promises are accounted for as a separate performance obligation to be recognized over time. We recognize revenue for these services as the performance obligations are satisfied, which we estimate using internal development costs incurred.
Accrued Research and Development Expenditures
A substantial portion of our preclinical studies and all of our clinical trials have been performed by third-party CROs and other vendors and our accruals for expenses for preclinical studies and clinical trials may be significant. For preclinical studies, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the percentage of work completed to date and contract milestones achieved. For clinical trial expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, duration of enrollment, milestones achieved and percentage of work completed to date. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent practicable through internal reviews, correspondence and status meetings with CROs, and review of contractual terms. We depend on the timeliness and accuracy of data provided by our CROs and other vendors to accrue expenses. If we receive and rely on incomplete or inaccurate data, accruals and expenses may be too high or too low at a given point in time and corresponding adjustments to accruals and expenses would be made in future periods when the actual expense becomes known.
Revenue Participation Right Purchase Agreements
We have entered into certain revenue participation right purchase agreements with certain investors, pursuant to which such investors purchased rights to royalties from certain revenue streams in exchange for consideration. We typically account for such agreements as debt to be amortized under the effective interest rate method over the life of the related royalty stream, when we have continuing involvement with the underlying R&D. We typically account for such agreements as deferred income to be amortized under the units-of-revenue method, when there is no continuing involvement with the underlying R&D.
Revenue participation right purchase agreements are recognized using significant unobservable inputs. These inputs are derived using internal management estimates developed based on third party data and reflect management’s judgements, current market conditions surrounding competing products, and forecasts. We will periodically assess the amount and timing of expected royalty payments and account for any changes in such estimates on a prospective basis.
Results of Operations
A discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2020 Annual Report.
Revenues
Our revenues since inception were primarily from our strategic alliances. Under our now terminated collaboration agreements with Amgen and Astellas, namely the Amgen Agreement and the Astellas OSSA Agreement, we received payments including upfront license fees, reimbursements of internal costs of certain FTEs and costs to support research and development programs, and milestone payments. We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales to date.
2021 license revenues were the result of a series of transactions we entered into with RTW Royalty Holdings and Ji Xing (together, the “2021 RTW Transactions”). 2020 license revenues were the result of a series of transactions we entered into with RTW Royalty Holdings and Ji Xing (together, the “2020 RTW Transactions”).
We may also be entitled to additional milestone payments and other contingent payments upon the occurrence of specific events. We expect that our revenue will continue to fluctuate in future periods.
Revenues in 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
Research and development revenues in 2021 and 2020 were primarily from Astellas and Amgen under the Astellas OSSA Agreement, the Astellas FSRA Agreement and the Amgen Agreement.
Research and development revenues from Astellas were $3.2 million and $6.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, for reimbursements under the Astellas FSRA Agreement and the Astellas OSSA Agreement in 2021 and the Astellas OSSA Agreement in 2020.
Research and development revenues from Amgen were $7.3 million and $10.0 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, for reimbursements.
License revenues for 2021 were the result of the Ji Xing OM License Agreement, pursuant to which we granted to Ji Xing an exclusive license to develop and commercialize omecamtiv mecarbil in China and Taiwan. License revenue was $54.9 million and consisted of the residual allocation of consideration from the 2021 RTW Transactions.
License revenues for 2020 were the result of the Ji Xing Aficamten License Agreement, pursuant to which we granted to Ji Xing an exclusive license to develop and commercialize aficamten in China and Taiwan. License revenue was $36.5 million and consisted of the residual allocation of consideration from the 2020 RTW Transactions. In 2021, we recognized a $5.0 million in milestone revenues from Ji Xing under the Ji Xing Aficamten License Agreement for having achieved initiation of a phase 3 clinical trial for aficamten in obstructive HCM. Although our contractual right to payment has not yet arisen under the Ji Xing Aficamten Agreement, we determined recognition of the milestone in accordance with ASC 606 in 2021 was appropriate based on our expected initiation of a phase 3 clinical trial of aficamten in oHCM. Milestone revenues from 2020 were $2.8 million and consisted primarily of the milestone earned from Ji Xing for the first patient dosed in Cohort 2 of REDWOOD-HCM.
We do not expect future revenues from Amgen or Astellas under the Amgen Agreement and the Astellas OSSA Agreement due to the termination thereof in 2021. Co-funding under the Astellas FSRA Agreement for the conduct of COURAGE-ALS will continue until the $12.0 million cap is reached.
Research and development expenses
We incur research and development expenses associated with both partnered and our own research activities.
Research and development expenses related to any development we elect to fund consist primarily of employee compensation, supplies and materials, costs for consultants and contract research and manufacturing, facilities costs and depreciation of equipment.
Research and development expenses by program for 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased to $159.9 million in 2021 from $97.0 million in 2020 primarily due to higher expenses for our clinical development activities for our cardiac muscle inhibitor programs, for COURAGE-ALS, for facilities expense due to the Oyster Point Lease recorded in 2021, and for regulatory filing costs. In addition, we incurred transition costs related to the termination of our collaboration with Amgen and our purchase from Amgen of approximately $14.6 million of materials including manufactured quantities of the active pharmaceutical ingredient for omecamtiv mecarbil.
We continue to develop reldesemtiv to treat ALS and we recently announced that COURAGE-ALS, the Phase 3 clinical trial of reldesemtiv in patients with ALS, is open to enrollment. We may also continue to develop reldesemtiv to treat SMA. Under the Astellas FSRA Agreement, Astellas has agreed to pay one-third of the out-of-pocket clinical development costs which may be incurred in connection with Cytokinetics’ Phase 3 clinical trial, COURAGE-ALS, of reldesemtiv in ALS up to a maximum contribution by Astellas of $12.0 million.
Under our strategic alliance with Amgen, Amgen was responsible for the development of omecamtiv mecarbil until the effective termination of the Amgen Agreement, which occurred on May 20, 2021. Following the effective termination of the Amgen Agreement, we have continued the Phase 3 development of omecamtiv mecarbil for the potential treatment of heart failure, at our own cost. We expect to continue the development of aficamten to assess the potential of aficamten to improve exercise capacity and relieve symptoms in patients with hyperdynamic ventricular contraction due to HCM. Under our strategic alliances with Ji Xing, Ji Xing is responsible for the development of aficamten and omecamtiv mecarbil in China and Taiwan, and we may be entitled to receive milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones.
Clinical development timelines, the likelihood of success and total completion costs vary significantly for each drug candidate and are difficult to estimate. We anticipate that we will determine on an ongoing basis which research and development programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program, taking into account the potential scientific and clinical success of each drug candidate. The lengthy process of seeking regulatory approvals and subsequent compliance with applicable regulations requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure by us to obtain and maintain, or any delay in obtaining, regulatory approvals could cause our research and development expenditures to increase and, in turn, could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation for employees in executive and administrative functions, including, but not limited to, finance, human resources, legal, business and commercial development and strategic planning. Other significant costs include facilities costs, consulting costs and professional fees for accounting and legal services, including legal services associated with obtaining and maintaining patents and regulatory compliance.
General and administrative expenses by program for 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses increased to $96.8 million in 2021 from $52.8 million in 2020, primarily due to higher outside service spend in anticipation of the potential commercial launch of omecamtiv mecarbil, an increase in personnel related costs including stock-based compensation and facilities expense due to the Oyster Point Lease recorded in 2021.
We expect that general and administrative expenses will fluctuate in the future, depending in part on the timing of and investments in commercial readiness.
Interest expense
Interest expense for 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
Interest expense in 2021 and 2020 consists of interest expense related to the Term Loan Agreement and respective warrants by and among the Company, Oxford and Silicon Valley Bank and interest expense related to the 2026 Notes. Approximately half of the 2026 Notes’ interest expense is due to the amortization of the discount associated with the equity component of the 2026 Notes.
Non-cash interest expense on liability related to sale of future royalties
Non-cash interest expense comprised of the RPI OM Liability under the RP OM RPA related to sale of future royalties in 2021, 2020 and 2019 results from accretion of the liability related to sale of future royalties. In 2021, we updated our analyses to reflect our current assumptions resulting from ongoing market research in the U.S. and to reflect other adjustments in connection with our anticipated commercialization. Our estimates regarding the amount of future royalty payments decreased and the time periods within which we anticipated that such payments will be due changed. Each of these adjustments is accounted for on a prospective basis in our liability calculation and resulted in a decline in our imputed interest rate and noncash interest expenses from 15% and $22.7 million in 2020 to 10% and $12.9 million in 2021, respectively. In 2021, the change in estimate had no impact on revenue and reduced the net loss by $11.5 million. The change in accounting estimate reduced the net loss per share by $0.15 in 2021. We review our assumptions on a quarterly basis and our estimates may change in the future as we refine and reassess our assumptions.
Non-cash interest expense on liability related to the RP OM RPA for 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest and other income, net for 2021, 2020 and 2019 consisted primarily of interest income generated from our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash, cash equivalents and investments and a summary of our borrowings and working capital is summarized as follows:
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods set forth below:
Sources and Uses of Cash
We have funded our operations and capital expenditures with proceeds primarily from private and public sales of our equity securities, a royalty monetization agreement, strategic alliances, long-term debt, other financings and interest on investments. We have generated significant operating losses since our inception. Our expenditures are primarily related to research and development activities.
Net cash used in operating activities of $142.5 million for 2021 which include a net loss of $215.3 million was largely due to ongoing research and development activities, general and administrative expenses to support those activities, and operating lease liability related to the existing and new leases. Net loss for 2021 included, among other items: non-cash stock-based compensation, non-cash interest expense related to sale of future royalties and non-cash interest expense related to debt.
Net cash used in investing activities of $147.8 million in 2021 was primarily due to purchases of investments and property and equipment offset by proceeds from maturity of investments.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $320.0 million in 2021 was primarily due to $296.9 million of proceeds related to issuance of common stock in an underwritten public offering and stock-based activities.
2021 Ji Xing and RTW Transactions
On December 20, 2021, we entered into the Ji Xing OM License Agreement, pursuant to which we granted to Ji Xing an exclusive license to develop and commercialize omecamtiv mecarbil in China and Taiwan. Under the terms of the Ji Xing OM License Agreement, we are the beneficiary of a nonrefundable $50.0 million payment obligation from Ji Xing comprised of a $40.0 million payment as consideration for the rights granted by us to Ji Xing and $10.0 million attributable to our having submitted to FDA an NDA for omecamtiv mecarbil. We may be eligible to receive from Ji Xing additional payments totaling up to $330.0 million for the achievement of certain commercial milestone events in connection to omecamtiv mecarbil. In addition, Ji Xing will pay us tiered royalties in the mid-teens to the low twenties range on the net sales of pharmaceutical products containing omecamtiv mecarbil in China and Taiwan, subject to certain reductions for generic competition, patent expiration and payments for licenses to third party patents. The Ji Xing OM License Agreement, unless terminated earlier, will continue on a market-by-market basis until expiration of the relevant royalty term.
In addition to the Ji Xing OM License Agreement, we entered into common stock purchase agreements with each of the RTW Investors, pursuant to which we sold and issued an aggregate of 0.5 million shares of our common stock at a price per share of $39.125 and an aggregate purchase price of $20.0 million.
2020 Ji Xing and RTW Transactions
On July 14, 2020, we entered into a series of agreements comprised of the Ji Xing Aficamten License Agreement, three common stock purchase agreements for the sale of Cytokinetics common stock to the RTW Investors (as defined below), an agreement to sell to RTW Royalty Holdings Designated Activity Company (“RTW Royalty Holdings”) our interest in certain future royalties on net sales of products containing the compound mavacamten that is being developed by Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (formerly by MyoKardia, Inc.) and a funding agreement pursuant to which we had the option to sell to RTW Royalty Holdings a revenue interest in certain of our future sales of aficamten, upon the achievement of certain clinical trial milestones, in exchange for future royalty payments as further discussed below. As a result, we have or expect to receive a combination of committed funding and sale proceeds from the RTW Investors, RTW Royalty Holdings and Ji Xing.
Under the Ji Xing Aficamten License Agreement, we granted to Ji Xing an exclusive license to develop and commercialize aficamten in China and Taiwan. Under the terms of the Ji Xing Aficamten License Agreement, we received from Ji Xing an upfront payment of $25.0 million. We may be eligible to receive from Ji Xing milestone payments totaling up to $200.0 million for the achievement of certain development and commercial milestone events in connection to aficamten in the field of oHCM and/or nHCM and other indications. In addition, Ji Xing will pay us tiered royalties in the low-to-high teens range on the net sales of pharmaceutical products containing aficamten in China and Taiwan, subject to certain reductions for generic competition, patent expiration and payments for licenses to third party patents. The Ji Xing Aficamten License Agreement, unless terminated earlier, will continue on a market-by-market basis until expiration of the relevant royalty term.
Under that certain Royalty Purchase Agreement, dated July 14, 2020, we sold to RTW Royalty Holdings our rights to receive certain payments on the net sales of products containing the compound mavacamten, a cardiac myosin inhibitor under the Research Collaboration Agreement, dated August 24, 2012, between us and MyoKardia, Inc. for an one-time payment of $85 million.
We also entered into common stock purchase agreements with each of RTW Master Fund, Ltd., RTW Innovation Master Fund, Ltd. and RTW Venture Fund Limited (collectively, the “RTW Investors”), we sold and issued an aggregate of 2.0 million shares of our common stock at a price per share of $25.00 and an aggregate purchase price of $50.0 million.
Finally, we also entered into a Funding Agreement (the “Funding Agreement”) with RTW Royalty Holdings. Pursuant to the Funding Agreement, RTW Royalty Holdings has committed to provide up to $90.0 million (the “Funding Commitment”), to fund our development and commercialization of aficamten in nHCM and oHCM in exchange for the Funding Commitment and upon receipt of such funding from RTW Royalty Holdings, we would have been liable to make payments to RTW Royalty Holdings equal to 2%, if RTW Royalty Holdings funds $45.0 million of the Funding Commitment, or 4%, if RTW Royalty Holdings funds the full $90.0 million of the Funding Commitment, in each case in respect of net sales of CK-274 by us and any of our licensees in the United States, the European Union, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and certain other countries in Europe. However, on January 7, 2022, we announced that we had elected to unilaterally terminate the Funding Agreement in connection with our entry into the RP Aficamten RPA. At the time of its termination, we had not exercised any rights to sell any revenue interest in aficamten under the Funding Agreement.
Future Sources and Uses of Cash
2022 Royalty Pharma Transactions
On January 7, 2022, we announced that we had entered into the RP Loan Agreement and the RP Aficamten RPA with RPDF and RPI ICAV respectively, each of which are affiliated with Royalty Pharma International plc.
Under the RP Loan Agreement, we are entitled to receive up to $300.0 million in term loans, $50.0 million of which was disbursed to us on closing and the remaining $250.0 available to us upon our satisfaction of customary disbursement conditions and certain development conditions by specific deadlines, as follows:
•
$50.0 million of tranche 2 term loans during the one year period following the receipt on or prior to December 31, 2022 of marketing approval from FDA of omecamtiv mecarbil;
•
$25.0 million of tranche 3 term loans during the one year period following the commercial availability of a diagnostic test measuring levels of omecamtiv mecarbil to support the final FDA label language applicable to such drug, subject to such commercial availability and the conditions to the tranche 2 term loans having occurred on or prior to December 31, 2022;
•
$75.0 million of tranche 4 term loans during the one year period following the receipt on or prior to September 30, 2024 of positive results from SEQUOIA-HCM, the Phase 3 trial for aficamten; and
•
$100.0 million of tranche 5 term loans during the one year period following the acceptance by the FDA on or prior to March 31, 2025 of an NDA for aficamten, subject to the conditions to the tranche 4 term loans having occurred on or prior to September 30, 2024.
Each term loan under the RP Loan Agreement matures on the 10 year anniversary of the funding date for such term loan and is repayable in quarterly installments of principal, interest and fees commencing on the last business day of the seventh full calendar quarter following the calendar quarter of the applicable funding date for such Term Loan, with the aggregate amount payable in respect of each term loan (including interest and other applicable fees) equal to 190% of the principal amount of the term loan (such amount with respect to each Term Loan, “Final Payment Amount”).
We may prepay the term loans in full (but not in part) at any time at our option by paying an amount equal to the unpaid portion of Final Payment Amount for the outstanding Term Loans; provided that if the conditions for either the tranche 4 term loans or the tranche 5 term loans have been met, we must have borrowed at least $25 million principal amount of the tranche 4 or 5 term loans. In addition, the term loans under the RP Loan Agreement are repayable in full at the option of either us or the lender in an amount equal to the unpaid portion of Final Payment Amount for the outstanding term loans upon a change of control of Cytokinetics.
In addition, on January 7, 2022, we entered into the RP Aficamten RPA with RPI ICAV, pursuant to which RPI ICAV purchased rights to certain revenue streams from net sales of pharmaceutical products containing aficamten by us, our affiliates and our licensees in exchange for up to $150.0 million in consideration, $50.0 million of which was paid on the closing date, $50.0 million of which is payable following the initiation of the first pivotal trial in oHCM for aficamten and $50.0 million of which is payable following the initiation of the first pivotal clinical trial in nHCM for aficamten. The RP Aficamten ARPA also provides that the parties will negotiate terms for additional funding if we achieve proof of concept results in certain other indications for aficamten, with a reduction in the applicable royalty if we and RPI ICAV fail to agree on such terms in certain circumstances.
Pursuant to the RP Aficamten RPA, RPI ICAV purchased the right to receive a percentage of net sales equal to 4.5% for annual worldwide net sales of pharmaceutical products containing aficamten up to $1 billion and 3.5% for annual worldwide net sales of pharmaceutical products containing aficamten in excess of $1 billion, subject to reduction in certain circumstances.
In future periods, we expect to incur substantial costs as we continue to expand our research programs and related research and development activities. We expect to incur significant research and development expenses as we advance the research and development of compounds from our other muscle biology programs through research to candidate selection to clinical development. We may also incur significant sales and marketing expenses if and when one or more of our drug candidates receive regulatory approvals, and in anticipation of regulatory approval of one of our drug candidates.
Our future capital uses and requirements depend on numerous factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following:
•
the initiation, progress, timing, scope and completion of preclinical research, non-clinical development, chemistry, manufacturing, and controls (“CMC”), and clinical trials for our drug candidates and other compounds;
•
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals;
•
the jurisdictions in which we are granted regulatory approvals and thus are able to successfully launch our products for commercial sale;
•
delays that may be caused by requirements of regulatory agencies;
•
our level of funding for the development of current or future drug candidates;
•
the number of drug candidates we pursue and the stage of development that they are in;
•
the costs involved in filing and prosecuting patent applications and enforcing or defending patent claims;
•
our ability to establish and maintain selected strategic alliances required for the development of drug candidates and commercialization of our potential drugs;
•
our plans or ability to expand our drug development capabilities, including our capabilities to conduct clinical trials for our drug candidates;
•
our plans or ability to engage third-party manufacturers for our drug candidates and potential drugs;
•
our plans or ability to build or access sales and marketing capabilities and to achieve market acceptance for potential drugs;
•
the expansion and advancement of our research programs;
•
the hiring of additional employees and consultants;
•
the acquisition of technologies, products and other business opportunities that require financial commitments; and
•
our revenues, if any, from successful development of our drug candidates and commercialization of potential drugs
•
As we advance commercialization plans for omecamtiv mecarbil, which we believe will importantly lay a strong foundation for commercialization of aficamten and the expansion of our cardiovascular franchise, we anticipate that our spending would increase, but we are also studying comparable company best practices and building a fit-for-purpose commercial organization.
As a result of Amgen’s and Servier’s elections to terminate the Amgen Agreement and the Servier Agreement respectively, we will dedicate resources to ensure the transition of the programs related to omecamtiv mecarbil and CK-136 to us. Finally, notwithstanding the expansion of our collaboration with Ji Xing to include omecamtiv mecarbil in December 2021 and our recent financing transactions with entities affiliated with Royalty Pharma International plc in January 2022, we plan to continue to evaluate a wide range of corporate development strategies for potential co-development, co-commercialization and licensing deals in relation to omecamtiv mecarbil and our other drug candidates in order to mitigate the cost effects of the termination of the Amgen Agreement and Servier Agreement and enhance our commercial capabilities. These cost effects of termination include forfeiture of potential milestone payments from Amgen to us, as well as additional costs to us relating to clinical studies, regulatory filing, and commercialization of omecamtiv mecarbil.
We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $1,207.6 million since inception and there can be no assurance that we will attain profitability. We are subject to risks common to clinical-stage companies including, but not limited to, development of new drug candidates, dependence on key personnel, and the ability to obtain additional capital as needed to fund our future plans. Our liquidity will be impaired if sufficient additional capital is not available on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Until we achieve profitable operations, we intend to continue to fund operations through payments from strategic collaborations, additional sales of equity securities, grants and other financings. We have never generated revenues from commercial sales of our drugs and may not have drugs to market for at least several years, if ever. Our success is dependent on our ability to obtain additional capital by entering into new strategic collaborations and/or through financings, and ultimately on our and our collaborators’ ability to successfully develop and market one or more of our drug candidates. We cannot be certain that sufficient funds will be available from such collaborators or financings when needed or on satisfactory terms. Additionally, there can be no assurance that any of our drug candidates will be accepted in the marketplace or that any future products can be developed or manufactured at an acceptable cost. These factors could have a material adverse effect on our future financial results, financial position and cash flows.
Based on the current status of our development plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, investments and interest earned on investments will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months. If, at any time, our prospects for internally financing our research and development programs decline, we may decide to reduce research and development expenses by delaying, discontinuing or reducing our funding of development of one or more of our drug candidates or of other research and development programs. Alternatively, we might raise funds through strategic relationships, public or private financings or other arrangements. There can be no assurance that funding, if needed, will be available on attractive terms, or at all, or in accordance with our planned timelines. Furthermore, financing obtained through future strategic relationships may require us to forego certain commercialization and other rights to our drug candidates. Similarly, any additional equity financing may be dilutive to stockholders and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy.
Segment Information
We have one primary business activity and operate in one reportable segment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not party to any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information required by this item is included in Item 8, Note 1, Organization and Accounting Policies, in our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.