Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and footnotes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those anticipated and discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors discussed in “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors” contained in this Annual Report and in our other reports that we file from time to time with the SEC.
Overview of Cyxtera’s Business
Cyxtera is a global data center leader in retail colocation and interconnection services. We provide an innovative suite of deeply connected and intelligently automated infrastructure and interconnection solutions to more than 2,300 leading enterprises, service providers and government agencies around the world enabling them to scale faster, meet rising consumer expectations and gain a competitive edge.
Factors Affecting Cyxtera’s Business
The Business Combination with Legacy Cyxtera and SVAC
On July 29, 2021, we consummated the Business Combination, with Legacy Cyxtera deemed the accounting acquirer. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with US GAAP.
Holders of 26,176,891 shares of SVAC’s Class A common stock issued in its IPO ( the “Public Shares”) properly exercised their right to have such shares redeemed for a full pro rata portion of the trust account holding the proceeds from SVAC’s IPO, calculated as of two business days prior to the consummation of the Business Combination, which was approximately $10.00 per share or $261.8 million in the aggregate.
As a result of the Business Combination, 106,100,000 shares of Class A common stock were issued to SIS and 25,000,000 shares of Class A common stock were issued to certain qualified institutional buyers and accredited investors, at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate consideration of $250.0 million , for the purpose of raising additional capital for use by the combined company following the closing of the Business Combination and satisfying one of the conditions to the closing (the “PIPE Investment”). Additionally, as a result of the Business Combination, 10,526,315 shares of Class A common stock were issued to certain clients of Starboard Value LP (the “Forward Purchasers”) at a price of $9.50 per share, for aggregate consideration of $100 million and 10,105,863 shares of SVAC Class B common stock held by the Sponsor, automatically converted to 10,105,863 shares of Class A common stock.
After giving effect to the Transactions, the redemption of Public Shares as described above, the issuance of the forward purchase shares and the consummation of the PIPE Investment, there were 165,978,740 shares of our Class A common stock issued and outstanding as of immediately following the completion of the Business Combination. Our Class A common stock and Public Warrants commenced trading on the Nasdaq under the symbols “CYXT” and “CYXTW,” respectively, on July 30, 2021, subject to ongoing review of our satisfaction of all listing criteria following the Business Combination. As noted above, an aggregate of $261.8 million was paid from SVAC’s trust account to holders that properly exercised their right to have Public Shares redeemed, and the remaining balance of $142 million immediately prior to the closing remained in the trust account. After taking into account the funds in the trust account after redemptions, the $250 million in gross proceeds from the PIPE Investment and the $100 million gross proceeds from the sale of the forward purchase shares, we received approximately $493 million in total cash from the Business Combination, before fees, expenses and debt repayment.
Public Company Costs
Following the consummation of the Business Combination, we became an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company, which requires us to hire additional staff and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur substantial additional annual expenses for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external costs for investor relations, accounting, audit, legal and other functions.
2021 Restructuring and Site Closures
Addison site
In January 2021, we notified the landlord of our office space in Addison, Texas, of our intent to sublease the property for the remaining lease term of ten years. We ceased use and subleased the space during the three months ended March 31, 2021. In connection with this decision, we incurred $7.9 million of expenses, including $5.9 million of accrued lease termination costs and $2.0 million of asset disposals.
Moses Lake site
In February 2021, we notified the landlord of our Moses Lake, Washington data center facility of our intent to cease our use of the space. Accordingly, we accelerated depreciation and amortization of all assets at the site, including favorable leasehold interest amortization, which resulted in $1.8 million in additional depreciation and amortization during the year ended December 31, 2021, and $0.6 million in additional favorable leasehold interest amortization, recorded in cost of revenue, during the year ended December 31, 2021. We ceased use of the property in June 2021 at which time we met the conditions for recording a charge related to the remaining lease obligation of $58.5 million. There is no sublease in place on this property. Furthermore, management believes the ability to sublease the property is remote and as such has not made any assumption for future cash flows from a potential sublease in making this estimate.
Impact of COVID-19
Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, there has been a trend in many parts of the world of increasing availability and administration of vaccines against COVID-19, as well as an easing of restrictions on social, business, travel and government activities and functions. On the other hand, infection rates and regulations continue to fluctuate in various regions and there are ongoing global impacts resulting from the pandemic, including challenges and increases in costs for logistics and supply chains, such as increased port congestion, intermittent supplier delays and a shortfall of semiconductor supply. Ultimately, we cannot predict the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. We will continue to monitor macroeconomic conditions to remain flexible and to optimize and evolve our business as appropriate.
Key Operational and Business Metrics
In addition to the Company’s results determined in accordance with US GAAP, our management uses the following key operational and business metrics to manage its data center business and to assess the results of operations:
•recurring and non-recurring revenues;
•bookings; and
•churn.
These metrics are important indicators of the overall direction of our business, including trends in sales and the effectiveness of operations and growth initiatives. The following table presents our recurring and nonrecurring revenues from the Company’s consolidated financial statements and certain operating metrics for each of the periods
indicated, which have been derived from the Company’s internal records. These metrics may differ from those used by other companies in our industry who may define these metrics differently.
We define these metrics as follows:
Revenues: We disaggregate revenue from contracts with customers into recurring revenues and non-recurring revenues. We derive the majority of our revenues from recurring revenue streams, consisting primarily of colocation service fees, which include fees for the licensing of space and power, and interconnection service fees. We consider our colocation service offerings recurring because customers are generally committed to such services under long term contracts, typically three years in length. Our interconnection services are typically on month-to-month contracts but are considered recurring because customers’ use of interconnection services generally remains stable over time. This is because interconnection services facilitate a customer’s full use of the colocation environment or support the business function housed within the customer’s colocation environment by establishing connections between colocation customers within our data center facilities and their preferred network service providers, low latency public cloud on-ramps and a wide range of technology and network service providers and business partners. Our colocation and interconnection service offerings are generally billed monthly and recognized ratably over the term of the contract. Our management reviews recurring revenue by reference to the metric of “MRR”, which is calculated as of the last day of a given month and represents the sum of all service charges for recurring services provided during such month. Our MRR was $53.5 million, and $52.9 million as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Our non-recurring revenues are primarily comprised of installation services related to a customer’s initial deployment and professional services we perform. These services are considered to be non-recurring because they are billed typically once, upon completion of the installation or the professional services work performed. The majority of these non-recurring revenues are typically billed on the first invoice distributed to the customer in connection with their initial installation. However, revenues from installation services are deferred and recognized ratably over the period of the contract term in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 as discussed in Note 6 of our consolidated financial statements.
Bookings: We define Bookings for a given period as the new monthly recurring service fees for colocation and interconnection services committed under service contracts during the relevant period. Bookings are measured for the respective reporting period and represent the monthly service fees - based on the service fees for one month of services - attributable to new service contracts entered into and additional services committed under existing service contracts during the relevant period. Bookings is a key performance measure that management uses to assess the productivity of our sales force and anticipate data center inventory requirements. In addition, our management considers Bookings together with Churn (described below) to anticipate future changes to MRR.
Bookings was calculated for each period presented (i.e., the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020) and represents the new monthly recurring service fees - based on the service fees for one month of services - attributable to new service contracts and additional services committed under existing service contracts during the period presented.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the total amount of new monthly recurring service fees for colocation and interconnection services committed under service contracts (i.e., Bookings) during such periods totaled $8.7 million, and $6.9 million, respectively.
Churn: We define Churn for a given period as the decrease in MRR during the relevant period attributable to service terminations and reductions. Churn is calculated for the respective reporting period, and represents the sum of the total amount of MRR for which a service contract was terminated or reduced during the relevant period, based on the last month’s service charges. Churn is a key performance measure that management uses to assess our customer satisfaction and performance against competition. In addition, our management considers Churn together with Bookings to anticipate future changes to MRR.
As presented in the table above, Churn was calculated for each period presented (i.e., the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020) and represents the sum of the total amount of MRR for which a service contract was terminated or reduced during the period presented.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the total amount of MRR for which a service contract was terminated or reduced (i.e., Churn) during such periods totaled $5.4 million and $6.9 million, respectively.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Revenues:
We derive the majority of our revenues from recurring revenue streams, consisting primarily of colocation service fees, which include fees for the licensing of space and power, as well as interconnection service fees. We consider our colocation service offerings recurring because our customers are generally committed to such services under long-term contracts, typically three years in length. Our interconnection services are typically on month-to-month contracts but are considered recurring because customers’ use of interconnection services generally remains stable over time. This is because interconnection services facilitate the customer’s full use of the colocation environment or support the business function housed within the customer’s colocation environment by establishing connections between colocation customers within our data center facilities and their preferred network service providers, low latency public cloud on-ramps and a wide range of technology and network service providers and business partners. Our colocation and interconnection service offerings are generally billed monthly and recognized ratably over the term of the contract. Our recurring revenues have comprised more than 95% of total revenues for each of the past three years. In addition, during 2021 and 2020, 84% and 77%, respectively, of our Bookings came from existing customers. For purposes of calculating Bookings attributable to existing customers, an existing customer is a customer with an active service contract that executes an order for additional services. Our largest customer accounted for approximately 15% of recurring revenues on average for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. Our 50 largest customers accounted for approximately 55% and 57%, respectively, of recurring revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Our interconnection revenues represented approximately 11% total revenues for both the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Our non-recurring revenues are primarily composed of installation services related to a customer’s initial deployment and professional services we perform, and sale of equipment. Non-recurring installation fees, although generally invoiced in a lump sum upon installation, are deferred and recognized ratably over the contract term. Professional service fees and equipment sales are also generally invoiced in a lump sum upon service delivery and are recognized in the period when the services are provided or the equipment is delivered. As a percentage of total revenues, we expect non-recurring revenues to represent less than 5% of total revenues for the foreseeable future.
Operating Costs and Expenses:
Cost of Revenues, excluding Depreciation and Amortization. The largest components of our cost of revenues are rental payments related to our leased data centers; utility costs, including electricity and bandwidth access; data center employees’ salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation, repairs and maintenance; supplies and equipment; and security. A majority of our cost of revenues is fixed in nature and are not expected to vary significantly from period to period unless we expand our existing data centers or open or acquire new data centers. However, there are certain costs that are considered more variable in nature, including utilities and supplies that are directly related to growth in our existing and new customer base. We expect the cost of utilities, specifically
electricity, will generally increase in the future on a cost-per-unit or fixed basis and for growth in consumption by our customers. In addition, the cost of electricity is generally higher in the summer months, as compared to other times of the year. Our costs of electricity may also increase as a result of the physical effects of climate change, increased regulations driving alternative electricity generation due to environmental considerations or as a result of our election to use renewable energy sources. To the extent we incur increased utility costs, such increased costs could materially impact our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation for our sales and marketing, executive, finance, human resources, legal and IT functions and administrative personnel, third-party professional services fees, insurance premiums and administrative-related rent expense.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily composed of depreciation and amortization on our property, plant and equipment and amortization related to intangible assets.
Restructuring, Impairment, Site Closures and Related Cost. Should we commit to a plan to dispose a long-lived asset before the end of its previously estimated useful life or change its use of assets, estimated cash flows are revised accordingly. Restructuring, impairment, site closures and related costs are primarily composed of costs incurred to dispose of a long-lived asset and include an impairment charge of the leased asset, related liabilities that may arise as a result of the underlying action (such as severance), contractual obligations and other accruals associated with the site closures.
Transaction-related costs. Transaction-related costs consisted of a one-time transaction bonus paid to current and former employees and directors of Legacy Cyxtera following the consummation of the Business Combination (the “Transaction Bonus”). The Transaction Bonus was funded in full by a capital contribution from SIS, the sole stockholder of Cyxtera prior to the consummation of the Business Combination.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net is primarily composed of interest incurred under our credit facilities and on capital leases.
Other Expenses, Net. Other expenses, net primarily includes the impact of foreign currency gains and losses.
Change in Fair Value of the Warrant Liabilities. Warrants that were assumed in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination were initially measured at fair value at the Business Combination date and are subsequently remeasured at estimated fair value on a recurring basis at the end of each reporting period, with changes in estimated fair value of the respective warrant liability recognized as change of fair value of warrant liabilities in the consolidated statement of operations. In December 2021, the Company announced that it would redeem all public (“Public Warrants”) and private placement warrants (“Private Placement Warrants”) that remained outstanding at 5:00 p.m., New York time, on January 19, 2022 (the “Redemption Time”). Subsequent to December 31, 2021, the remaining Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants were either exercised by the holders, or if not redeemed by the Company, were redeemed at the Redemption Time (see Note 13, Warrant Liabilities and Note 22, Subsequent Events).
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparisons of our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future. The results of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, have been derived from our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated, and the changes between periods:
Revenues
Revenues increased by $13.2 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year. The increase in revenue is attributable to an increase in recurring revenues as a result of increased bookings and lower churn.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue, excluding Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of revenues, excluding depreciation and amortization were flat at $390.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company lowered headcount and external contractors across its data centers resulting in a reduction of $7.4 million in payroll and services expenses. As part of the reduction, the Company incurred severance expenses of $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, benefit expenses were lower by $1.2 million due to lower claims period-over-period. Our exit from Moses Lake, completed in the second quarter of 2021, resulted in a reduction in rent expense of $4.4 million compared to the prior year. Customer installation costs have decreased by $8.7 million driven by cost management efforts on implementations. Security costs have decreased by $0.7 million driven by the implementation of an automated security system, leading to a reduction in the use of outside security contractors. In addition, the Company recovered $4.3 million in relation to a settlement with a vendor. These savings have been offset by an increase in utilities expense of $23.2 million and increases to data center maintenance of $1.4 million period-over-period. The increase in utility expense during 2021 is mostly driven by $3.4 million in additional electric power expenses resulting from Winter Storm Uri, which affected the grid in several markets driving a significant increase in pricing for the affected time periods, approximately $13.5 million related to rate increases, and approximately $1.9 million growth in our existing and new customer base and the remaining change related to increases in consumption.
Sales, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $2.7 million, or 2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. This decrease in selling, general and
administrative expenses was primarily attributable to the reversal of a $2.0 million litigation contingency as a result of a favorable settlement and a decrease in legal fees of $2.1 million. Professional fees decreased by $3.3 million year over year, primarily as a result of a decrease in pre-transaction exploratory costs incurred in late 2020 as compared to 2021. Subscription expense decreased by $1.0 million driven by better rates obtained on subscription licenses. The costs were offset by an increase to payroll related expenses of $6.7 million due to an increase in employee headcount and increases in stock compensation driven by equity awards granted following the completion of the Business Combination.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $8.8 million, or 4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year. The increase to depreciation was primarily attributable to leasehold improvement additions and $1.8 million of accelerated depreciation and amortization on Moses Lake assets in connection with the decision to cease use of the data center site as further described in Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements. Amortization increased due to capital lease asset additions for capital leases entered in December 2020 and throughout 2021.
Restructuring, impairment, site closures and related costs
Restructuring, impairment, site closures and related costs were $69.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 (no such costs were incurred in the same period of the prior year). These charges are related to the Moses Lake data center facility and Addison office space closures.
Transaction-related costs
The Company paid a one-time $5.2 million Transaction Bonus related to the completion of the Business Combination for the year ended December 31, 2021 (no such costs incurred in the same period of the prior year).
Recovery of Notes Receivable from Affiliate
On March 31, 2019, Appgate, Inc., formerly known as Cyxtera Cybersecurity, Inc. (“Appgate”), issued promissory notes to each of Cyxtera and Cyxtera Management, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “Management Company”), evidencing certain funds borrowed by Appgate from each of Cyxtera and the Management Company as well as potential future borrowings (together, the “Promissory Notes”). Appgate is an affiliate of the Company and a direct subsidiary of SIS, and through December 31, 2019, was a direct subsidiary of the Company. The Promissory Notes had a combined initial aggregate principal amount of $95.2 million and provided for additional borrowings during the term of the Promissory Notes for additional amounts not to exceed approximately $52.5 million in the aggregate (approximately $147.7 million including the initial aggregate principal amount). Interest accrued on the unpaid principal balance of the Promissory Notes at a rate per annum equal to 3%; provided, that, with respect to any day during the period from the date of the Promissory Notes through December 31, 2019, interest was calculated assuming that the unpaid principal balance of the Promissory Notes on such day is the unpaid principal amount of the notes on the last calendar day of the quarter in which such day occurs. Interest was payable upon the maturity date of the notes. Each of the Promissory Notes had an initial maturity date of March 30, 2020, and was extended through March 30, 2021, by amendments entered into effective as of March 30, 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, we had a receivable related to the Promissory Notes of $127.7 million. On December 31, 2019, Appgate spun off from Cyxtera. As of December 31, 2019, we assessed collectability of the Promissory Notes from Appgate and reserved the entire amount of $127.7 million as the balance was deemed unrecoverable. In making that determination, we considered factors such as Appgate’s operating and cash losses since the initial acquisition into the Cyxtera group in 2017 through December 31, 2019, and Appgate’s anticipated
cash needs and potential access to liquidity and capital resources over the remaining term of the note based on the facts and circumstances at the time.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we advanced $19.4 million under the Promissory Notes and recorded a provision for loan losses in the same amount based on the same factors discussed above. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020, we had a receivable related to the Promissory Notes of $147.1 million with an allowance of $30.0 million. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we had other amounts receivable from Appgate of $3.9 million with a full reserve because of the same factors discussed above for the Promissory Notes. These other amounts include charges under the Transition Services Agreement by and between, Appgate and the Management Company pursuant to which the Management Company provided certain transition services to Appgate and Appgate provided certain transition services to Cyxtera (the “Transition Services Agreement”). The Transition Services Agreement provided for a term that commenced on January 1, 2020, and was terminated on December 31, 2020.
On February 8, 2021, we received a payment of $118.2 million from Appgate against the then accumulated principal and interest under the Promissory Notes and issued a payoff letter to Appgate extinguishing the $36.1 million of principal and accrued interest balance remaining following such repayment. Of the $118.2 million payment, $1.1 million was attributed to 2020 accrued interest on the Promissory Notes and $117.1 million to the recovery of a portion of the Promissory Notes’ principal and interest balance outstanding as of December 31, 2019. Accordingly, for the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a reversal of the previously established allowance of $117.1 million. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, we wrote off the ending balance of $30.0 million in the allowance for loan losses on the Promissory Notes. Accordingly, no additional changes or advances on the Promissory Notes or the allowance for loan losses occurred during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $4.5 million, or 3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. The decrease of interest expense of $4.5 million is due to the repayment in full of the 2017 Second Lien Term Facility, and the paying down of the Revolving Facility (as defined in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources”) and the 2021 Revolving Facility (as defined in “-Liquidity and Capital Resources”) in July and August 2021 following the consummation of the Business Combination.
Other Expenses, Net
Other expenses, net decreased by $0.2 million, or 67%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. In 2020, the Company incurred $3.4 million in realized losses related to foreign exchange rates and finance charges, offset by approximately $4.2 million in gains related to fees charged to Appgate under the Transition Services Agreement. In 2021, the Company realized $2.5 million in gains related to foreign exchange rates, offset by finance charges of $2.0 million incurred in connection with the factoring arrangement entered into 2021.
Change in Fair Value of the Warrant Liabilities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a loss of $25.5 million on our consolidated statement of operations in connection with the change of the fair value of the warrant liabilities. In December 2021, the Company announced that it would redeem all of the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants that remained outstanding as of the Redemption Time. Pursuant to the terms of the warrant agreement governing the Warrants, prior to the Redemption Time, the warrant holders were permitted to exercise their warrants either (a) on a cash basis by paying the exercise price of $11.50 per warrant in cash or (b) on a “cashless basis,” in which case the holder would receive 0.265 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock per warrant. As of December 31, 2021, 840,456 Public Warrants were exercised in accordance with the terms of the Warrant Agreement, resulting in the issuance by us of 228,450 shares of Class A common stock. The Company recorded a decrease of the warrant
liability of $2.6 million and increase to additional paid in capital of $2.8 million in connection with the warrants that were exercised.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $47.8 million, compared to $3.5 million of income tax expense for the prior year. The income tax benefit on the pre-tax loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, was different than the amount expected at the statutory federal income tax rate primarily as a result of additional state income tax benefits, which were partially offset by valuation allowances recorded on certain deferred tax assets in the United States and foreign jurisdictions, non-deductible equity compensation, nondeductible remeasurement of the warrant liabilities and the remeasurement of the Company’s net deferred tax assets in the United Kingdom. due to a recently enacted tax rate change. The income tax benefit on the pre-tax loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, was different than the amount expected at the statutory federal income tax rate primarily as a result of additional state income tax benefits, which were partially offset by valuation allowances recorded on certain deferred tax assets in the United States and foreign jurisdictions, non-deductible equity compensation, foreign withholding taxes and the remeasurement of the Company’s net deferred tax assets in the United Kingdom due to an enacted tax rate change.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had cash of $52.4 million and $120.7 million, respectively, and had $88.8 million and $7.4 million of our revolving facilities available, respectively. Historically, customer collections are our primary source of cash. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, the cash generated from operations and the borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facilities, will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months and the long-term foreseeable future. We intend to continue to make significant investments to support our business growth, which may include pursuing additional expansion opportunities. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The occurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. The inability to raise capital would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives. If current market conditions were to deteriorate, some of our customers may have difficulty paying us and we may experience increased churn in our customer base, including reductions in their commitments to us, and we may be unable to secure additional financing, or any such additional financing may only be available to us on unfavorable terms, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity. Additionally, an inability to pursue additional expansion opportunities will have a material adverse effect on our ability to maintain our desired level of revenue growth in future periods.
Debt
On May 1, 2017, a subsidiary of the Company (the “Borrower”) entered into credit agreements for up to $1,275.0 million of borrowings under first and second lien credit facilities ( together with the 2019 First Lien Term Facility and the 2021 Revolving Facility described below, collectively, the “Senior Secured Credit Facilities”). The Senior Secured Credit Facilities initially consisted of (a) a first lien credit agreement providing for (i) a $150.0 million first lien multicurrency revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) and (ii) an $815.0 million first lien term loan borrowing (the “First Lien Term Facility”) and (b) a second lien credit agreement providing for a $310.0 million second lien term loan credit borrowing (the “2017 Second Lien Term Facility”). On May 13, 2019, the Borrower borrowed an additional $100.0 million under the incremental first lien loan under the first lien credit agreement (the “2019 First Lien Term Facility”). On May 7, 2021, certain of the lenders under the Revolving Facility entered into an amendment with the Borrower pursuant to which they agreed to extend the maturity date for certain revolving commitments from May 1, 2022, to November 1, 2023. Under the terms of the amendment, $141.3 million of commitments under the existing Revolving Facility were exchanged for $120.1 million of commitments under a new revolving facility (the “2021 Revolving Facility”). In connection with the amendment, the Borrower
repaid $19.6 million of the outstanding balance under the Revolving Facility on May 10, 2021. In connection with the Business Combination, the Borrower repaid the entire balance of the 2017 Second Lien Term Facility of $310.0 million on July 29, 2021, and the remaining outstanding balance on the Revolving Facility and 2021 Revolving Facility of $123.1 million on August 13, 2021. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid down $9.15 million of principal of the First Lien Term Facility. Subsequent to the consummation of the Business Combination and the pay-down of the Revolving Facility and the 2021 Revolving Facility, the Borrower drew down an additional $40.0 million from the Revolving Facility and the 2021 Revolving Facility during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Revolving Facility, the 2021 Revolving Facility, the 2017 First Lien Term Facility and the 2019 First Lien Term Facility have a five-year, 18-month, seven- and five-year term, respectively, and are set to expire on May 1, 2022, November 1, 2023, May 1, 2024, and May 1, 2024, respectively.
The Senior Secured Credit Facilities are secured by substantially all assets of the Borrower and contain customary covenants, including reporting and financial covenants, some of which require the Borrower to maintain certain financial coverage and leverage ratios, as well as customary events of default, and are guaranteed by certain of the Borrower’s domestic subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021, the Company believes the Borrower was in compliance with these covenants.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $976.3 million and $908.3 million in capital lease obligations and long-term debt outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, we had $989.0 million and $1,320.6 million in capital lease obligations and long-term debt outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, respectively.
Cash Flow
Operating Activities
Cash provided by our operations is generated by colocation service fees, which include fees for the licensing of space, power and interconnection services.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities provided $25.8 million of net cash as compared to $116.6 million during the prior year. The decrease in net cash from operating activities during 2021 compared to 2020 was due to higher cash outflows in 2021. Most notably, the pay down of $33.0 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable and $22.7 million of fees owed under the Services Agreement described in Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements, amounts that were related to the Structuring Fee (as defined in Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements), Service Provider Fee (as defined in Note 21 to our consolidated financial statements) and other Sponsor related expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we factored $101.2 million of receivables and received $99.5 million, net of fees of $1.7 million. The remaining decrease was due to higher cash inflows in 2020 as a result of improved collections on outstanding accounts receivables.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities are primarily focused on capital expenditures due to expansion activities and overall modernization of our data centers.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities provided $39.6 million of net cash as compared to net cash used of $102.6 million during the same period in the prior year. Year over year, the Company decreased its capital expenditures by $5.7 million. In addition, in February 2021, the Company received $117.1
million from Appgate in connection with the settlement of the Promissory Notes. During 2020, the Company advanced $19.4 million to Appgate.
Financing Activities
Our cash flow from financing activities is centered around the use of our credit facilities and lease financings.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, financing activities used $137.0 million of net cash as compared to net cash provided of $91.0 million for the prior year. During 2021, the Company completed the Business Combination which resulted in the receipt of $493.9 million in total cash from the SVAC trust account, the PIPE investors and the Forward Purchasers, before direct and incremental transactional cost of approximately $59.4 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by the $97.9 million capital redemption payment to SIS. In addition, a total of $452.2 million was used to repay in full outstanding amounts of principal on the Second Lien Term Facility, the Revolving Facility, the 2021 Revolving Facility and a paydown of $9.2 million on the principal of the First Lien Term Facility. Since the consummation of the Business Combination, the Company drew $40.0 million from the Revolving Facility and the 2021 Revolving Facility. Repayments on capital leases were also higher in the 2021 period by $25.7 million compared to the prior year period which was a result of capital leases entered into during December 2020 and throughout 2021. In the prior year period the Company additionally received $46.0 million in proceeds from a sales-leaseback transaction compared to $5.0 million in proceeds from a sales-leaseback transaction in 2021. The Company also obtained a capital contribution of $5.2 million from SIS to pay the Transaction Bonus to current and former employees.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Cyxtera leases a majority of its data centers and certain equipment under long-term lease agreements. The following represents our debt maturities, financings, leases and other contractual commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in millions):
(1)Represents aggregate maturities of long-term debt, including the Revolving Facilities.
(2)Represents interest on our long-term debt included in (1) based on their approximate interest rates as of December 31, 2021, as well as the credit facility fee for the Revolving Facilities.
(3)Represents lease payments under capital and operating lease arrangements, including renewal options that are reasonably assured to be exercised.
(4)Represents unaccrued purchase commitments related to IT licenses, utilities and colocation operations. These amounts do not represent Cyxtera’s entire anticipated purchases in the future but represent only those items for which the Company was contractually committed as of December 31, 2021.
(5)Represents liability, net of future accretion expense.
Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with US GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require Cyxtera’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the following critical accounting policies and estimates: revenue from contracts with customers, accounting for income taxes, accounting for leases, and accounting for warrant liabilities. These critical accounting policies are addressed below. In addition, we have other key accounting policies and estimates that are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
We derive the majority of our revenues from recurring revenue streams, consisting primarily of colocation service fees. Colocation service fees include fees for the licensing of space, power and interconnection services. The remainder of our revenues are derived from non-recurring charges, such as installation fees and professional services, including remote support to troubleshoot technical issues and turnkey structured cabling solutions. Our revenue contracts are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC Topic 606”), with the exception of certain contracts that contain lease components and are accounted for in accordance with ASC Topic 840, Leases. Under the revenue accounting guidance, revenues are recognized when control of these products and services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the products and services. Revenues from recurring revenue streams are generally invoiced monthly in advance and recognized ratably over the term of the contract, which is generally three years. Non-recurring installation fees, although generally invoiced in a lump sum upon installation, are deferred and recognized ratably over the contract term. Professional service fees and equipment sales are also generally invoiced in a lump sum upon service delivery and are recognized in the period when the services are provided or the equipment is delivered. For contracts with customers that contain multiple performance obligations, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct or as a series of distinct obligations if the individual performance obligations meet the series criteria. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The standalone selling price is determined based on overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions, geographic locations and other factors. Other judgments include determining if any variable consideration should be included in the total contract value of the arrangement, such as price increases.
Revenue is generally recognized on a gross basis in accordance with the accounting standard related to reporting revenue on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent, as we are primarily responsible for fulfilling the contract, bear the inventory risk and have discretion in establishing the price when selling to customers. To the extent we do not meet the criteria for recognizing revenue on a gross basis, we record the revenue on a net basis.
Contract balances
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections result in accounts receivables, contract assets and deferred revenues. A receivable is recorded at the invoice amount, net of an allowance for doubtful accounts and is recognized in the period in which we have transferred products or provided services to our customers and when our right to consideration is unconditional. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type,
although terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 to 45 days. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we have determined that our contracts generally do not include a significant financing component. We assess collectability based on a number of factors, including past transaction history with the customer and the credit-worthiness of the customer. We generally do not request collateral from our customers. We also maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments which we had expected to collect. If the financial condition of our customers deteriorates or if they became insolvent, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, greater allowances for doubtful accounts may be required. Management specifically analyzes accounts receivable and current economic news and trends, historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit-worthiness and changes in customer payment terms when evaluating revenue recognition and the adequacy of our reserves. Any amounts that were previously recognized as revenue and subsequently determined to be uncollectable are charged to bad debt expense, which is included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. Delinquent account balances are written off after management has determined that collection is not probable.
A contract asset exists when we have transferred products or provided services to our customers, but customer payment is contingent upon satisfaction of additional performance obligations. Certain contracts include terms related to price arrangements such as price increases and free months. We recognize revenues ratably over the contract term, which could potentially give rise to contract assets during certain periods of the contract term. Contract assets are recorded in prepaid and other current assets and other assets in the consolidated balance sheets.
Deferred revenue (a contract liability) is recognized when we have an unconditional right to a payment before we transfer products or services to customers. Deferred revenue is included in other current liabilities and other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets.
Contract costs
Direct and indirect incremental costs solely related to obtaining revenue generating contracts are capitalized as costs of obtaining a contract when they are incremental and if they are expected to be recovered. Such costs consist primarily of commission fees and sales bonuses, contract fulfillment costs, as well as indirect related payroll costs. Contract costs are amortized over the estimated period of benefit, which is estimated as three years, on a straight-line basis.
For further information on revenue recognition, see Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities related to the expected future tax consequences arising from temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities based on enacted statutory tax rates applicable to the periods in which the temporary differences are expected to reverse. Any effects of changes in income tax rates or laws are included in income tax expense in the period of enactment. We reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance if, based on the evidence available, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. In making the assessment under the more likely than not standard, appropriate consideration must be given to all positive and negative evidence related to the realization of the deferred tax assets. The assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carry forward periods by jurisdiction, our experience with loss carryforwards not expiring unutilized and all tax planning alternatives that may be available. A valuation allowance is recognized if, under applicable accounting standards, we determine it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset would not be realized.
Leases
Our capital lease obligations represent our aggregate obligations for lease payments arising from capital leases where we are the tenant and are measured based on the present value of fixed lease payments over the lease term. As our lessee leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate estimated based on information available at the commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments under each capital lease. When determining the incremental borrowing rate, we assess multiple variables such as lease term, collateral, economic conditions and creditworthiness. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate using a benchmark senior unsecured yield curve for debt instruments adjusted for our credit quality, market conditions, tenor of lease contracts and collateral.
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC Topic 815-15, Derivatives-Embedded Derivatives. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, we assumed 11,620,383 public warrants issued in SVAC’s IPO (the “Public Warrants”) and 8,576,940 warrants issued to the Sponsor and the Forward Purchasers in private placement transactions (the “Private Placement Warrants” and, together with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”). All of our outstanding Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40, Derivatives in Entity’s Own Equity. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the public warrants are traded on the Nasdaq, and was measured utilizing the closing price as the measurement date. The private placement warrants were initially measured at fair value using the Monte Carlo Simulation.
In December 2021, the Company announced that it would redeem all Public and Private Placement Warrants that remained outstanding as of 5:00 p.m., New York time, on January 19, 2022. Pursuant to the terms of the Warrant Agreement, prior to the Redemption Time, the warrant holders were permitted to exercise their warrants either (a) on a cash basis by paying the exercise price of $11.50 per warrant in cash or (b) on a “cashless basis,” in which case the holder would receive 0.265 shares of Class A common stock per warrant. As of December 31, 2021, 840,456 Public Warrants were exercised in accordance with the terms of the Warrant Agreement, resulting in the issuance of 228,450 shares of Class A common stock. None of the Private Warrants were exercised through December 31, 2021. For the Public Warrants exercised through December 31, 2021, the warrants were marked to market through the settlement date utilizing the publicly traded closing stock price of the Public Warrants on the settlement date with changes in fair through the settlement date recorded as a change of fair value of warrant liabilities in other expenses in the consolidated financial statements of operations. Upon the settlement, the remaining warrant liabilities were derecognized and the liabilities and cash received from warrant holders was recorded as consideration for the common shares issued. As a result of the result of the redemption notice for the Public and Private Placement Warrants, the valuation method for the Private Placement Warrants was changed from Monte Carlo Simulation to a fair value based on the publicly traded closing price of the Public Warrants given that in connection with the terms of the redemption notice, the exercise and the settlement provisions of the Public and Private Placement Warrants are substantially the same.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements.