Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
DallasNews intends for the discussion of its financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding its financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those statements from period to period, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect its financial statements. The following information should be read in conjunction with the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes filed as part of this report. All dollar amounts presented herein, except share and per share amounts, are in thousands, unless the context indicates otherwise.
This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain certain forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements. See the Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward-Looking Statements of this Annual Report for further discussion.
OVERVIEW
DallasNews Corporation, formerly A. H. Belo Corporation, and its subsidiaries are referred to collectively herein as “DallasNews” or the “Company.” DallasNews was formed in February 2008 through a spin-off from its former parent company and is registered on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (Nasdaq trading symbol: DALN). DallasNews is the Dallas-based holding company of The Dallas Morning News and Medium Giant.
The Company operates The Dallas Morning News (dallasnews.com), Texas’ leading newspaper and winner of nine Pulitzer Prizes, and various niche publications targeting specific audiences. These operations generate revenue from sales of advertising within the Company’s newspaper and digital platforms, subscriptions and retail sales of its newspapers, commercial printing and distribution services primarily related to national newspapers, and preprint advertising.
In addition, the Company has a full-service agency, Medium Giant, with capabilities including strategy, creative and media management with a focus on strategic and digital marketing, and data intelligence that provide a measurable return on investment to its clients.
The Company transferred its stock exchange listing from the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) to The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) and changed its corporate name to DallasNews Corporation. The listing and trading of the Company’s Series A common stock on the NYSE ceased trading at market close on June 28, 2021, and began trading on Nasdaq at market open on June 29, 2021, under the ticker symbol “DALN.”
On May 13, 2021, at the Company’s 2021 annual meeting of shareholders, its shareholders approved a reverse stock split at a ratio of not less than one-for-three and not more than one-for-five, with the exact ratio to be determined by the Company’s board of directors. Following the annual meeting, the Company’s board of directors approved a one-for-four reverse stock split of its issued, outstanding and treasury shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, which became effective June 8, 2021. As a result, every four shares of the Company’s issued and outstanding Series A common stock and Series B common stock (and any such shares held in treasury) were converted into one share of Series A common stock and Series B common stock, respectively. All fractional shares were settled in cash on June 9, 2021, in connection with the reverse stock split. The par value of the Series A and Series B common stock were not adjusted as a result of the reverse stock split and the Company reclassified an amount equal to the reduction in the number of Company shares at par value to additional paid-in capital. All issued and outstanding Series A and Series B common stock and per share amounts in the consolidated financial statements and footnotes included herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect this reverse stock split for all periods presented.
Beginning in early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic impacted, and may continue to impact, the Company’s customers, distribution partners, advertisers, production facilities, and third parties, and could result in additional loss of advertising revenue or supply chain disruption. Media was designated an essential business, therefore the Company’s operations have continued throughout the pandemic. The Company has been following the recommendations of local government and health authorities to minimize exposure risk for employees. Employees, including financial reporting staff, have been working remotely since March 2020. Beginning in June 2021, the Company allowed its employees to return to the office on a voluntary basis and currently expects all employees will return to the office in the first quarter of 2022. If the pandemic were to affect a significant number of the workforce employed in printing operations, the Company may experience delays or be unable to produce, print and deliver its publications and other third-party print publications on a timely basis.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
In April 2020, the Company implemented measures to reduce costs and preserve cash flow. These measures included reduction in the quarterly dividend rate per share, temporary decreases in employee compensation, as well as reductions in discretionary spending. In addition, the Company benefited from tax provisions permitted under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and benefited from the pension relief provisions under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the “ARP Act”). However, these measures did not fully offset the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company continues to evaluate the future material impacts on its consolidated financial statements that may result from the actions taken by the Company and its customers in respect of the pandemic.
Overview of Significant Transactions
Operating results for 2021 reflect relative stability in print advertising and circulation revenue. In addition to the general trends adversely impacting the publishing industry, the Company did experience declines resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning late in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing into early 2021. However, the Company is beginning to see improvement in certain advertising revenue streams, as discussed below, as well as an increase in the Company’s digital-only subscriptions revenue. While the 2021 operating results reflect the recovery from the unfavorable impacts of the pandemic, the Company continues its efforts to diversify revenues through its digital platforms for delivery of news and advertising, grow its paid digital memberships and improve the member experience, and leverage its brand and personnel to enhance its media agency solutions. However, there is no guarantee the Company will be able to generate enough digital revenue or margin to offset the possible future loss of print advertising and circulation revenue and margin.
As a direct result of COVID-19 uncertainties, on April 3, 2020, the Company and Charter DMN Holdings, LP (the “Purchaser”) entered into an amendment to the two-year seller-financed promissory note of $22,400 (the “Promissory Note”), for the sale of the real estate assets previously used as the Company’s headquarters. The amendment (the “Second Promissory Note”), in the principal amount of $375, included a deferred interest payment of $195 that was due April 1, 2020, and a 2019 real property tax reconciliation payment due from the Purchaser. Subsequently, on June 29, 2021, the Company’s board of directors approved a second amendment and extension of the maturity date of the Promissory Note to June 30, 2022 (the “Second Modification Agreement”), effective June 30, 2021. In connection with the Second Modification Agreement, the Purchaser paid the Second Promissory Note in full. The unpaid, original principal balance of the Promissory Note will continue to bear interest at the rate of 4.5 percent, with interest payable quarterly through June 30, 2022, the maturity date of the Promissory Note. The Promissory Note continues to be secured by a first priority lien on the property.
In the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, the Company sold inactive IP addresses for $1,349 and $744, respectively.
In 2021, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $2,575 and $455 of interest income due to the release of a federal uncertain tax reserve and related interest resulting from the statute of limitations lapsing in August 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company performed a review of potential impairment indicators for its long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, and right-of-use assets. The Company determined there was no significant decrease in the market value of the long-lived assets or significant change in the extent or manner in which the asset group is being used or in its physical condition as of December 31, 2021, and there was no significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate during the period that could affect the value of the asset group. Based upon the review of indicators, the Company did not identify any events or changes in circumstances that indicate the carrying amount of long-lived assets may not be recoverable. See Note 3 - Leases for information on right-of-use asset impairments occurring in 2021 and 2020.
Quarterly dividends returned $3,425 and $5,139 to shareholders in 2021 and 2020, respectively. On December 2, 2021, the Company’s board of directors declared a $0.16 per share dividend to shareholders of record as of the close of business on February 11, 2022, paid on March 4, 2022.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
This section contains discussion and analysis of net operating revenue, operating costs and expense and other information relevant to an understanding of results of operations for 2021 and 2020. Based on how the Company’s chief operating decision-maker makes decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance, the Company determined it has one reportable segment.
The table below sets forth the components of DallasNews’ operating loss.
Traditionally, the Company’s primary revenues are generated from advertising within its core newspapers, niche publications and related websites and from subscription and single copy sales of its printed newspapers. As a result of competitive and economic conditions, the newspaper industry has faced a significant revenue decline over the past decade. Therefore, the Company has sought to diversify its revenues through development and investment in new product offerings, increased circulation rates and leveraging of its existing assets to offer cost efficient commercial printing and distribution services. The Company continually evaluates the overall performance of its core products to ensure existing assets are deployed adequately to maximize return.
The Company’s advertising revenue from its core newspapers continues to be adversely affected by the shift of advertiser spending to other forms of media and the increased accessibility of free online news content, as well as news content from other sources, which resulted in declines in advertising and paid print circulation volumes and revenue. Decreases in print display and classified categories are indicative of continuing trends by advertisers towards digital platforms, which are widely available from many sources. In the current environment, companies are allocating more of their advertising spending towards programmatic channels that provide digital advertising on multiple platforms with enhanced technology for targeted delivery and measurement. In addition, the Company did experience declines resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning late in the first quarter of 2020 and continuing into early 2021; however, the Company is beginning to see improvement in certain advertising revenue streams as discussed below, despite recent supply chain issues impacting advertisers.
In response to the decline in print revenue, the Company has developed agency capabilities, including strategy, creative and media management with a focus on strategic and digital marketing, and data intelligence that provide a measurable return on investment to its clients. The Company leverages its news content to improve engagement on the Company’s digital platforms that results in increased digital subscriptions and associated revenue. The Company also continues to diversify its revenue base by leveraging the available capacity of its existing assets to provide print and distribution services for newspapers and other customers requiring these services, by introducing new advertising and marketing services products, and by increasing circulation prices.
Because of declining print circulation, the Company has developed broad digital strategies designed to provide readers with multiple platforms for obtaining online access to local news. The Company continues to obtain additional key demographic data from readers, which allows the Company to provide content desired by readers and to modify marketing and distribution strategies to target and reach audiences valued by advertisers. The Company has access to programmatic digital advertising platforms that provide digital ad placement and targeting efficiencies and increases utilization of digital inventory within the Company’s websites. Additionally, in order to optimize owned & operated digital advertising revenue, the Company has adopted a holistic yield management approach powered by real-time bidding technologies and data analysis to ensure the optimal mix of direct sales and programmatic ad sales is achieved.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Advertising and marketing services revenue
Advertising and marketing services revenue was 47.4 percent and 46.8 percent of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Print advertising
Print advertising is comprised of display, classified and preprint advertising revenue.
Display and classified print revenue primarily represents sales of advertising space within the Company’s core and niche newspapers. As advertisers continue to diversify marketing budgets to incorporate more and varied avenues of reaching consumers, traditional display and classified advertising continues to be impacted. In 2021, display and classified print advertising revenue increased $1,318, primarily due to an increase in the volume of classified advertisements and display advertisements related to sports team barter agreements that returned to pre-pandemic levels.
Preprint advertising revenue primarily reflects preprinted advertisements inserted into the Company’s core newspapers, niche publications, and distributed to publications in other markets, or distributed to non-subscribers through the mail. Preprint advertising also includes other services revenue related to the Company’s niche publications. In 2021, revenue remained flat, as volume increased in preprint newspaper inserts distributed to publications in other markets, which are beginning to recover from the unfavorable impacts resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by a decline in other services revenue.
Digital advertising and marketing services
Digital advertising and marketing services revenue consists of strategic marketing management, consulting, creative services, targeted and multi-channel (programmatic) advertising placed on third-party websites, digital sales of banner, classified and native advertisements on the Company’s news and entertainment-related websites and mobile apps, social media management, search optimization, direct mail and the sale of promotional materials. In 2021, revenue remained flat, primarily due to an increase in digital advertisements on dallasnews.com, offset by a decline in sales of promotional materials related to COVID-19.
Circulation revenue
Circulation revenue was 42.1 percent and 42.1 percent of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Print circulation
Revenue decreased in 2021, primarily driven by volume declines, partially offset by rate increases. In 2021, home delivery revenue declined $2,211 or 4.2 percent. The Company ended 2021 with 89,271 print subscriptions, a decrease of 11,494 or 11.4 percent when compared to 100,765 at the end of 2020. Single copy revenue declined $866 or 15.2 percent in 2021.
Digital circulation
Revenue increased in 2021, due to an increase in digital-only subscriptions. The Company ended 2021 with 59,471 digital-only subscriptions, an increase of 10,568 or 21.6 percent when compared to December 31, 2020, reflecting the Company’s continued focus on growing its paid digital memberships and improving the member experience.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Printing, distribution and other revenue
Printing, distribution and other revenue was 10.5 percent and 11.1 percent of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue decreased in 2021, primarily due to a decline in commercial printing and distribution revenue.
Operating Costs and Expense
The table below sets forth the components of the Company’s operating costs and expense.
Employee compensation and benefits - The Company continues to implement measures to optimize its workforce and evaluate strategies to reduce risk associated with future obligations for employee benefit plans. Employee compensation and benefits decreased $2,694 in 2021, primarily due to headcount reductions within the Company. Savings from headcount reductions of 87 since December 31, 2020, were partially offset by $1,423 of severance expense related to the voluntary severance offer and restoring employees’ base salaries to pre-pandemic amounts.
Other production, distribution and operating costs - Expense increased $1,033 in 2021, primarily due to an increase in advertising and promotional expense related to sports team barter agreements that returned to pre-pandemic levels. Distribution expense also increased due a higher rate and volume of preprint newspaper inserts being distributed to other markets.
Newsprint, ink and other supplies - Expense decreased $290 in 2021, reflecting savings from reduced newsprint costs associated with lower circulation volumes. Competitive pricing is available under the Company’s paper supply agreement; however, the price of newsprint has been increasing. Newsprint consumption approximated 8,405 and 9,781 metric tons in 2021 and 2020, respectively, at an average cost per metric ton of $572 and $549, respectively.
Depreciation - Expense decreased $3,014 in 2021, due to a lower depreciable asset base as a higher level of in-service assets are now fully depreciated and the Company reduced capital spending.
Amortization - Expense decreased in 2021, due to all intangible assets being fully amortized in the first quarter of 2021
Loss on sale/disposal of assets, net - In 2021 and 2020, the Company disposed assets that were no longer in use. From time to time, the Company will sell disposed assets, primarily production related assets.
Asset impairments - The Company subleased office space in Dallas, Texas, in the third quarter of 2021 and the fourth quarter of 2020, at a lower rate than the head lease. Accordingly right-of-use asset impairments of $232 and $461 were recorded in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Other
The table below sets forth the other components of the Company’s results of operations.
Other income, net - Other income, net is primarily comprised of net periodic pension and other post-employment benefit, interest income (expense) and gain (loss) from investments. Net periodic pension and other post-employment benefit for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $4,141 and $4,627, respectively, resulting from a favorable return on pension assets, partially offset by a decrease in the discount rate.
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded $1,008 and $897, respectively, of interest income related to the promissory notes from the sale of the Company’s former headquarters. In addition, the Company recorded $455 of interest income in connection with the accounting for unrecognized tax positions, primarily related to the release of a federal uncertain tax reserve in the third quarter of 2021.
In the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, the Company sold inactive IP addresses for $1,349 and $744, respectively. In the third quarter of 2020, the Company’s shares of eSite Analytics, Inc. (“eSite”) were repurchased by eSite for $750.
Income tax benefit - A tax benefit of $(2,151) was recorded in 2021. The benefit was primarily due to the release of $2,575, included in other liabilities, for a federal uncertain tax reserve resulting from the statute of limitations lapsing in August 2021, partially offset by the effect of the Texas margin tax.
A tax benefit of $(1,687) was recorded in 2020. The benefit was primarily due to the recognition of the 2018 net operating loss carryback permitted by the CARES Act, partially offset by the effect of the Texas margin tax.
Legal proceedings - From time to time, the Company is involved in a variety of claims, lawsuits and other disputes arising in the ordinary course of business. Management routinely assesses the likelihood of adverse judgments or outcomes in these matters, as well as the ranges of probable losses to the extent losses are reasonably estimable. Accruals for contingencies are recorded when, in the judgment of management, adverse judgments or outcomes are probable and the financial impact, should an adverse outcome occur, is reasonably estimable. The determination of likely outcomes of litigation matters relates to factors that include, but are not limited to, past experience and other evidence, interpretation of relevant laws or regulations and the specifics and status of each matter. Predicting the outcome of claims and litigation and estimating related costs and financial exposure involves substantial uncertainties that could cause actual results to vary materially from estimates and accruals. In the opinion of management, liabilities, if any, arising from other currently existing claims against the Company would not have a material adverse effect on DallasNews’ results of operations, liquidity or financial condition.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
DallasNews’ consolidated financial statements reflect the application of accounting policies that require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. The Company believes that the following are the critical accounting policies, estimates and assumptions currently affecting DallasNews’ financial position and results of operations. See the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards, for additional information concerning significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition. The Company’s principal sources of revenue are sales of advertising within its newspaper and digital platforms, subscription and retail sales of its newspapers, commercial printing and distribution services, primarily related to national newspapers, and preprint advertising. In addition, revenue includes strategic marketing management, consulting, creative services, targeted and multi-channel (programmatic) advertising placed on third-party websites, social media management, search optimization, direct mail and the sale of promotional materials.
Advertising and Marketing Services
Print advertising is comprised of display, classified and preprint advertising revenue. Display revenue results from sales of advertising space within the Company’s core newspapers and niche publications to local, regional or national businesses with local operations, affiliates or resellers.
Classified revenue, which includes automotive, real estate, employment, obituaries and other, results from sales of advertising space in the classified and other sections of the Company’s newspapers. Preprint revenue results from sales of preprinted advertisements or circulars inserted into the Company’s core newspapers, niche publications, and distributed to publications in other markets, or distributed by mail or third-party distributors to households in targeted areas in order to provide total market coverage for advertisers. The Company’s capabilities allow its advertisers to target preprint distribution selectively at the sub-zip code level in order to optimize coverage for the advertisers’ locations. Preprint advertising also includes other services revenue related to the Company’s niche publications.
Digital advertising and marketing services revenue consists of strategic marketing management, consulting, creative services, targeted and multi-channel (programmatic) advertising placed on third-party websites, digital sales of banner, classified and native advertisements on the Company’s news and entertainment-related websites and mobile apps, social media management, search optimization, direct mail and the sale of promotional materials.
Advertising and marketing services revenue is primarily recognized at a point in time when the ad or service is complete and delivered, based on the customers’ contract price. Barter advertising transactions are recognized at estimated fair value based on the negotiated contract price and the range of prices for similar advertising from customers unrelated to the barter transaction. The Company expenses barter costs as incurred, which is independent from the timing of revenue recognition. In addition, certain digital advertising revenue related to website access is recognized over time, based on the customers’ monthly rate.
For ads placed on certain third-party websites, the Company must evaluate and use judgment to determine whether it is acting as the principal, where revenue is reported on a gross basis, or acting as the agent, where revenue is reported on a net basis. Generally, the Company reports advertising revenue for ads placed on third-party websites on a net basis, meaning the amount recorded to revenue is the amount billed to the customer net of amounts paid to the publisher of the third-party website. The Company is acting as the agent because the publisher controls the advertising inventory. The Company will record certain arrangements gross when it has latitude in establishing price or it determines the placement of the ads as a value added service to the customer.
Circulation
Circulation revenue is generated primarily by selling home delivery, including premium publications, and digital subscriptions, as well as single copy sales to non-subscribers for which revenue is recognized at a point in time when the paper is purchased. Home delivery revenue is recognized over the subscription period based on the days of actual delivery over the total subscription days. Revenue is directly reduced for any non-payment for the grace period of home delivery subscriptions where the Company recorded revenue for newspapers delivered after a subscription expired. Digital-only subscription revenue is recognized over the subscription period based on daily or monthly access to the content in the subscription period. Payment of circulation fees is typically received in advance and deferred over the subscription period. There is little judgment required for valuation or timing of circulation revenue recognition.
Printing, Distribution and Other
Printing, distribution and other revenue is primarily generated from printing and distribution of other newspapers, as well as production of preprinted advertisements for other newspapers. Printing, distribution and other revenue is recognized at a point in time when the product or service is delivered, which requires little judgment to determine.
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Pension. The Company follows accounting guidance for single-employer defined benefit plans. Plan assets and the projected benefits obligation are measured each December 31, and the Company records as an asset or liability for the net funded position of the plans. Certain changes in actuarial valuations related to returns on plan assets and projected benefit obligations are recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are amortized to net periodic pension expense (benefit) over the weighted average remaining life of plan participants, to the extent the cumulative balance in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) exceeds 10 percent of the greater of the respective plan’s (a) projected benefit obligation or (b) the market-related value of the plan’s assets. Net periodic pension expense (benefit) is recognized each period by accruing interest expense on the projected benefit obligation and accruing a return on assets associated with the plan assets. Participation in and accrual of new benefits to participants has been frozen since 2007 and, accordingly, on-going service costs are not a component of net periodic pension expense (benefit). From time to time, the Company-sponsored plans may settle pension obligations with certain plan participants through the plans’ master trust as part of its de-risking strategies. The gains or losses associated with settlements of plan obligations to participants are recognized to earnings if such settlements exceed the interest component of net periodic pension cost for the year. Otherwise, such amounts are included in actuarial gains (losses) in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Re-measurement of plan assets and liabilities upon a significant settlement or curtailment event is performed based on the values of the month-end closest to the event.
The projected benefit obligations of the DallasNews Pension Plans are estimated using the FTSE Pension Discount Curve, which is based upon a portfolio of high-quality corporate debt securities with maturities that correlate to the expected timing of estimated benefit payments to the Pension Plans’ participants. Future estimated benefit payments are discounted to their present value at the appropriate yield curve spot rate to determine the projected benefit obligation outstanding at each year end. The single equivalent discount rate as of December 31, 2021 was 2.5 percent and 2.1 percent for December 31, 2020. The significant gains and losses related to changes in the projected benefit obligation for 2021 and 2020, were primarily due to the movement in the discount rate and demographic experience.
Interest expense included in net periodic pension benefit is based on the FTSE Pension Discount Curve established at the beginning of the fiscal year. The discount rate for fiscal year 2021 and 2020 interest cost was 2.1 percent and 2.9 percent, respectively.
The Company assumed a 5.5 percent and 6.5 percent long-term return on the Pension Plans’ assets in 2021 and 2020, respectively. This return is based upon historical returns of similar investment pools having asset allocations consistent with the expected allocations of the DallasNews Pension Plans. Investment strategies for the Pension Plans’ assets are based upon factors such as the effective duration of the actuarial liabilities and market risks.
Recent Accounting Standards
See the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Standards, regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash balances as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $32,439 and $42,015, respectively. The decrease in the cash balance during 2021 was primarily due to the return of capital to shareholders through dividends and the net loss from operations.
The Company intends to hold the majority of existing cash for purposes of future investment opportunities, potential return of capital to shareholders and for contingency purposes. Although revenue is expected to continue to decline in future periods, cash flows and other expense reduction measures are expected to be sufficient to fund operating activities and capital spending of approximately $1,000 in 2022.
The future approval of dividends is dependent upon available cash after considering future operating and investing requirements and cannot be guaranteed. The Company continues to have a board-authorized repurchase authority. However, the agreement to repurchase the Company’s stock expired and was not renewed.
In April 2020, the Company announced that it was taking several actions to reduce cash outflow in response to the financial impact of COVID-19. The Company reduced operating expenses, reduced capital expenditures to less than $1,000 in 2020, and lowered the quarterly dividend rate per share. In addition, employee compensation was temporary reduced Company-wide. In August 2020, the Company began to restore base salaries and by October, the Company restored base salaries prospectively for all employees, with the exception of the executive officers that report to the Chief Executive Officer. The executive officers’ base salaries were restored effective January 1, 2021.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
In response to COVID-19, the CARES Act was signed into law in March 2020. The CARES Act provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures. The Company has benefited from the temporary five-year net operating loss carryback provision and the technical correction for qualified leasehold improvements, which changes 39-year property to 15-year property, eligible for 100 percent tax bonus depreciation. Applying the technical correction to 2018 has resulted in reporting additional tax depreciation of $1,017 and increased the 2018 net operating loss to approximately $6,829. The loss was carried back against 2014 taxes paid at the federal statutory rate of 35 percent that was previously in effect, resulting in a cash refund of $2,425, including interest, received in October 2020.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, which includes the COVID-related Tax Relief Act of 2020 and the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020, was passed and signed into law the last week of 2020. Among others, the provisions in this act included items such as guidance on expenses associated with forgiven Paycheck Protection Program loans, business meals deductions, individual tax rebates and unemployment benefits. The Company did not avail itself of any of the items contained in this act.
In addition, the ARP Act was passed and signed into law on March 11, 2021, and was designed to speed up the United States’ economic recovery. The ARP Act contains many provisions, including direct cash payments to eligible taxpayers below specified income limits, extended unemployment insurance benefits, additional relief designed to prevent layoffs and business closures at small businesses, and pension relief provisions. The pension relief provisions include extending the interest rate relief passed in previous years, permanently adding a floor to funding interest rates, and permanently changing the amortization period for pension underfunding from 7 to 15 years. All provisions are required to be effective for plan years beginning in 2022, but plan sponsors can elect certain provisions to apply to plan years beginning as early as 2019. The Company benefited from the shortfall amortization relief provisions and the segment interest rate relief provisions contained in the ARP Act effective for the 2020 plan year.
As a direct result of COVID-19 uncertainties, on April 3, 2020, the Company and Charter DMN Holdings, LP (the “Purchaser”) entered into an amendment to the two-year seller-financed promissory note of $22,400 (the “Promissory Note”), for the sale of the real estate assets previously used as the Company’s headquarters. The amendment (the “Second Promissory Note”), in the principal amount of $375, included a deferred interest payment of $195 that was due April 1, 2020, and a 2019 real property tax reconciliation payment due from the Purchaser. Subsequently, on June 29, 2021, the Company’s board of directors approved a second amendment and extension of the maturity date of the Promissory Note to June 30, 2022 (the “Second Modification Agreement”), effective June 30, 2021. In connection with the Second Modification Agreement, the Purchaser paid the Second Promissory Note in full. The unpaid, original principal balance of the Promissory Note will continue to bear interest at the rate of 4.5 percent, with interest payable quarterly through June 30, 2022, the maturity date of the Promissory Note. The Promissory Note continues to be secured by a first priority lien on the
property.
The Company evaluated the collectability of the note as a result of the Purchaser’s request to extend the maturity date of the Promissory Note and the continuation of the pandemic. Management believes as of December 31, 2021, the Promissory Note is recoverable since the Purchaser is in compliance with the terms, is publicly indicating its intent to develop the property, and management believes that the value of the collateral has not decreased from the sale date. In addition, on January 3, 2022, the Purchaser paid the fourth quarter 2021 interest payment of $254 due under the Second Modification Agreement.
The timing in general of commercial development may have been impacted by the pandemic, and thus capital constraints in commercial real estate markets may exist. Management continues to closely monitor the collectability of the Promissory Note and the value of the underlying collateral. Continued economic and other effects of the pandemic could impact the timing of payment or realization of the note.
The following discusses the changes in cash flows by operating, investing and financing activities in 2021 and 2020.
Operating Cash Flows
Net cash used for operating activities was $5,760 and $1,490 in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash flows from operating activities decreased by $4,270 in 2021, when compared to the prior year period. The decrease was driven primarily by changes in working capital and other operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by an improvement in net loss, which includes the sale of IP addresses for $1,349.
Cash flows from operating activities decreased by $2,695 in 2020, when compared to the prior year period. The decrease was driven primarily by the net loss of $6,872 in 2020, and changes in working capital and other operating assets and liabilities. The 2020 net loss includes the CARES Act refund of $2,425 and the sale of IP addresses for $744.
‎
DallasNews Corporation 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities was $(390) and $18 in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash flows from investing activities decreased in 2021. The cash proceeds of $375 received in the second quarter of 2021 to pay the Second Promissory Note in full, as discussed above, were offset by the cash proceeds of $750 received in 2020, from the sale of the Company’s eSite shares. Cash flows from investing activities also included $767 and $887 of capital spending in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash flows from investing activities increased in 2020 due to a reduction in capital spending of $1,528 and cash proceeds of $750 from the sale of the Company’s eSite shares that were repurchased by eSite in the third quarter of 2020. The Company reduced its capital spending plan for 2020 in response to the financial impact of COVID-19 as discussed above.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash used for financing activities was $3,426 and $5,139 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily attributable to dividend payments.
Financing Arrangements
None.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had contractual obligations, in aggregate, of $14,652 for the next five years and $17,215 thereafter, for operating leases, primarily for office space and other distribution centers, some of which include escalating lease payments. See Note 3 - Leases for future lease payments by year. In addition, the Company had expected purchase obligations of $245 related to capital expenditures.
In December 2017, AHC Dallas Properties, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, assumed a 12-year lease agreement for office space that serves as the headquarters of the Denton Record-Chronicle. In connection with the sale of Denton Publishing Company, owner of the Denton Record-Chronicle, to Denton Media Company, Inc., the Company entered into a sublease with Denton Publishing Company for a term ending on July 30, 2023. While it is anticipated that lease payments will be made on a timely basis there is not a guarantee. If Denton Publishing Company is not able to meet the obligation, the Company may look to alternative sublease arrangements.
In December 2016, the Dallas Morning News, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a 16-year lease agreement for office space for the Company’s new corporate headquarters. The Company recognizes rent expense on a straight-line basis. Per the amended lease agreement, rent payments began in November 2018.
The Company currently does not expect to make contributions to the DallasNews Pension Plans in 2022 and no contributions are required to these plans in 2022 under the applicable tax and labor laws governing pension plan funding.
On December 2, 2021, the Company’s board of directors declared a $0.16 per share dividend to shareholders of record as of the close of business on February 11, 2022, paid on March 4, 2022. On March 3, 2022, the Company’s board of directors declared a $0.16 per share dividend to shareholders of record as of the close of business on May 13, 2022, which is payable on June 3, 2022.