ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The Company's actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth below under the heading “Forward Looking Statements” and in Item 1A of this report under the heading “Risk Factors.”
Fiscal Year 2021 Overview
The Company is a global developer and producer of sustainable natural ingredients from edible and inedible bio-nutrients, creating a wide range of ingredients and customized specialty solutions for customers in the pharmaceutical, food, pet food, feed, industrial, fuel, bioenergy and fertilizer industries. With operations on five continents, the Company collects and transforms all aspects of animal by-product streams into useable and specialty ingredients, such as collagen, edible fats, feed-grade fats, animal proteins and meals, plasma, pet food ingredients, organic fertilizers, yellow grease, fuel feedstocks, green energy, natural casings and hides. The Company also recovers and converts recycled oils (used cooking oil and animal fats) into valuable feed and collects and processes residual bakery products into feed ingredients. In addition, the Company provides environmental services, such as grease trap collection and disposal services to food service establishments. The Company sells its products domestically and internationally and operates within three industry segments: Feed Ingredients, Food Ingredients and Fuel Ingredients.
The Feed Ingredients operating segment includes the Company's global activities related to (i) the collection and processing of beef, poultry and pork animal by-products in North America and Europe into non-food grade oils and protein meals, (ii) the collection and processing of bakery residuals in North America into Cookie Meal®, which is predominantly used in poultry and swine rations, (iii) the collection and processing of used cooking oil in North America into non-food grade fats, (iv) the collection and processing of porcine and bovine blood in China, Europe, North America and Australia into blood plasma powder and hemoglobin, (v) the processing of selected portions of slaughtered animals into a variety of meat products for use in pet food in Europe and North America, (vi) the processing of cattle hides and hog skins in North America, (vii) the production of organic fertilizers using protein produced from the Company’s animal by-products processing activities in North America and Europe, (viii) the rearing and processing of black soldier fly larvae into specialty proteins for use in animal feed and pet food in North America; and (ix) the provision of grease trap services to food service establishments in North America. Non-food grade oils and fats produced and marketed by the Company are principally sold to third parties to be used as ingredients in animal feed and pet food, as an ingredient for the production of biodiesel and renewable diesel, or to the oleo-chemical industry to be used as an ingredient in a wide variety of industrial applications. Protein meals, blood plasma powder and hemoglobin produced and marketed by the Company are sold to third parties to be used as ingredients in animal feed, pet food and aquaculture.
The Food Ingredients operating segment includes the Company's global activities related to (i) the purchase and processing of beef and pork bone chips, beef hides, pig skins, and fish skins into collagen in Europe, China, South America and North America, (ii) the collection and processing of porcine and bovine intestines into natural casings in Europe, China and North America, (iii) the extraction and processing of porcine mucosa into crude heparin in Europe, (iv) the collection and refining of animal fat into food grade fat in Europe, and (v) the processing of bones to bone chips for the collagen industry and bone ash in Europe. Collagens produced and marketed by the Company are sold to third parties to be used as ingredients in the pharmaceutical, nutraceutical, food, pet food and technical (e.g., photographic) industries. Natural casings produced and marketed by the Company are sold to third parties to be used as an ingredient in the production of sausages and other similar food products.
The Fuel Ingredients operating segment includes the Company's global activities related to (i) the Company’s share of the results of its equity investment in Diamond Green Diesel Holdings LLC, a joint venture with Valero Energy Corporation (“Valero”) to convert animal fats, recycled greases, used cooking oil, inedible corn oil, soybean oil, or other feedstocks that become economically and commercially viable into renewable diesel (“DGD” or the “DGD Joint Venture”) as described in Note 2 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements for the period ended January 1, 2022 included herein, (ii) the conversion of organic sludge and food waste into biogas in Europe, (iii) the collection and conversion of fallen stock and certain animal by-products pursuant to applicable E.U. regulations into low-grade energy sources to be used in industrial applications, and (iv) the processing of manure into natural bio-phosphate in Europe.
Corporate Activities principally includes unallocated corporate overhead expenses, acquisition-related expenses, interest expense net of interest income, and other non-operating income and expenses.
Observations on the Effects of COVID-19
The novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the infectious disease known as COVID-19, continues to evolve since it was declared a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. Since then, various federal, state and local government-imposed movement restrictions and initiatives have at various times been implemented worldwide to reduce the global transmission of COVID-19, including reduced or eliminated food services, the promotion of social distancing and the adoption of remote working policies. We continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the ongoing impacts COVID-19 has on our business, operations and financial results.
To date, COVID-19 has not had a material impact on the Company’s operations, as the Company operates in industries that are deemed “critical” and “essential” under the rules imposing these restrictions; however, the Company incurred approximately $7.5 million of COVID-19 related charges globally in fiscal year 2020 and incurred approximately $3.1 million in fiscal year 2021. The Company has implemented operational guidelines throughout the Company's organization consistent with the applicable governmental and regulatory policies in the geographies the Company operates intended to protect the Company's employees and prevent the spread of the virus in the Company's workplace, and to date, COVID-19 has not had a significant impact on the Company's ability to operate its facilities. Notwithstanding, the Company believes the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain and such uncertainty will likely continue. Among the items that could have a significant impact on the Company's future results is a reduction in the Company's raw material supply due to disruptions in the operations of the Company's third-party suppliers. Accordingly, while to date the Company has experienced no material negative effects on the Company's business and results of operations as a result of the current COVID-19 outbreak, the situation remains dynamic and subject to rapid and possibly material change, including but not limited to changes that may materially affect the operations of the Company's supply chain partners and finished product customers, which ultimately could result in material negative effects on the Company's business and results of operations.
DGD has also implemented operational guidelines in its organization, and to date, COVID-19 has not had a material impact on DGD’s operations. We expect that biofuel regulations and mandates will continue supporting renewable diesel demand; however, a prolonged or significant decline in overall fuel demand could negatively impact the sales and profitability of DGD’s business.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts the Company’s and DGD's results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted and may vary by jurisdiction and market, including the duration and scope of the pandemic, the emergence and spread of new variants of the virus, such as the delta variant, the likelihood of a resurgence of positive cases, the development, availability and acceptance of effective treatments and vaccines, the speed at which such vaccines are administered, the efficacy of current vaccines against evolving strains or variants of the virus, global economic conditions during and after the pandemic and governmental actions that have been taken or may be taken in the future in response to the pandemic, among others. For additional information regarding the risks associated with COVID-19, see the important information in Item 1A. Risk Factors, under the caption “Pandemics, epidemics or disease outbreaks, such as the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”), may disrupt our business, including, among other things, our supply chain and production processes, each of which could materially affect our operations, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations.”
Operating Performance Indicators
The Company monitors the performance of its business segments using key financial metrics such as results of operations, non-GAAP measurements (Adjusted EBITDA), segment operating income, raw material processed, gross margin percentage, foreign currency translation, and corporate activities. The Company’s operating results can vary significantly due to changes in factors such as the fluctuation in energy prices, weather conditions, crop harvests, government policies and programs, changes in global demand, changes in standards of living, protein consumption, and global production of competing ingredients. Due to these unpredictable factors that are beyond the control of the Company, forward-looking financial or operational estimates are not provided. The Company is exposed to certain risks associated with a business that is influenced by agricultural-based commodities. These risks are further described in Item 1A of this report under the heading “Risk Factors.”
The Company’s Feed Ingredients segment animal by-products, bakery residuals, used cooking oil recovery, and blood operations are each influenced by prices for agricultural-based alternative ingredients such as corn oil, soybean oil, soybean meal, and palm oil. In these operations, the costs of the Company's raw materials change with, or in certain cases are indexed to, the selling price or the anticipated selling price of the finished goods produced from the acquired raw materials and/or in some cases, the price spread between various types of finished products. The Company believes that this methodology of procuring raw materials generally establishes a relatively stable gross margin upon the acquisition of the raw material. Although the costs of raw materials for the Feed Ingredients segment are generally based upon actual or anticipated finished goods selling
prices, rapid and material changes in finished goods prices, including competing agricultural-based alternative ingredients, generally have an immediate and often times, material impact on the Company’s gross margin and profitability resulting from the brief lapse of time between the procurement of the raw materials and the sale of the finished goods. In addition, the volume of raw material acquired, which has a direct impact on the amount of finished goods produced, can also have a material effect on the gross margin reported, as the Company has a substantial amount of fixed operating costs.
The Company’s Food Ingredients segment collagen and natural casings products are influenced by other competing ingredients including plant-based and synthetic hydrocolloids and artificial casings. In the collagen operation, the cost of the Company's animal-based raw material moves in relationship to the selling price of the finished goods. The processing time for the Food Ingredients segment collagen and casings is generally 30 to 60 days, which is substantially longer than the Company's Feed Ingredients segment animal by-products operations. Consequently, the Company’s gross margin and profitability in this segment can be influenced by the movement of finished goods prices from the time the raw materials were procured until the finished goods are sold.
The Company's Fuel Ingredients segment converts fats into renewable diesel, organic sludge and food waste into biogas, and fallen stock into low-grade energy sources. The Company's gross margin and profitability in this segment are impacted by world energy prices for oil, electricity, natural gas and governmental subsidies.
The reporting currency for the Company's financial statements is the U.S. dollar. The Company operates in over 15 countries and therefore, certain of the Company's assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses are denominated in functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar, primarily in the Euro, Brazilian real, Chinese renminbi, Canadian dollar and Polish zloty. To prepare the Company's consolidated financial statements, assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses must be translated into U.S. dollars at the applicable exchange rate. As a result, increases or decreases in the value of the U.S. dollar against these other currencies will affect the amount of these items recorded in the Company's consolidated financial statements, even if their value has not changed in the functional currency. This could have a significant impact on the Company's results, if such increase or decrease in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to these other currencies is substantial.
In 2019, the Company evaluated the operational developments and the impact of anticipated significant expansion of the DGD Joint Venture. This evaluation was impactful to the consideration of how the Company most appropriately reflects its share of equity income from the DGD Joint Venture. Based on the Company's analysis, it was determined that the DGD Joint Venture has evolved into an integral and integrated part of the Company's ongoing operations. The Company determined this justifies a more meaningful and transparent presentation of equity in net income of the DGD Joint Venture as a component of the Company's operating income.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended January 1, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended January 2, 2021
Fiscal 2020 includes an additional week of operations which occurs every five to six years. In Fiscal 2020 the additional week occurred in the fourth quarter and increased net sales and operating income by approximately $73 million and $8 million, respectively.
Operating Performance Metrics
Other operating performance metrics indicators which management routinely monitors as an indicator of operating performance include:
•Finished product commodity prices
•Segment results
•Foreign currency exchange
•Corporate activities
•Non-U.S. GAAP measures
These indicators and their importance are discussed below.
Finished Product Commodity Prices
Prices for finished product commodities that the Company produces in the Feed Ingredients segment are reported each business day on the Jacobsen Index (the “Jacobsen”), an established North American trading exchange price publisher. The Jacobsen reports industry sales from the prior day's activity by product. Included on the Jacobsen are reported prices for finished products such as MBM, PM and feather meal (“FM”), hides, BFT and YG and corn, which is a substitute commodity for the Company's BBP as well as a range of other branded and value-added products, which are products of the Company's Feed Ingredients segment. In the U.S. the Company regularly monitors the Jacobsen for MBM, PM, FM, BFT, YG and corn because it provides a daily indication of the Company's U.S. revenue performance against business plan benchmarks. In Europe, the Company regularly monitors Thomson Reuters (“Reuters”) to track the competing commodities palm oil and soy meal.
Although the Jacobsen and Reuters provide useful metrics of performance, the Company's finished products are commodities that compete with other commodities such as corn, soybean oil, palm oil complex, soybean meal and heating oil on nutritional and functional values. Therefore, actual pricing for the Company's finished products, as well as competing products, can be quite volatile. In addition, neither the Jacobsen nor Reuters provides forward or future period pricing for the Company's commodities. The Jacobsen and Reuters prices quoted below are for delivery of the finished product at a specified location. Although the Company's prices generally move in concert with reported Jacobsen and Reuters prices, the Company's actual sales prices for its finished products may vary significantly from the Jacobsen and Reuters because of production and delivery timing differences and because the Company's finished products are delivered to multiple locations in different geographic regions which utilize alternative price indexes. In addition, certain of the Company's premium branded finished products may sell at prices that may be higher than the closest product on the related Jacobsen or Reuters index. During fiscal year 2021, the Company's actual sales prices by product trended with the disclosed Jacobsen and Reuters prices.
Average Jacobsen and Reuters prices (at the specified delivery point) for fiscal year 2021, compared to average Jacobsen and Reuters prices for fiscal year 2020 are:
The following table shows the average Jacobsen and Reuters prices for the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021, compared to the average Jacobsen and Reuters prices for the third quarter of fiscal year 2021.
Segment Results
Segment operating income for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 was $884.5 million, which reflects an increase of $453.6 million or 105.3% as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
Feed Ingredients Segment
Raw material volume. In fiscal year 2021, the raw material processed by the Company's Feed Ingredients segment totaled 8.92 million metric tons. Compared to fiscal year 2020, overall raw material volume processed in the Feed Ingredients segment decreased approximately 0.3% primarily due to one less week of raw material volume as compared to fiscal year 2020.
Sales. During the year ended January 1, 2022, net sales for the Feed Ingredients segment were $3,039.5 million as compared to $2,072.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, an increase of approximately $967.4 million. Net sales for fats were approximately $1,198.1 million and $661.7 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. Protein net sales were approximately $1,022.7 million and $830.2 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. Other rendering net sales, which include hides, pet food, and service charges, were
approximately $173.4 million and $178.6 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. Total rendering net sales were approximately $2,394.2 million and $1,670.5 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. Used cooking oil net sales were approximately $319.1 million and $176.7 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively. Bakery net sales were approximately $287.4 million and $183.8 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively, and other net sales, which includes trap services, were approximately $38.8 million and $41.1 million for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively.
The increase in net sales for the Feed Ingredients segment was primarily due to the following (in millions of dollars):
Margins. In the Feed Ingredients segment for fiscal year 2021, the gross margin percentage was 27.4% as compared to 25.5% for fiscal year 2020. The increase in fiscal year 2021 was primarily due to overall increased finished product prices as compared to fiscal year 2020.
Segment operating income. Feed Ingredients' operating income for fiscal year 2021 was $394.8 million, an increase of $298.2 million or 308.6% as compared to fiscal year 2020. This increase was primarily due to increasing overall fat and protein finished product sales prices leading to an increased gross margin that more than offset higher selling, general and administrative expenses.
Food Ingredients Segment
Raw material volume. In fiscal year 2021, the raw material processed by the Company's Food Ingredients segment totaled 1.11 million metric tons. Compared to fiscal year 2020, overall raw material volume processed in the Food Ingredients segment increased approximately 2.8%.
Sales. Overall sales increased in the Food Ingredients segment due to higher sales volumes and higher sales prices in the collagen and edible fat sales markets.
Margins. In the Food Ingredients segment for fiscal year 2021, the gross margin percentage was 23.0% as compared to 22.4% for fiscal year 2020. The increase is due primarily to higher overall finished product prices as compared to fiscal year 2020.
Segment operating income. Food Ingredients' operating income was $134.0 million for fiscal year 2021, an increase of $50.6 million or 60.7% as compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily due to higher sales volumes and prices in Europe, North America and China collagen markets and higher fat prices in the edible fat market, which was partially offset by a weaker Brazilian real and lower volumes in Brazil as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in South America. In addition, segment operating income increased as a result of lower depreciation expense.
Fuel Ingredients Segment
Raw material volume. In fiscal year 2021, the raw material processed by the Company's Fuel Ingredients segment, excluding the DGD Joint Venture, totaled 1.28 million metric tons. Compared to fiscal year 2020, overall raw material volume processed in the Fuel Ingredients segment decreased approximately 2.5% primarily due to one less week of raw material volume as compared to fiscal year 2020.
Sales. Overall sales increased in the Fuel Ingredients segment primarily due to higher sales volumes and sales prices in Europe.
Margins. In the Fuel Ingredients segment (exclusive of the equity contribution from the DGD Joint Venture) for fiscal year 2021, the gross margin percentage was 27.0% as compared to 28.8% for fiscal year 2020. The decrease is primarily due to considerably higher raw material prices in Europe that more than offset alternative fuel mixture credits recorded in the current period as a reduction to other operating expense in fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020.
Segment operating income. The Company's Fuel Ingredients segment operating income (inclusive of the equity contribution from DGD Joint Venture) for fiscal year 2021 was $425.1 million, an increase of $107.8 million or 34.0% as compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase in earnings is primarily due to the expansion of the DGD Norco Facility that was effective in October 2021, an increase in the renewable identification number (RIN) prices and renewable diesel fuel prices in fiscal year 2021 and a decrease of restructuring and impairment charges, as compared to fiscal year 2020, as well as higher sales prices in our European market.
Foreign Currency
During fiscal year 2021, the euro and Canadian dollar strengthened against the U.S. dollar as compared to fiscal year 2020. Using actual results for fiscal year 2021 and the prior year's average foreign currency rates for fiscal year 2020 would result in a decrease in operating income of approximately $18.9 million. The average rates assumption used in this calculation was the actual average rate for fiscal year 2021 of €1.00:USD$1.18 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.80 as compared to the average rate for fiscal year 2020 of €1.00:USD$1.14 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.75, respectively.
Corporate Activities
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $56.9 million during fiscal year 2021, a $1.6 million increase from $55.3 million during fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily due to an increase in insurance costs, tax and license costs and repairs and maintenance costs that were partially offset by a decrease in corporate related benefits, legal costs, and other miscellaneous costs.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization charges increased slightly by $0.1 million to $11.1 million during fiscal year 2021 as compared to $11.0 million during fiscal year 2020.
Acquisition and Integration Costs. Acquisition and integration costs include amounts incurred during fiscal year 2021 primarily related to the Company's December 2021 announcement that we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire all of the shares of Valley Proteins, Inc. for approximately $1.1 billion in cash.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $62.1 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $72.7 million for fiscal year 2020, a decrease of $10.6 million. The decrease is primarily due to lower amortization of deferred loan costs and lower interest on the Term loan B as a result of partial note pay-downs.
Foreign Currency Losses. Foreign currency losses were $2.2 million during fiscal year 2021, as compared to losses of approximately $2.3 million for fiscal year 2020. The slight decrease is due primarily to reduced losses on the revaluation of non-functional currency liabilities as compared to the same period in fiscal 2020.
Other Expense, net. Other expense was $4.6 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $5.5 million in fiscal year 2020. The decrease in other expense was primarily due to a decrease in pension expense, a decrease in insurance proceeds on fire and casualty losses and a decrease in interest income.
Equity in Net Income of Other Unconsolidated Subsidiaries. The change in this line item is not significant and primarily represents the Company's pro rata share of the net income from its foreign unconsolidated subsidiaries.
Income Taxes. The Company recorded income tax expense of $164.1 million for fiscal year 2021, compared to $53.3 million of income tax expense recorded in fiscal year 2020, an increase of $110.8 million, which was primarily due to an increase in income from operations before income taxes. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2020 was 20.0% and 15.1%, respectively. The effective tax rate for both fiscal years 2021 and 2020 differs slightly from the statutory rate of 21% due primarily to biofuel tax incentives, the relative mix of earnings among jurisdictions with different tax rates, state income taxes and excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation.
Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized accounting measurement under GAAP; it should not be considered as an alternative to net income, as a measure of operating results, or as an alternative to cash flow as a measure of liquidity. It is presented here not as an alternative to net income, but rather as a measure of the Company's operating performance. Since EBITDA (generally, net income plus interest expenses, taxes, depreciation and amortization) is not calculated identically by all companies, the presentation in this report may not be comparable to EBITDA or adjusted EBITDA presentations disclosed by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated below and represents, for any relevant period, net income/(loss) plus depreciation and amortization, goodwill and long-lived asset impairment, interest expense, (income)/loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, income tax provision, other income/(expense) and equity in net (income)/loss of unconsolidated subsidiaries. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating the Company's operating performance compared to that of other companies in its industry because the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA generally eliminates the effects of financing, income taxes and certain non-cash and other items that may vary for different companies for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
As a result, the Company’s management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a measure to evaluate performance and for other discretionary purposes. In addition to the foregoing, management also uses or will use Adjusted EBITDA to measure compliance with certain financial covenants under the Company's Senior Secured Credit Facilities, 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes that were outstanding at January 1, 2022. However, the amounts shown below for Adjusted EBITDA differ from the amounts calculated under similarly titled definitions in the Company’s Senior Secured Credit Facilities, 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes, as those definitions permit further adjustments to reflect certain other non-recurring costs, non-cash charges and cash dividends from the DGD Joint Venture. Additionally, the Company evaluates the impact of foreign currency exchange on operating cash flow, which is defined as segment operating income (loss) plus depreciation and amortization.
Reconciliation of Net Income to (Non-GAAP) Adjusted EBITDA and (Non-GAAP) Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA
Fiscal Year 2021 As Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
(1) The average rate assumption used in this calculation was the actual fiscal average rate for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 of €1.00:USD$1.18 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.80 as compared to the average rate for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 of €1.00:USD$1.14 and CAD$1.00:USD$0.75, respectively.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 2, 2021 compared to the year ended December 28, 2019 are included in Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results in our 2020 Form 10-K and is incorporated herein by reference.
FINANCING, LIQUIDITY, AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Indebtedness
Certain Debt Outstanding at January 1, 2022. On January 1, 2022, debt outstanding under the Company's Amended Credit Agreement, the Company's 5.25% Notes and the Company's 3.625% Notes consists of the following (in thousands):
At January 1, 2022, the U.S. dollar strengthened as compared to the euro at January 2, 2021. Using the euro based debt outstanding at January 1, 2022 and comparing the closing balance sheet rates at January 1, 2022 to those at January 2, 2021, the U.S. dollar debt balances of euro based debt decreased by $49.0 million, at January 1, 2022. The closing balance sheet rate assumptions used in this calculation were the actual fiscal closing balance sheet rate at January 1, 2022 of €1.00:USD$1.132000 as compared to the closing balance sheet rate at January 2, 2021 of €1.00:USD$1.227500.
Senior Secured Credit Facilities. On January 6, 2014, Darling, Darling International Canada Inc. (“Darling Canada”) and Darling International NL Holdings B.V. (“Darling NL”) entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (as subsequently amended, the “Amended Credit Agreement”), restating its then existing Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated September 27, 2013, with the lenders from time to time party thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, and the other agents from time to time party thereto. Effective December 9, 2021, the Company, and certain of its subsidiaries entered into an amendment (the "Seventh Amendment") with its lenders to the Amended Credit Agreement. Among other things, the Seventh Amendment (a) increased the maximum aggregate principal amount of the revolving credit facility from $1.0 billion to $1.5 billion, under which loans will or will continue to be made, as applicable, in U.S. dollars or alternative currencies, to the Company and certain of the Company’s subsidiaries as borrowers under the Amended Credit Agreement, (b) extended the stated maturity date of the revolving credit facility from September 18, 2025 to December 9, 2026, (c) obtained a delayed draw term loan commitment, and incurred new term loans pursuant thereto, in an aggregate principal amount of up to $400.0 million, which will be made available to the Company and have a term of five years, (d) joined Darling Ingredients Germany Holding GmbH (“Darling GmbH”) and Darling Ingredients Belgium Holding B.V. (“Darling Belgium”), each of which are indirect subsidiaries of the Company, and Guarantors under the Amended Credit Agreement, as “Borrowers” under the Amended Credit Agreement and (e) updated and modified certain other terms and provisions of the Amended Credit Agreement, including to reflect alternative reference rates based on the secured overnight financing rate for U.S. dollar loans, the sterling overnight index average for pound sterling loans and the euro short term rate for euro swingline loans. The Amended Credit Agreement provides for senior secured credit facilities in the aggregate principal amount of $2.425 billion comprised of (i) the Company's $525.0 million term loan B facility, (ii) the Company's $400.0 million delayed draw term A loan and (iii) the Company's $1.5 billion five-year revolving loan facility (up to $150.0 million of which will be available for a letter of credit sub-limit and $50.0 million of which will be available for a swingline sub-limit) (collectively, the “Senior Secured Credit Facilities”). The Amended Credit Agreement also permits Darling and the other borrowers thereunder to incur ancillary facilities provided by any revolving lender party to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities
(with certain restrictions). For more information regarding the Amended Credit Agreement see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
•As of January 1, 2022, the Company had availability of $1.286 billion under the revolving loan facility, taking into account an aggregate of $160.0 million in outstanding borrowings, $50.3 million of ancillary facilities and letters of credit issued of $3.8 million.
•As of January 1, 2022, the Company had availability under its delayed draw term A loan commitment of $400.0 million. Under the terms of the delayed draw term A loan, the Company can take up to two years to borrow under the term A loan commitment in U.S. dollars. Amounts borrowed under the term A loan that are repaid by the Company cannot be reborrowed. The term A loan borrowings are repayable in quarterly installments of 0.25% of the aggregate principle amount of the relevant term A loan facility on the last day of each March, June, September and December of each year commencing on the last day of such month falling on or after the last day of the first full fiscal quarter following the second anniversary of the Seventh Amendment date and continuing until the last day of such quarterly period ending immediately prior to the term A loan maturity date of December 9, 2026.
•As of January 1, 2022, the Company has borrowed all $525.0 million under the terms of the term loan B facility and repaid approximately $325.0 million, which when repaid, cannot be reborrowed. As a result of early payments made by the Company under the term loan B facility only one final installment of the relevant term loan B facility then outstanding is due on December 18, 2024. The term loan B facility will mature on December 18, 2024.
•The interest rate applicable to any borrowings under the revolving loan facility will equal the adjusted term secured overnight financing rate (SOFR) for U.S. dollar borrowings or the adjusted euro interbank rate (EURIBOR) for euro borrowings or the adjusted daily simple Sterling overnight index average (SONIA) for British pound borrowings or CDOR for Canadian dollar borrowings plus 1.25% per annum or base rate or the adjusted term SOFR for U.S. dollar borrowings or Canadian prime rate for Canadian dollar borrowings or the adjusted daily simple European short term rate (ESTR) for euro borrowings or the adjusted daily SONIA rate for British pound borrowings plus 0.25% per annum subject to certain step-ups or step-downs based on the Company's total leverage ratio. The interest rate applicable to any borrowing under the delayed draw term loan A will equal the adjusted term SOFR plus a minimum of 1.50% per annum subject to certain step-ups based on the Company's total leverage ratio. The interest rate applicable to any borrowings under the term loan B facility will equal the base rate plus 1.00% or LIBOR plus 2.00%.
5.25% Senior Notes due 2027. On April 3, 2019, Darling issued and sold $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.25% Senior Notes due 2027 (the “5.25% Notes”). The 5.25% Notes, which were offered in a private offering, were issued pursuant to a Senior Notes Indenture, dated as of April 3, 2019 (the “5.25% Indenture”), among Darling, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto from time to time, and Regions Bank, as trustee. The 5.25% Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Darling and all of Darling's restricted subsidiaries (other than foreign subsidiaries). For a description of the terms of the 5.25% Notes see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
3.625 % Senior Notes due 2026. On May 2, 2018, Darling Global Finance B.V. issued and sold €515.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.625% Senior Notes due 2026 (the “3.625% Notes”). The 3.625% Notes, which were offered in a private offering, were issued pursuant to a Senior Notes Indenture, dated as of May 2, 2018 (the “3.625% Indenture”), among Darling Global Finance B.V., Darling, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto from time to time, Citibank, N.A., London Branch, as trustee and principal paying agent, and Citigroup Global Markets Deutschland AG, as principal registrar. The 3.625% Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Darling and all of Darling's restricted subsidiaries (other than any foreign subsidiary or any receivable entity) that guarantee the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. For a description of the terms of the 3.625% Notes see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Other debt consists of U.S., Canadian and European ancillary and overdraft facilities and capital lease obligations and note arrangements in Brazil, China and Europe that are not part of the Company's Amended Credit Agreement, 5.25% Notes or 3.625% Notes.
The classification of long-term debt in the Company’s January 1, 2022 consolidated balance sheet is based on the contractual repayment terms of the 5.25% Notes, the 3.625% Notes and debt issued under the Amended Credit Agreement.
As a result of the Company's borrowings under its Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Indenture and the 3.625% Indenture, the Company is highly leveraged. Investors should note that, in order to make scheduled payments on the indebtedness outstanding under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Notes and the 3.625% Notes, and otherwise, the Company will rely in part on a combination of dividends, distributions and intercompany loan repayments from the Company's
direct and indirect U.S. and foreign subsidiaries. The Company is prohibited under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Indenture and the 3.625% Indenture from entering (or allowing such subsidiaries to enter) into contractual limitations on the Company's subsidiaries’ ability to declare dividends or make other payments or distributions to the Company. The Company has also attempted to structure the Company's consolidated indebtedness in such a way as to maximize the Company's ability to move cash from the Company's subsidiaries to Darling or another subsidiary that will have fewer limitations on the ability to make upstream payments, whether to Darling or directly to the Company's lenders as a Guarantor. Nevertheless, applicable laws under which the Company's direct and indirect subsidiaries are formed may provide limitations on such dividends, distributions and other payments. In addition, regulatory authorities in various countries where the Company operates or where the Company imports or exports products may from time to time impose import/export limitations, foreign exchange controls or currency devaluations that may limit the Company's access to profits from the Company's subsidiaries or otherwise negatively impact the Company's financial condition and therefore reduce the Company's ability to make required payments under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Notes and the 3.625% Notes, or otherwise. In addition, fluctuations in foreign exchange values may have a negative impact on the Company's ability to repay indebtedness denominated in U.S. or Canadian dollars or euros. See “Risk Factors - Our business may be adversely impacted by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, which could affect our ability to comply with our financial covenants” and “- Our ability to repay our indebtedness depends in part on the performance of our subsidiaries, including our non-guarantor subsidiaries, and their ability to make payments” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022.
As of January 1, 2022, the Company believes it is in compliance with all financial covenants under the Amended Credit Agreement, as well as all of the other covenants contained in the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Indenture and the 3.625% Indenture.
Working Capital and Capital Expenditures
On January 1, 2022, the Company had working capital of $336.3 million and its working capital ratio was 1.45 to 1 compared to working capital of $311.7 million and a working capital ratio of 1.46 to 1 on January 2, 2021. At January 1, 2022, the Company had unrestricted cash of $68.9 million and funds available under the revolving credit facility of $1.286 billion, compared to unrestricted cash of $81.6 million and funds available under the revolving credit facility of $893.9 million at January 2, 2021. The Company diversifies its cash investments by limiting the amounts deposited with any one financial institution and invests primarily in government-backed securities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $704.4 million and $624.7 million for the fiscal years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively, an increase of $79.7 million due primarily to an increase in net income that was partially offset by the effect of a negative impact from equity in net income of the DGD Joint Venture as well as a decrease in distributions of earnings from Diamond Green Diesel and other unconsolidated subsidiaries of approximately $202.7 million and to changes in operating assets and liabilities that include a decrease in cash used by accounts receivable of approximately $102.3 million, a decrease in cash used by prepaid expenses and inventory of $54.3 million, an increase in cash provided by income taxes refundable/payable of approximately $14.6 million and an increase in cash provided by accounts payable and accrued expense of approximately $73.4 million. Cash used by investing activities was $490.3 million during fiscal year 2021, compared to $310.6 million in fiscal year 2020, an increase in cash used of $179.7 million, primarily due to an increase in investments in the DGD Joint Venture and other unconsolidated subsidiaries and an increase in loan to the DGD Joint Venture that more than offset a decrease in acquisitions and capital expenditures. Net cash used by financing activities was $221.4 million during fiscal year 2021, compared to $307.0 million in fiscal year 2020, a decrease in cash used of $85.6 million, primarily due to a decrease in debt payments that more than offset increases from the repurchase of common stock and increases in minimum withholding taxes paid as compared to fiscal year 2020.
Capital expenditures of $274.1 million were made during fiscal year 2021 as compared to $280.1 million in fiscal year 2020 a decrease of $(6.0) million, or (2.1)%. The Company expects to incur capital expenditures of approximately $339 million in fiscal year 2022, including new construction, compliance and expansion projects. The Company intends to finance these costs using cash flows from operations. Capital expenditures related to compliance with environmental regulations were $40.6 million in fiscal year 2021, $38.7 million in fiscal year 2020 and $37.4 million in fiscal year 2019.
Accrued Insurance and Pension Plan Obligations
Based upon the annual actuarial estimate, current accruals and claims paid during fiscal year 2021, the Company has accrued approximately $9.9 million as of January 1, 2022 that it expects will become due during the next twelve months in order to meet obligations related to the Company's self-insurance reserves and accrued insurance obligations, which are included in current accrued expenses at January 1, 2022. The self-insurance reserve is composed of estimated liability for claims arising for workers’ compensation and for auto liability and general liability claims. The self-insurance reserve liability
is determined annually, based upon a third party actuarial estimate. The actuarial estimate may vary from year to year, due to changes in costs of health care, the pending number of claims and other factors beyond the control of management of the Company.
Based upon current actuarial estimates, the Company expects to make payments of approximately $0.3 million in order to meet minimum pension funding requirements to its domestic plans in fiscal year 2022. In addition, the Company expects to make payments of approximately $3.6 million under its foreign pension plans in fiscal year 2022. The minimum pension funding requirements are determined annually, based upon a third party actuarial estimate. The actuarial estimate may vary from year to year, due to fluctuations in return on investments or other factors beyond the control of management of the Company or the administrator of the Company’s pension funds. No assurance can be given that the minimum pension funding requirements will not increase in the future. The Company has made required and tax deductible discretionary contributions to its domestic pension plans in fiscal year 2021 and fiscal year 2020 of approximately $0.2 million and $7.5 million, respectively. Additionally, the Company has made required and tax deductible discretionary contributions to its foreign pension plans in fiscal year 2021 of approximately $3.7 million, as compared to $4.0 million in contributions in fiscal year 2020.
The U.S. Pension Protection Act of 2006 (“PPA”) went into effect in January 2008. The stated goal of the PPA is to improve the funding of U.S. pension plans. U.S. plans in an under-funded status are required to increase employer contributions to improve the funding level within PPA timelines. Volatility in the world equity and other financial markets could have a material negative impact on U.S. pension plan assets and the status of required funding under the PPA. The Company participates in various U.S. multiemployer pension plans which provide defined benefits to certain employees covered by labor contracts. These plans are not administered by the Company and contributions are determined in accordance with provisions of negotiated labor contracts to meet their pension benefit obligations to their participants. The Company's contributions to each individual U.S. multiemployer plan represent less than 5% of the total contributions to each such plan. Based on the most currently available information, the Company has determined that, if a withdrawal were to occur, withdrawal liabilities on two of the U.S. plans in which the Company currently participates could be material to the Company, with one of these material plans certified as critical or red zone. With respect to the other U.S. multiemployer pension plans in which the Company participates and which are not individually significant, five plans have certified as critical or red zone and two have certified as endangered or yellow zone, as defined by the PPA. The Company has withdrawal liabilities recorded on four U.S. multiemployer plans in which it participated. During fiscal 2021, the Company was notified by one of these multiemployer plans that the Company's withdrawal liability has increased and as a result the Company recorded an additional liability of approximately $1.3 million. As of January 1, 2022, the Company has an aggregate accrued liability of approximately $3.8 million representing the present value of scheduled withdrawal liability payments on the remaining multiemployer plans that have given notices of withdrawals. While the Company has no ability to calculate a possible current liability for under-funded multiemployer plans that could terminate or could require additional funding under the Pension Protection Act of 2006, the amounts could be material.
DGD Joint Venture
In January 2011, Darling, through a wholly-owned subsidiary, entered into a limited liability company agreement (as subsequently amended, the “DGD LLC Agreement”) with Valero to form the DGD Joint Venture. The DGD Joint Venture is owned 50% / 50% with Valero and was formed to design, engineer, construct and operate a renewable diesel plant located adjacent to Valero's refinery in Norco, Louisiana (the “DGD Norco Facility”). The DGD Norco Facility reached mechanical completion and began the production of renewable diesel and certain other co-products in late June 2013. In October 2021, the DGD Joint Venture completed an expansion of the DGD Norco Facility that increased its renewable diesel production by 410 million gallons per year, so that it is now capable of producing 700 million gallons per year of renewable diesel, as well as separating renewable naphtha (approximately 30 million gallons) and other light end renewable hydrocarbons for sale into low carbon fuel markets. The expansion of the DGD Norco Facility was completed and became operational in October 2021, at a total cost, including naphtha production and improved logistics capability, of approximately $1.1 billion, which was substantially funded by DGD Joint Venture cash flow. Additionally, in January 2021, we and our DGD Joint Venture partner approved the construction of a new facility to be located next to Valero’s Port Arthur Refinery in Port Arthur, Texas, capable of producing 470 million gallons per year of renewable diesel and 20 million gallons per year of renewable naphtha and having similar logistics flexibilities as those of the DGD Norco Facility. Construction is underway, and the new plant is anticipated to commence operations in the first quarter of 2023, with the total cost of the expansion project estimated to be approximately $1.45 billion. Once operational, the new plant is expected to increase the DGD Joint Venture’s total renewable diesel production capacity to approximately 1.2 billion gallons per year. Based on forecasted margins as of the date of this report, the Port Arthur expansion project is expected to be substantially funded by DGD Joint Venture cash flow; however, if the DGD Joint Venture cash flow is not sufficient to fully fund the project, the DGD Joint Venture may need to borrow funds or the joint venture partners may be required to contribute additional funds to complete the project.
On May 1, 2019, Darling, through its wholly owned subsidiary Darling Green Energy LLC, (“Darling Green”), and Diamond Alternative Energy, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Valero (“Diamond Alternative” and together with Darling Green, the “DGD Lenders”) entered into a revolving loan agreement (the “DGD Loan Agreement”) with the DGD Joint Venture. The DGD Lenders have committed to make loans available to the DGD Joint Venture in the total amount of $50.0 million with each lender committed to $25.0 million of the total commitment. Any borrowings by the DGD Joint Venture under the DGD Loan Agreement are at the applicable annum rate equal to the sum of (a) the LIBO Rate (meaning Reuters BBA Libor Rates Page 3750) on such day plus (b) 2.50%. The DGD Loan Agreement matures on April 29, 2022, unless extended by agreement of the parties. The DGD Loan Agreement replaced a similar agreement with lower commitment levels that expired on December 31, 2018. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, the DGD Joint Venture borrowed all $50.0 million available under the DGD Loan Agreement, including the Company's full $25.0 million commitment and paid interest to the Company of approximately $0.1 million. As of January 1, 2022, $25.0 million was owed to Darling Green under the DGD Loan Agreement.
On March 30, 2021, the DGD Joint Venture entered into a $400.0 million senior, unsecured revolving credit facility, with CoBank ACB acting as lead arranger and the administrative agent for the lending group, which is comprised of Farm Credit System institutions. The new revolving credit facility matures March 30, 2024 and is non-recourse to the joint venture partners. As of January 1, 2022, the DGD Joint Venture had borrowings outstanding of $100.0 million under this unsecured revolving credit facility.
Based on the sponsor support agreements executed in connection with the initial construction of the DGD Norco Facility, the Company contributed a total of approximately $111.7 million for completion of the DGD Norco Facility including the Company's portion of cost overruns and working capital funding. In fiscal 2021, each joint venture partner made $189.0 million in additional capital contributions to the DGD Joint Venture. Subsequent to January 1, 2022, each joint venture partner made a capital contribution of approximately $24.75 million. As of January 1, 2022, under the equity method of accounting the Company has an investment in the DGD Joint Venture of approximately $1.3 billion included on the consolidated balance sheet.
The Company’s original investment in DGD has expanded since 2011 to the point that it is now integral to how the Company operates its business. The Company traditionally collected and converted used cooking oil and animal fats into feed ingredients which were sold on a caloric value to feed animals as well as for industrial technical uses. Over the past decade, the world’s increasing focus on climate change and greenhouse gas has provided a new finished market for the Company’s finished fats ingredients. With the Company’s significant fats ownership, this has and continues to transform how the Company operates. In 2021, a large portion of Darling’s total U.S. finished fats products were sold to the DGD Norco Facility as feedstock for renewable diesel. In 2021, 2020 and 2019, DGD was the Company’s largest finished product customer in terms of sales, with the Company recording sales to DGD in those years of $521.7 million, $264.1 million and $208.7 million, respectively.
From a procurement, production and distribution standpoint, DGD has become integral to the Company’s base business. DGD is integrated into the Company’s operations via the combined vertical operating structure from collecting raw fats, to processing collected fats at the Company facilities nationwide to transporting the refined fats to the DGD Norco Facility as feedstock. The Company supply chain has become more efficient and sustainable with transparency for verification to obtain full value to low carbon intensity markets. The development of the low carbon markets in North America and Europe has influenced how the Company operates its core business and has also been a driver for the recent DGD expansions, which are making DGD much more relevant to the Company’s earnings. Since 2011 when construction began on DGD, Darling has invested substantially to increase its U.S. railcar fleet to efficiently manage nationwide transportation of Darling fats to DGD. Additionally, the Company acquired an Iowa location on the Mississippi River that further enhances the ability of the Company's Midwest network of facilities to collect and deliver feedstocks to DGD via water, rail or truck from a centralized location. The Company has also stepped up collection efforts by providing indoor used cooking oil collection units in exchange for extended collection contracts at eating establishments and has moved to more of a centralized digital marketing effort with restaurant chains and franchise groups and invested in internet search engine key words to improve visibility with restaurants. The Company also includes DGD in marketing efforts to emphasize environmental sustainability that restaurants participate in when their used cooking oil is collected by the Company. From a production standpoint, the Company now isolates used cooking oil from other fats to preserve identification to qualify for a higher carbon intensity value. As a result, the Company includes its equity in net income of the DGD Joint Venture as operating income.
Financial Impact of Significant Debt Outstanding
The Company has a substantial amount of indebtedness, which could make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations to our financial lenders and our contractual and commercial commitments, limit our ability to obtain additional financing to fund future working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions or other general corporate requirements on
commercially reasonable terms or at all, require us to use a substantial portion of our cash flows from operations to pay principal and interest on our indebtedness instead of other purposes, thereby reducing the amount of our cash flows from operations available for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes, increase our vulnerability to adverse economic, industry and business conditions, expose us to the risk of increased interest rates as certain of our borrowings are at variable rates of interest, limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry in which we operate, place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to other, less leveraged competitors, and/or increase our cost of borrowing.
Cash Flows and Liquidity Risks
Management believes that the Company’s cash flows from operating activities consistent with the level generated in fiscal year 2021, unrestricted cash and funds available under the Amended Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to meet the Company’s working capital needs and maintenance and compliance-related capital expenditures, scheduled debt and interest payments, income tax obligations, and other contemplated needs through the next twelve months. Numerous factors could have adverse consequences to the Company that cannot be estimated at this time, such as negative impacts from the current COVID-19 outbreak and those factors discussed below under the heading “Forward Looking Statements”. These factors, coupled with volatile prices for natural gas and diesel fuel, currency exchange fluctuations, general performance of the U.S. and global economies, disturbances in world financial, credit, commodities and stock markets, and any decline in consumer confidence, including the inability of consumers and companies to obtain credit due to lack of liquidity in the financial markets, among others, could negatively impact the Company's results of operations in fiscal year 2022 and thereafter. The Company reviews the appropriate use of unrestricted cash periodically. As of the date of this report, other than the Company's previously announced acquisition of Valley Proteins, Inc.for $1.1 billion, plus or minus various closing adjustments in accordance with the Stock Purchase Agreement, no decision has been made as to non-ordinary course material cash usages at this time; however, potential usages could include: opportunistic capital expenditures and/or acquisitions and joint ventures; investments relating to the Company’s renewable energy strategy, including, without limitation, potential required funding obligations with respect to the DGD Joint Venture expansion project or potential investments in additional renewable diesel projects; investments in response to governmental regulations relating to human and animal food safety or other regulations; unexpected funding required by the legislation, regulation or mass termination of multiemployer plans; and paying dividends or repurchasing stock, subject to limitations under the Amended Credit Agreement, the 5.25% Notes and the 3.625% Notes, as well as suitable cash conservation to withstand adverse commodity cycles. The Company's Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program of up to an aggregate of $500.0 million of the Company's Common Stock depending on market conditions. The repurchases may be made from time to time on the open market at prevailing market prices or in negotiated transactions off the market. The program runs through August 13, 2024, unless further extended or shortened by the Board of Directors. During fiscal year 2021, the Company repurchased approximately $167.7 million, including commissions, of its common stock in the open market. As of January 1, 2022, the Company had approximately $500.0 million remaining in its share repurchase program. Subsequent to January 1, 2022, the Company repurchased approximately $11.2 million, including commissions, of its common stock in the open market.
Each of the factors described above has the potential to adversely impact the Company's liquidity in a variety of ways, including through reduced raw materials availability, reduced finished product prices, reduced sales, potential inventory buildup, increased bad debt reserves, potential impairment charges and/or higher operating costs.
Sales prices for the principal products that the Company sells are typically influenced by sales prices for agricultural-based ingredients, the prices of which are based on established commodity markets and are subject to volatile changes. Any decline in these prices has the potential to adversely impact the Company's liquidity. Any of a decline in raw material availability, a decline in agricultural-based alternative ingredients prices, increases in energy prices or the impact of U.S. and foreign regulation (including, without limitation, China), changes in foreign exchange rates, imposition of currency controls and currency devaluations has the potential to adversely impact the Company's liquidity. A decline in commodities prices, a rise in energy prices, a slowdown in the U.S. or international economy or other factors, could cause the Company to fail to meet management's expectations or could cause liquidity concerns.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The following is a description of the terms and conditions of the guarantees with respect to senior notes for which Darling is an issuer or provides full and unconditional guarantee.
Note Guarantees
The Company's 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes (see Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein) are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by the following Notes Guarantors, each of which is a 100% directly or indirectly owned subsidiary of Darling and which constitute all of Darling's existing restricted subsidiaries that are Credit Agreement Guarantors (other than Darling's foreign subsidiaries, Darling Global Finance B.V., which issued the 3.625% Notes and is discussed further below, or any receivables entity): Darling National, Griffin Industries, LLC and its subsidiary Craig Protein Division, Inc., DarPro Storage Solutions LLC, Darling Global Holdings Inc., EV Acquisition LLC, Rousselot Inc., Rousselot Dubuque Inc., Sonac USA LLC and Rousselot Peabody Inc. (collectively, the Notes Guarantors). In addition, the 3.625% Notes, which were issued by Darling Global Finance B.V., a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of Darling, are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by Darling. The Notes Guarantors, and Darling in the case of the 3.625% Notes, fully and unconditionally guaranteed the 5.25% Notes and 3.625% Notes on a joint and several basis. The following financial tables present summarized financial information for (i) Darling, (ii) the combined Notes Guarantors, (iii) the combined other subsidiaries of the Company that did not guarantee the 5.25% Notes or the 3.625% Notes (the “Non-guarantors”), and (iv) eliminations necessary to arrive at the Company's consolidated summarized financial information, which include summarized condensed consolidated balance sheets as of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, and the summarized condensed consolidating statements of operations for the years ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019. Separate financial information is not presented for Darling Global Finance B.V. since it was formed as a special purpose finance subsidiary for the purpose of issuing euro-denominated notes such as the 3.625% Notes and therefore does not have any substantial operations or assets.
Summarized Financial Information
Condensed Balance Sheet Information
(in thousands)
Condensed Statements of Operations Information
(in thousands)
OFF BALANCE SHEET OBLIGATIONS AND OTHER COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS
Based upon the underlying purchase agreements, the Company has commitments to purchase $236.6 million of commodity products, consisting of approximately $78.3 million of finished and raw material products and approximately $135.1 million of natural gas and diesel fuel and approximately $23.2 million of other commitments during the next five years, which are not included in liabilities on the Company’s balance sheet at January 1, 2022. These purchase agreements are entered into in the normal course of the Company’s business and are not subject to derivative accounting. The commitments will be recorded on the balance sheet of the Company when delivery of these commodities occurs and ownership passes to the Company during the next five years, in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The Company's off-balance sheet contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of January 1, 2022 relate to letters of credit, foreign bank guarantees, forward purchase agreements and employment agreements. The Company has excluded these items from the balance sheet in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The following table summarizes the Company’s other commercial commitments, including both on- and off-balance sheet arrangements that are part of the Company's Amended Credit Agreement and other foreign bank guarantees that are not a part of the Company's Amended Credit Agreement at January 1, 2022 (in thousands):
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company follows certain significant accounting policies when preparing its consolidated financial statements. A complete summary of these policies is included in Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.
Certain of the policies require management to make significant and subjective estimates or assumptions that may deviate from actual results. In particular, management makes estimates regarding fair value of the Company’s reporting units
and future cash flows with respect to assessing potential impairment of both long-lived assets and goodwill and pension liability. Each of these estimates is discussed in greater detail in the following discussion.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews the carrying value of long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset, or related asset group, may not be recoverable from estimated future undiscounted cash flows. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset or asset group. In fiscal year 2021 and 2019, no triggering event occurred requiring that the Company perform testing of its long-lived assets for impairment. In December 2020, due to unfavorable economics in the biodiesel industry, the Company made the decision to shut down processing operations at its biodiesel facilities located in the United States and Canada, and there are no current plans to resume biodiesel production at these facilities in the future. In fiscal 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded asset impairment charges related to its biodiesel long-lived assets of approximately $0.1 million and $6.2 million, respectively.
Goodwill and Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets Valuation
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. When assessing the recoverability of goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets, the Company may first assess qualitative factors in determining whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, or an other indefinite lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. The qualitative evaluation is an assessment of multiple factors, including the current operating environment, financial performance and market considerations. The Company may elect to bypass this qualitative assessment for some or all of its reporting units or other indefinite lived intangible assets and perform a quantitative test, based on management's judgment. If the Company chooses to bypass the qualitative assessment, it performs the quantitative approach to impairment testing by comparing the fair value of the Company's reporting units to their respective carrying amounts and records an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amounts exceeds the fair value; however, the loss recognized if any will not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In fiscal 2021, the Company performed a qualitative impairment analysis for its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets at October 30, 2021. Based on the Company's annual impairment testing at October 30, 2021, we concluded it is more likely than not that the fair values of the Company’s reporting units containing goodwill exceeded the related carrying value.
In fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, the Company performed its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing using a quantitative impairment assessment. During the annual impairment testing at October 24, 2020 and prior to finalizing the impairment testing a triggering event occurred resulting in the Company making the decision to shut down the Company's biodiesel facilities as described above, and recording goodwill impairment charges of approximately $31.6 million. Based on the Company's annual impairment testing at October 24, 2020, the fair value of the remaining six reporting units was greater than its carrying value. The Company determined the fair value of reporting units with the assistance of a valuation expert who assisted the Company primarily using the Income Approach to determine the fair value of the Company's reporting units. Key assumptions that impacted the discounted cash flow model were raw material volumes, gross margins, terminal growth rates and discount rates. It is possible, depending upon a number of factors that are not determinable at this time or within the control of the Company, that the fair value of these six reporting units could decrease in the future and result in an impairment to goodwill. Based on the Company’s annual impairment testing at October 26, 2019, the fair values of the Company’s reporting units containing goodwill exceeded the related carrying value. The Company's management believes the biggest risk to these reporting units is decreasing finished product prices impacting gross margins and an economic slowdown that would impact raw material suppliers. Goodwill was approximately $1.2 billion and $1.3 billion at January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively.
Pension Liability
The Company has retirement and pension plans covering a substantial number of its domestic and foreign employees. Major assumptions used in the accounting for these employee benefit plans include the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of increase in employee compensation levels, mortality rates and trends in health care costs. The actuarial assumptions used may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates or longer or shorter life spans of participants. These differences may result in a significant impact to the amount of net periodic benefit cost recorded in future periods.
The discount rate applied to the Company’s pension liability is the interest rate used to calculate the present value of the pension benefit obligation. The weighted average discount rate was 2.40% at January 1, 2022 and 2.10% at January 2, 2021, respectively. The net periodic benefit cost for fiscal year 2022 would increase by approximately $1.1 million if the discount rate was 0.5% lower at a weighted average of 1.90%. The net periodic benefit cost for fiscal year 2022 would decrease by approximately $0.9 million if the discount rate was 0.5% higher at a weighted average of 2.90%.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 24, "New Accounting Pronouncements," to the consolidated financial statements for a description of new accounting pronouncements.
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes “forward-looking” statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the statements. Statements that are not statements of historical facts are forward looking statements and are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as “estimate,” “project,” “planned,” “contemplate,” “potential,” “possible,” “proposed,” “intend,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical facts included in this report are forward looking statements, including, without limitation, the statements under the sections entitled “Business,” “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Legal Proceedings” and located elsewhere herein regarding industry prospects, the Company's financial position and the Company's use of cash. Forward-looking statements are based on the Company's current expectations and assumptions regarding its business, the economy and other future conditions. The Company cautions readers that any such forward-looking statements it makes are not guarantees of future performance and that actual results may differ materially from anticipated results or expectations expressed in its forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of factors, including many that are beyond the Company's control.
In addition to those factors discussed under the heading “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report and elsewhere in this report, and in the Company's other public filings with the SEC, important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company's expectations include: existing and unknown future limitations on the ability of the Company's direct and indirect subsidiaries to make their cash flow available to the Company for payments on the Company's indebtedness or other purposes; global demands for bio-fuels and grain and oilseed commodities, which have exhibited volatility, and can impact the cost of feed for cattle, hogs and poultry, thus affecting available rendering feedstock and selling prices for the Company’s products; reductions in raw material volumes available to the Company due to weak margins in the meat production industry as a result of higher feed costs, reduced consumer demand or other factors, reduced volume from food service establishments, or otherwise; reduced demand for animal feed; reduced finished product prices, including a decline in fat and used cooking oil finished product prices; changes to worldwide government policies relating to renewable fuels and GHG emissions that adversely affect programs like the U.S. government's renewable fuel standard, low carbon fuel standards (“LCFS”) and tax credits for biofuels both in the United States and abroad; possible product recall resulting from developments relating to the discovery of unauthorized adulterations to food or food additives; the occurrence of 2009 H1N1 flu (initially known as Swine Flu), highly pathogenic strains of avian influenza (collectively known as Bird Flu), SARS, BSE, PED or other diseases associated with animal origin in the United States or elsewhere, such as the outbreak of ASF in China and elsewhere; the occurrence of pandemics, epidemics or disease outbreaks, such as the current COVID-19 outbreak; unanticipated costs and/or reductions in raw material volumes related to the Company’s compliance with the existing or unforeseen new U.S. or foreign (including, without limitation, China) regulations (including new or modified animal feed, Bird Flu, SARS, PED, BSE or ASF or similar or unanticipated regulations) affecting the industries in which the Company operates or its value added products; risks associated with the DGD Joint Venture, including possible unanticipated operating disruptions and issues relating to the announced expansion project; risks and uncertainties relating to international sales and operations, including imposition of tariffs, quotas, trade barriers and other trade protections imposed by foreign countries; difficulties or a significant disruption in the Company's information systems or failure to implement new systems and software successfully; risks relating to possible third party claims of intellectual property infringement; increased contributions to the Company’s pension and benefit plans, including multiemployer and employer-sponsored defined benefit pension plans as required by legislation, regulation or other applicable U.S. or foreign law or resulting from a U.S. mass withdrawal event; bad debt write-offs; loss of or failure to obtain necessary permits and registrations; continued or escalated conflict in the Middle East, North Korea, Ukraine or elsewhere; uncertainty regarding the exit of the U.K. from the European Union; and/or unfavorable export or import markets. These factors, coupled with volatile prices for natural gas and diesel fuel, climate conditions, currency exchange fluctuations, general performance of the U.S. and global economies, disturbances in world financial, credit, commodities and stock markets, and any decline in consumer confidence and discretionary spending, including the inability of consumers and companies to obtain credit
due to lack of liquidity in the financial markets, among others, could cause actual results to vary materially from the forward-looking statements included in this report or negatively impact the Company's results of operations. Among other things, future profitability may be affected by the Company’s ability to grow its business, which faces competition from companies that may have substantially greater resources than the Company. The Company's announced share repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time and purchases of shares under the program are subject to market conditions and other factors, which are likely to change from time to time. The Company cautions readers that all forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward looking statements, whether as a result of changes in circumstances, new events or otherwise.