Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For purposes of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, references to “we,” “our,” “us” or similar terms refer to VPCC prior to the closing of the Business Combination.
Overview
We were a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on January 14, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities.
On January 5, 2022, we completed our Business Combination with Dave Inc.
Results of Operations
Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and consummating the acquisition of Dave Inc. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the period from January 14, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $5,269,664, which consists of formation and operational costs of $6,376,928, and transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $600,571, offset by a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,684,892 and interest income on investments held in Trust Account of $22,943.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 9, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,376,598 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment options in the amount of 2,876,598 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $253,765,980.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,100,214 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to VPC Impact Acquisition Holdings Sponsor III, LLC (the “Sponsor”), generating gross proceeds of $7,650,321.
Transaction costs amounted to $14,386,571, consisting of $5,075,320 of underwriting fees, $8,881,809 of deferred underwriting fees and $429,442 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 14, 2021 through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $2,090,773. Net loss of $5,269,664 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $22,943,
changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,684,892, and transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $600,571. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $4,286,155 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $253,788,923. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account.
Until the consummation of the Business Combination, we used the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
We completed our Business Combination on January 5, 2022, which was the Business Combination with Dave Inc, and have raised sufficient capital for our operations. We raised sufficient proceeds in the Business Combination transaction, including funds from the Trust Account net of redemptions and proceeds from the PIPE Investment, to fund operations and transaction expenses.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement, commencing on March 4, 2021, to pay the Sponsor up to $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services. Upon completion of the Business Combination, the Company ceased paying these monthly fees.
The underwriters were entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,881,809 in the aggregate. The deferred fee was paid upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815,
including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in
capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash
gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common share outstanding during the period. We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update(“ASU”)2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted
method for all convertible instruments. ASU2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU2020-06
would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.