Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
For a comparison of our Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, and our Cash Flow discussion for the year ended December 31, 2020, see " Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations” of our Registration Statement on Form S-1/A, as filed with the SEC on May 26, 2021.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. As used in this report, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” or “Day One” refer to Day One Biopharmaceuticals, Inc.
Overview
Day One was founded to address a critical unmet need: children with cancer are being left behind in a cancer drug development revolution. Our name was inspired by the “The Day One Talk” that physicians have with patients and their families about an initial cancer diagnosis and treatment plan. We aim to re-envision cancer drug development and redefine what’s possible for all people living with cancer-regardless of age-starting from Day One.
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to developing and commercializing targeted therapies for patients of all ages with genomically-defined cancers. Initially, we focus our clinical development efforts on pediatric patients living with cancer, a vulnerable population that has been underserved in the recent revolution in targeted therapeutics and immuno-oncology. Our lead product candidate, DAY101 (tovorafenib), is an oral, brain-penetrant, highly-selective type II pan-rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma, or pan-RAF, kinase inhibitor. DAY101 (tovorafenib) has been studied in over 250 patients and has been shown to be well-tolerated as a monotherapy. DAY101 (tovorafenib) has demonstrated encouraging anti-tumor activity in pediatric and adult populations with specific genetic alterations that result in the over-activation of the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase, or MAPK, pathway leading to uncontrolled cell growth. We have initiated a pivotal Phase 2 trial (FIREFLY-1) of DAY101 (tovorafenib) for pediatric patients with relapsed or progressive low-grade glioma, or pLGG, the most common brain tumor diagnosed in children, for which there are no approved therapies and no standard of care. The first patient was dosed in May 2021, we achieved targeted enrollment in March 2022 and we expect to report initial data from this trial in June 2022. Furthermore, we anticipate reporting topline data from this trial in the first quarter of 2023, and, if the data are supportive, we expect to file a related New Drug Application, or NDA, with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, in 2023. DAY101 (tovorafenib) has been granted Breakthrough Therapy designation by the FDA for the treatment of pLGG, based on initial results from a Phase 1 trial which showed evidence of rapid anti-tumor activity and durable responses in pLGG patients. We received Orphan Drug designation for the treatment of malignant melanoma from the FDA in September 2020 and from the EU Commission for the treatment of glioma in May 2021. Additionally, the FDA granted Rare Pediatric designation to DAY101 (tovorafenib) for treatment of low-grade gliomas (LGGs) harboring an activating RAF alteration in July 2021. We also plan to study DAY101 (tovorafenib) alone or in combination with additional agents that target other key signaling nodes in the MAPK pathway in patient populations where various genetic alterations are believed to play an important role in driving disease.
Our second product candidate, pimasertib, is an oral, highly-selective small molecule inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases 1 and 2 (MEK), a well-characterized key signaling node in the MAPK pathway. We expect to initiate a Phase 1b/2 trial in March 2022 to study the combination of DAY101 (tovorafenib) and pimasertib in patients 12 years and older with various MAPK-altered solid tumors. We believe our business development capabilities combined with our extensive experience in oncology drug development and deep ties within the research and patient advocacy communities, particularly within the pediatric setting, positions us to be a leader in identifying, acquiring and developing therapies for patients of all ages. We hold exclusive worldwide rights to DAY101 (tovorafenib) for all oncology indications and to pimasertib for all therapeutic areas subject to certain milestone and royalty payments. For additional information, see the subsection titled “Significant agreements.”
The following table summarizes our product candidate pipeline.
Since our inception in November 2018, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to identifying, acquiring and developing our product candidates and building our pipeline, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, establishing arrangements with third parties for the manufacture of our product candidates, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenues from product sales or any other source and have incurred net losses since commencement of our operations. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we reported a net loss of $72.8 million, $43.8 million, and $17.0 million, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $127.5 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect a significant increase in expenses and substantial losses for the foreseeable future as we continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates, commercialize any approved products, and seek to expand our product pipeline and invest in our organization. In addition, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, audit, accounting, regulatory, tax-related, director and officer insurance, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
To date, we have funded our operations through the sale of our redeemable convertible preferred shares, convertible notes and common stock in our initial public offering.
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $284.3 million as of December 31, 2021. Based on our current operating plan, management believes we have sufficient capital resources to fund anticipated operations into 2024. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we may never achieve profitability, and unless and until then, we will need to continue to raise additional capital. There are no assurances that we will be successful in obtaining an adequate level of financing to support our business plans. If we are unable to raise capital as and when needed or on attractive terms, we may have to significantly delay, reduce or discontinue the development and commercialization of our product candidates or scale back or terminate our pursuit of new in-licenses and acquisitions.
We do not own or operate, and currently have no plans to establish, any manufacturing facilities. We rely, and expect to continue to rely, on third parties for the manufacture of our product candidates for clinical testing, as well as for commercial manufacturing if any of our product candidates obtain marketing approval. As we advance our product candidates through development, we will explore adding backup suppliers for the API, drug product, packaging and formulation for each of our product candidates to protect against any potential supply disruptions.
COVID-19 pandemic
The degree to which COVID-19 and related variants impact our business operations, research and development programs and financial condition will depend on future developments, including the ultimate duration and/or severity of the outbreak, the impact of any resurgences and new strains that emerge, actions by government authorities to contain the spread of the virus, the timing, availability, and effectiveness of any vaccines, and when and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Our management team continues to actively monitor this evolving health crisis and its effects on our operations, key vendors and workforce.
We conduct our clinical trials in the U.S. and internationally in geographic regions that have been and continue to be impacted by COVID-19 to varying degrees. We have experienced and expect to continue to experience volatility in services rendered from our third-party service providers as local governments respond to resurgences and the emergence of new strains, each of which may result in the prolonged reinstitution, extension or enhancement of protective measures. The American Cancer Society has also reported that the pandemic has led to declines in screening, diagnosis and treatment for cancer patients, which will impact the enrollment of patients in clinical trials targeting early-stage cancers and retention of patients overall in our trials. Patient safety remains our paramount concern and we continue to collaborate with our existing and with new investigational sites to implement measures to minimize disruptions to patients and ensure continued access to treatment, in accordance with health authority guidance. We are unable to predict the continuing ultimate impact of this pandemic on our ongoing and planned clinical programs. With respect to manufacturing and supply, we do not anticipate any disruptions to our drug supply chain.
The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak, including related variants, remains highly uncertain and subject to change. The safety, health and well-being of our employees remains a primary concern, and we instituted remote work arrangements for our office-based employees. There are many uncertainties around the COVID-19 pandemic and future developments, which are unpredictable, may result in a material, negative impact to our operations and financial condition.
Significant agreements
Takeda asset agreement
On December 16, 2019, DOT-1 Therapeutics, Inc., or DOT-1, our subsidiary, entered into an asset purchase agreement, or the Takeda Asset Agreement, with Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., an affiliate of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, or Takeda. Pursuant to the Takeda Asset Agreement, we purchased certain technology rights and know-how related to TAK-580 (which is now DAY101 (tovorafenib)) which was being developed to treat patients with primary brain tumors or brain metastases of solid tumors. We also received clinical inventory supplies to use in our research and development activities of such RAF-inhibitor and an assigned investigator clinical trial agreement. Takeda also assigned to us its exclusive license agreement, or the Viracta License Agreement, with Sunesis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (now Viracta Therapeutics, Inc. or Viracta). Takeda also granted us a worldwide, sublicensable exclusive license under specified patents and know-how and non-exclusive license under other patents and know-how generated by Takeda under the Takeda Asset Agreement or otherwise through practice of the technology assigned or licensed to us under the Takeda Asset Agreement, in each case, to develop, manufacture and commercialize products containing DAY101 (tovorafenib) in all fields of use. We also granted Takeda an exclusive license under the technology assigned or licensed to us under the Takeda Asset Agreement and a non-exclusive license under any patents and know-how generated by us under the Takeda Asset Agreement or otherwise through the practice of the technology assigned or licensed to us under the Takeda Asset Agreement, in each case, only for Takeda to develop, manufacture and commercialize products containing DAY101 (tovorafenib) in the field excluded from our license grant. This grant back license to Takeda was terminated at the time of Conversion in connection with the Millennium Stock Exchange Agreement.
In consideration for the sale and assignment of assets and the grant of the license under the Takeda Asset Agreement, DOT-1 made an upfront payment of $1.0 million in cash and issued 9,857,143 shares of Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock in DOT-1 in December 2019. The fair value of issued shares was estimated as $9.9 million, based on the price paid by other investors for issued shares in the Series A financing of DOT-1 Therapeutics, Inc. Pursuant to the terms of the Millennium Stock Exchange Agreement, Takeda agreed to exchange the 9,857,143 shares of Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock of DOT-1, Inc. for 6,470,382 shares of the Company’s common stock pursuant to and contingent upon the effectiveness of the Conversion on May 26, 2021.
For a more complete description of our Takeda Asset Agreement, see the section titled “Business-Significant agreements.”
Viracta license agreement
On December 16, 2019, we amended and restated the Viracta License Agreement that was assigned to us pursuant to the Takeda Asset Agreement. Under the Viracta License Agreement, we received a worldwide exclusive license under specified patent rights and know-how to develop, use, manufacture, and commercialize products containing compounds binding the RAF protein family.
Under the Viracta License Agreement, we paid $2.0 million upfront in cash to Viracta, which was recorded as research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019. We made a milestone payment of $3.0 million to Viracta in February 2021, which was recorded was research and development expenses when the milestone was achieved in April 2021. We are also required to make additional milestone payments of up to $54.0 million upon achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones.
The total amount of consideration for the assets and the license acquired related to the Takeda Asset Agreement and Viracta License Agreement of $12.9 million was recorded as research and development expenses in the consolidated income statement in December 2019.
For a more complete description of our Viracta License Agreement see the section titled “Business-Significant agreements.”
License agreement with Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany
On February 10, 2021, DOT Therapeutics-2, Inc., or DOT-2, our subsidiary, entered into a license agreement, or MRKDG License Agreement, with Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany, a pharmaceutical corporation located in Darmstadt, Germany. Under the MRKDG License Agreement, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany as licensor granted to DOT-2, an exclusive worldwide license, with the right to grant sublicenses through multiple tiers, under specified patent rights and know-how for us to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize products containing and comprising the pimasertib and MSC2015103B compounds. Our exclusive license grant is subject to a non-exclusive license granted by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany’s affiliate to a cancer research organization and Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany retains the right to conduct, directly or indirectly, certain ongoing clinical studies relating to pimasertib. In consideration for the rights granted under the MRKDG License Agreement, we made an upfront payment of $8.0 million to the licensor, which was recorded as research and development expenses. We may also be required to make additional payments of up to $367.0 million based upon the achievement of specified development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, as well a high, single-digit royalty percentage on future net sales of licensed products, if any. Milestones and royalties are contingent upon future events and will be recorded when the milestones are achieved and when payments are due, none of which were achieved during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For a more complete description of our License Agreement with Merck KGaA see the section titled “Business-Significant agreements.”
Components of results of operations
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of external and internal expenses incurred for our research activities, including our discovery and in-licensing undertakings, and the development of our lead product candidate, DAY101 (tovorafenib) and our second product candidate, pimasertib.
External expenses include:
•costs associated with acquiring technology and intellectual property licenses that have no alternative future uses;
•costs incurred under agreements with third-party contract research organizations (CROs), contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs), and other third parties that conduct clinical trials on our behalf; and
•other costs associated with our research and development programs, including laboratory materials and supplies.
Internal expenses include:
•employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation expense, for our research and development personnel; and
•facilities and other overhead expenses, including expenses for rent and facilities maintenance, and amortization.
We expense research and development expenses as incurred. We track external costs by program, which currently consist of expenses for our DAY101 (tovorafenib) program and our pimasertib program. We do not track indirect costs on a program specific basis because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to implement our business strategy, advance DAY101 (tovorafenib) and pimasertib through clinical trials and conduct larger clinical trials, expand our research and development efforts, and identify, acquire and develop additional product candidates, particularly as more of our product candidates move into clinical development and later stages of clinical development.
We cannot reasonably determine the duration and costs to complete future clinical trials of DAY101 (tovorafenib), pimasertib or any other product candidate we may develop or acquire, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates, as well as our ability to obtain the necessary regulatory and marketing approvals are highly uncertain. This is due to numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing new drugs, many of which are outside of our control, including:
•the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of preclinical development activities, as well as of any future clinical trials of our product candidates, and other research and development activities we may conduct;
•uncertainties in clinical trial design;
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients, particularly in light of the COVID-19 pandemic environment;
•the safety and efficacy profiles of our product candidates;
•The timing, receipt and terms of any approvals from applicable regulatory authorities, including the FDA, European Medicines Agency, Health Canada or other regulatory agencies of the investigational NDAs, clinical trial applications or other regulatory filings for DAY101 (tovorafenib) and future product candidates;
•obtaining and maintaining intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•establishing clinical and commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers in order to ensure that we or our third-party manufacturers are able to make product successfully;
•retention and expansion of a workforce of experienced scientists and others to continue research and development of our product candidates;
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the products following any marketing approvals.
•significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
•the impact of any business interruptions to our operations or to those of the third parties with whom we work, particularly considering the COVID-19 pandemic environment; and
•the extent to which we establish additional strategic collaborations or other arrangements.
A change in estimates of any of these factors could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of our current and future product candidates. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our ongoing and planned clinical trials due to patient enrollment or other reasons, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, legal and professional service costs, insurance costs, and facility-related costs. Personnel-related costs include salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, travel expenses, and other related costs, for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate, business development and administrative functions. Legal and professional service expenses include legal fees related to intellectual property and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax, human resources, business development, and other consulting services, stock-based compensation issued to certain nonemployee consultants, and travel expenses and facilities-related expenses.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we anticipate an increase in our personnel headcount to support expansion of research and development efforts for our product candidates, as well as to support our operations generally. We also expect an increase in expenses associated with being a public company, including costs related to compliance with the Nasdaq and SEC requirements; additional director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Changes in fair value of derivative tranche liability
Our obligation to issue additional redeemable convertible preferred shares upon the occurrence of certain milestone events represented a freestanding financial instrument. The instrument was classified as a liability in the consolidated balance sheets and re-measured at each reporting period end and at the settlement date. Changes in the fair value were recognized in other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The tranches were settled and reclassified to redeemable convertible preferred shares upon our issuance of additional Series A redeemable convertible preferred shares in November and December 2020.
Net loss attributable to redeemable convertible noncontrolling interest
Net loss attributable to redeemable convertible noncontrolling interest represented a portion of the net loss that is not allocated to us in our subsidiary, DOT-1. On May 26, 2021, in connection with the terms of the Millennium Stock Exchange Agreement, Takeda exchanged its shares in DOT-1 for our common stock. At that time, redeemable convertible noncontrolling interest was extinguished and DOT-1 became our wholly owned subsidiary.
Results of operations
Comparison of year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $43.6 million, compared to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recorded $8.0 million related to MRKDG License Agreement in February 2021. We recorded $3.0 million related to the milestone met under the Viracta License Agreement in April 2021. Third-party clinical trial expenses increased by $19.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to an increase in clinical trial and product development expenses. Our personnel related expenses increased by $7.7 million resulting from additional headcount and stock-based compensation expenses. Our other research and development expenses decreased by $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as we focused our activities on the development of our product candidates.
The following table summarizes our external and internal research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Third-party CRO, CMO, and other third-party clinical trial costs for DAY 101 program and pimasertib program were $19.8 million and $1.4 million for year ended December 31, 2021, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, third-party CRO, CMO, and other third-party clinical trial costs were attributable to the DAY101 (tovorafenib) program.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $24.5 million, from $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $29.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily due to $14.4 million in employee compensation costs driven by headcount growth, $9.4 million in legal and professional services driven by operational support and the cost of operating as a public company, and $0.7 million in facilities costs and other expenses.
Changes in fair value of derivative tranche liability
During the year ended December 31, 2021, there was no such expense recognized since the derivative tranche liability was settled as of December 31, 2020. During year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $30.0 million expense for changes in fair value of derivative tranche liability related to the milestone-based closing of the Series A redeemable convertible preferred shares financing.
Exchange of redeemable noncontrolling interest shares - deemed dividend
In May 2021, we exchanged Takeda’s redeemable noncontrolling interest shares in DOT-1 for common stock of Day One Biopharmaceuticals, Inc. which resulted in accounting for the transaction as a deemed dividend. As such, we recognized a $100.0 million, non-cash, extinguishment loss to additional paid-in capital, which was calculated as a difference between the fair value of common stock issued to Takeda in the Conversion and the carrying value of the redeemable noncontrolling interest at the conversion date. This was disclosed below net loss on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as a deemed dividend, and included in the net loss per share calculation for the year ended December 31, 2021. There was no such loss recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of liquidity
On June 1, 2021, we completed our IPO and sold an aggregate of 11,500,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $16.00 per share, which included 1,500,000 shares issued upon the full exercise by the underwriters in May 2021 of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock. We received aggregate net proceeds from the IPO of $167.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and offering costs of $17.0 million. Prior to our IPO, we had funded our operations through the sale of our redeemable convertible preferred shares and convertible notes. We had previously raised approximately $192.0 million in gross proceeds from the sale and issuance of our Series A and Series B redeemable convertible preferred shares and convertible notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $127.5 million and $284.3 million in cash and cash equivalents. We believe our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements over the next 12 months and beyond.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures including our license, clinical trial, and laboratory costs as well as to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures including our salary and consulting expenses. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Leases
We have an operating lease obligation for office space. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had fixed lease payment obligations of approximately $0.2 million, with approximately $0.2 million payable within 12 months.
Contract Research Organizations and Contract Manufacturing Organizations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials, with CMOs for clinical supplies manufacturing and with other vendors for preclinical studies, supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice and may have a termination fees and non-cancellable commitments. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts accrued related to termination and cancellation charges as these are not probable, and our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements were not material.
License Agreements
We entered into licensing agreements, which require us to pay milestones contingent upon meeting of specific events. In April 2021, we achieved a milestone related to the Viracta License Agreement of $3.0 million. No other milestones were achieved, due or payable as of December 31, 2021. We are required to pay royalties on sales of products developed under these agreements. All our products are in development as of December 31, 2021 and no such royalties are due. As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any contingent payment obligations since the amount, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the periods presented:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $48.5 million, consisting of our net loss of $72.8 million, partially offset by $2.7 million in net operating assets and liabilities and by non-cash charges of $21.5 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily related to an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.7 million, which includes $3.0 million prepayment of the Viracta license milestone, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $5.1 million, and an increase in accounts payable of $1.5 million. Our non-cash charges primarily consisted of $13.3 million in share-based compensation expense and $0.2 million in non-cash lease expense. We also paid $8.0 million related to the MRKDG License Agreement, which was recognized as research and development expenses and presented in investing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.5 million, consisting of net loss of $43.8 million, net decrease in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.4 million, partially offset by our non-cash charges of $30.7 million. Our non-cash charges included changes in fair value of the Series A derivative tranches liability of $30.0 million, share-based compensation expense of $0.5 million, and non-cash lease expense of $0.1 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.0 million, attributable to the payment under the MRKDG License Agreement.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.1 million, attributable to the purchases of property and equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $297.1 million, attributable to $167.0 million related to the net proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the IPO, and $129.8 million related to the net proceeds from the sale and issuance of Series B redeemable convertible preferred shares.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $30.0 million related to the net proceeds from the issuance of the second and third tranches of Series A redeemable convertible preferred shares in November and December 2020.
Funding requirements
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future in connection with our ongoing activities.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
As a result of anticipated expenditures, we will need to obtain substantial additional financing in connection with our continuing operations. Until such time, if ever, as we cannot generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot predict the timing or amount of increased expenses and cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We did not during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical accounting policies and use of estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements appearing within Item 8 of this annual report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued research and development expenses
We record accrued liabilities for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third- party service providers, which include the conduct of preclinical and clinical studies, and contract manufacturing activities. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service providers under the service agreements.
We make payments in connection with clinical trials under contracts with CMOs and CROs that support conducting and managing our clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiation, which vary by contract and may result in payments that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided. Generally, these agreements set forth the scope of work to be performed at a fixed fee, unit price or on a time and materials basis. We accrue costs for clinical trial activities performed by CROs based upon the estimated amount of work completed on each trial. For clinical trial expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, the activities to be performed for each patient, the number of active clinical sites and the duration for which the patients will be enrolled in the trial. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent possible through internal reviews, correspondence with CROs and review of contractual terms. We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. In accruing service fees of CMOs, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. Clinical supplies inventories that have no alternative use are recorded to research and development expense as ownership for these supplies passes to us.
If we do not identify costs that have begun to be incurred or if we under or over estimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, actual expenses could differ from our estimates. To date, we have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical trials and other research activities.
Share-based compensation
Prior to our IPO, we recognized share-based compensation expense based on the estimated fair value of all share-based awards, incentive shares and restricted share awards, on the date of grant using the option-pricing model. The option-pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common shares, the expected term of the award, the expected volatility, risk-free interest rates, and the dividend yield. In determining the fair value of common shares, the methodologies used to estimate the enterprise value were performed using methodologies, approaches, and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The participation threshold amounts were determined by the board of directors at the time of grant. The expected life of the awards granted during the period was determined based on an expected time to the liquidation event. We applied the risk-free interest rate based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of the grant consistent with the life of the award. The expected volatility was based on a peer group in the industry in which we did business consistent with the expected time to liquidity. The dividend yield was set at zero as the underlying security did not and was not expected to pay a dividend.
Subsequent to closing of the IPO, we use the Black-Scholes valuation model to estimate the fair value of options granted to employees and non-employees, intrinsic value to estimate the fair value of restricted stock award, and fair value of our common stock at the grant date for restricted stock units.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model, used to estimate fair value of stock options awards, requires the use of the following assumptions:
•Fair Value of Common Stock-the closing price on the Nasdaq market at the grant date.
•Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for stock options is calculated using simplified method, as the weighted-average vesting term of the award and the award’s contract period.
•Expected Volatility-Since we do not have sufficient trading history for its common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the average historical volatilities of common stock of comparable publicly traded entities over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies are chosen based on their size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until sufficient historical information regarding the volatility of the common stock price becomes available.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the awards.
•Expected Dividend Yield-We have never paid dividends on the common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, the expected dividend yield use is zero.
We recognize forfeitures by reducing the expense in the same period the forfeitures occur. We recognize share/stock-based compensation expense for awards with performance conditions when it is probable that the condition will be met, and the award will vest.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
New accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of recent accounting pronouncements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
As an emerging growth company, or EGC, under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or JOBS Act, we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an EGC to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act.