ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021.
Overview
Our modern economy runs on knowledge. Today, knowledge lives in the cloud as digital content, and Dropbox is where businesses and individuals can create, access, and share this content globally. We serve more than 700 million registered users across 180 countries.
Since our founding in 2007, our market opportunity has grown as we’ve expanded from keeping files in sync to keeping teams in sync. In a world where using technology at work can be fragmented and distracting, Dropbox makes it easy to focus on the work that matters.
By solving these universal problems, we’ve become invaluable to our users. The popularity of our platform drives viral growth, which has allowed us to scale rapidly and efficiently. We’ve built a thriving global business with 16.79 million paying users.
Our Subscription Plans
We generate revenue from individuals, families, teams, and organizations by selling subscriptions to our platform, which serve the varying needs of our diverse customer base. Subscribers can purchase individual licenses through our Plus and Professional plans, or purchase multiple licenses through our Family plan or our Standard, Advanced, and Enterprise team plans. Each team or family represents a separately billed deployment that is managed through a single administrative dashboard. Teams must have a minimum of three users, but can also have more than tens of thousands of users. Families can have up to six users. Customers can choose between an annual or monthly plan, with a small number of large organizations on multi-year plans. A majority of our customers opt for our annual plans, although we have seen and may continue to see an increase in customers opting for our monthly plans. Our customer base is highly diversified, and in the periods presented, no customer accounted for more than 1% of our revenue. We typically bill our customers at the beginning of their respective terms and recognize revenue ratably over the term of the subscription period. International customers can pay in U.S. dollars or a select number of foreign currencies.
Our premium subscription plans, such as Professional and Advanced, provide more functionality than other subscription plans and have higher per user prices. Our Standard and Advanced subscription plans offer robust capabilities for businesses, and the vast majority of Dropbox Business teams purchase our Standard or Advanced subscription plans. While our Enterprise subscription plan offers more opportunities for customization, companies can subscribe to any of these team plans for their business needs.
In the first quarter of 2021, we acquired DocSend, a secure document sharing and analytics company. The combination of DocSend with our other product offerings helps customers across industries manage end-to-end document workflows-from content collaboration to sharing and e-signature-giving them more control over their business results.
DocSend offers paid subscription plans, including a personal plan designed for individuals and Standard, Advanced, and Enterprise plans designed for business users and teams. Similar to Dropbox plans, pricing of DocSend's plans is based on the number of licenses purchased. Customers can choose between an annual or monthly plan, with a small number of large organizations on multi-year plans. We typically bill DocSend customers at the beginning of their respective terms and recognize revenue ratably over the subscription period. DocSend primarily sells within the United States, and the majority of sales are in U.S. dollars.
We also offer HelloSign as our e-signature solution. HelloSign has several product lines, and the pricing and revenue generated from each product line varies, with some product lines priced based on the number of licenses purchased (similar to Dropbox plans), while others are priced based on a customer’s transaction volume. Depending on the product purchased, teams must have a minimum number of licenses, but can also have hundreds of users. Customers can choose between an annual or
monthly plan, with a small number of large organizations on multi-year plans. We typically bill HelloSign customers at the beginning of their respective terms and recognize revenue ratably over the subscription period. We sell HelloSign products globally and sell primarily in U.S. dollars.
Our Business Model
Drive new signups
We acquire users efficiently and at relatively low costs through word-of-mouth referrals, direct in-product referrals, and sharing of content. Anyone can create a Dropbox account for free through our website or app and be up and running in minutes. These users often share and collaborate with other non-registered users, attracting new signups into our network.
Increase conversion of registered users to our paid subscription plans
We generate over 90% of our revenue from self-serve channels-users who purchase a subscription through our app or website. To grow our recurring revenue base, we actively encourage our registered users to convert to one of our paid plans based on the functionality that best suits their needs. We do this via in-product prompts and notifications, time-limited free trials of paid subscription plans, email campaigns, and lifecycle marketing. Together, these enable us to generate increased recurring revenues from our existing user base.
Upgrade and expand existing customers
We offer a range of paid subscription plans, from Plus, Professional, and Family for individuals to Standard, Advanced, and Enterprise for teams. We analyze usage patterns within our network and run hundreds of targeted marketing campaigns to encourage paying users to upgrade their plans. We prompt individual subscribers who collaborate with others on Dropbox to purchase our Standard or Advanced plans for a better team experience, and we also encourage existing Dropbox Business teams to purchase additional licenses or to upgrade to premium subscription plans. We also aim to offer additional products that expand our content collaboration capabilities, such as through our acquisitions of HelloSign in 2019 and DocSend in 2021.
COVID-19 Update
Although we did not experience material impacts to our financial condition and results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, we have seen and may continue to see impacts to certain components of results of operations, as described below. However, the full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will continue to depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, new information about additional variants, the availability and efficacy of vaccine distributions, additional or renewed actions by government authorities and private businesses to contain the pandemic or respond to its impact and altered consumer behavior, the pace of reopening, impact on our customers and our sales cycles, impact on our business operations, impact on our customer, employee or industry events, and effect on our vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has created economic uncertainty, including disruptions of the supply chain globally and labor shortages, which may adversely impact us directly or indirectly as a result of the effects on our customers and vendors. Accordingly, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business, financial condition or results of operations remains uncertain, but may include, without limitation, impacts to our paying user growth as well as disruptions to our business operations as a result of travel restrictions, shutdown of workplaces and potential impacts to our vendors.
Additionally, our results of operations and cash flows are subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates relative to U.S. dollars, our reporting currency, as well as changes in interest rates. Volatile market conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic has, at times, and may in the future negatively impact our results of operations and cash flows, due to (i) a weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which may cause our revenues to decline relative to our costs, and (ii) government-initiated reductions in interest rates or maintaining low interest rates, which may reduce our interest income. Conversely, we have seen and may continue to see cost savings from the shift to remote work for all of our employees in areas including events, travel, utilities, and other benefits. We may continue to experience certain of these cost savings beyond the resolution of the COVID-19 pandemic as we shift to our Virtual First work model, as described below. Due to our subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods, if at all.
Virtual First
The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have led us to reimagine the way we work, resulting in our announcement in October 2020 of our shift to a Virtual First work model pursuant to which remote work has become the primary experience for all of our employees. As a result, we expect that our workforce will continue becoming more distributed over time, although we will continue to offer our employees opportunities for in-person collaboration in all locations we currently have offices, either through our existing real-estate, or new on-demand, flexible spaces, which are known as "Dropbox Studios". Consistent with this strategy, we have retained a portion of our office space while the remainder will be subleased. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we executed a partial termination of our headquarters head lease and the related sublease for the space. See Note 9, "Leases" for additional information. We recorded impairment charges of $31.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the continued adoption of Virtual First, including impairment related to real estate assets acquired as part of our acquisition of DocSend. We recorded an impairment charge of $398.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 9, "Leases" for additional information. We may incur additional charges depending on the continued recovery of the global real estate market. In addition to generating sublease income, we expect that as a result of our shift to Virtual First we will continue to see certain savings that we experienced as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in areas, including reductions in facilities related costs and depreciation expense due to the impairment charges related to the continued adoption of Virtual First.
Reduction in Force
On January 13, 2021, we announced a reduction of our global workforce by approximately 11% to streamline our team structure in support of our business priorities. As a result, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $14.3 million of expenses related to severance, benefits, and other related items. We do not expect to incur additional expenses of any significance related to our reduction in force in future periods.
Key Business Metrics
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Total annual recurring revenue
We primarily focus on total annual recurring revenue (“Total ARR”) as the key indicator of the trajectory of our business performance. Total ARR represents the amount of revenue that we expect to recur annually, enables measurement of the progress of our business initiatives, and serves as an indicator of future growth. In addition, Total ARR is less subject to variations in short-term trends that may not appropriately reflect the health of our business, however the changes in ARR throughout the year could be subject to seasonality. Total ARR is a performance metric and should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue, and is not intended to be a substitute for, or combined with, any of these items.
Total ARR consists of contributions from all of our revenue streams, including subscriptions and add-ons. We calculate Total ARR as the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to our platform as of the end of the period, multiplied by their annualized subscription price to our platform. We include ARR related to acquired companies in our total ARR in the period of the acquisition. We adjust the exchange rates used to calculate Total ARR on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year.
We experienced an increase in ARR during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in ARR was primarily driven by an increase in paying users across our product portfolio, as well as an increased mix of sales going to our higher-priced subscription plans. In addition, we acquired DocSend in the first quarter of 2021, resulting in a benefit to Total ARR.
The below tables set forth our Total ARR using the exchange rates set at the beginning of each year, as well as on a constant currency basis relative to the exchange rates used in 2021.
Revaluing our ending Total ARR for fiscal 2021 using exchange rates set at the beginning of fiscal 2022, Total ARR at the end of fiscal 2021 would be $2,250 million.
Paying users
We define paying users as the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to our platform as of the end of the period. One person would count as multiple paying users if the person had more than one active license. For example, a 50-person Dropbox Business team would count as 50 paying users, and an individual Dropbox Plus user would count as one paying user. If that individual Dropbox Plus user was also part of the 50-person Dropbox Business team, we would count the individual as two paying users.
We have experienced growth in the number of paying users across our products, with the majority of paying users for the periods presented coming from our self-serve channels.
We define DocSend paying users as the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to our platform as of the end of the period. DocSend users have been included as paying users since our acquisition of DocSend in 2021.
HelloSign has several product lines and the pricing and revenue generated from each product line varies, with some product lines priced based on the number of licenses purchased (similar to Dropbox plans), while others are priced based on a customer’s transaction volume. For purposes of HelloSign results, we include as paying users either (i) the number of users who have active paid licenses for access to the HelloSign platform as of the period end for those products that are priced based on the number of licenses purchased (which is the same method we use to evaluate existing Dropbox plans) or (ii) the number of customers for those products that are priced based on transaction volumes.
The below table sets forth the number of paying users as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Average revenue per paying user
We define average revenue per paying user, or ARPU, as our revenue for the period presented divided by the average paying users during the same period. For interim periods, we use annualized revenue, which is calculated by dividing the revenue for the particular period by the number of days in that period and multiplying this value by 365 days. Average paying users are calculated based on adding the number of paying users as of the beginning of the period to the number of paying users as of the end of the period, and then dividing by two.
We experienced an increase in our average revenue per paying user for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increased mix of sales toward our higher-priced subscription plans and the acquisition of DocSend, as well as favorable foreign exchange rates across multiple currencies.
The below table sets forth our ARPU for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we believe that free cash flow, or FCF, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating our liquidity.
Free cash flow
We define FCF as GAAP net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. We believe that FCF is a liquidity measure and that it provides useful information regarding cash provided by operating activities and cash used for investments in property and equipment required to maintain and grow our business. FCF is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. FCF has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities. Some of the limitations of FCF are that FCF does not reflect our future contractual commitments, excludes investments made to acquire assets under finance leases, includes capital expenditures, and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Our FCF increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in cash provided by operating activities, which was driven by increased subscription sales, as a majority of our paying users are invoiced in advance, and a decrease in capital expenditures as a result of decreased spend on office build-outs.
We expect our FCF to generally increase in future periods as we increase subscription sales and reduce our capital expenditures as we shift to a Virtual First environment. Although we expect to continue to purchase infrastructure equipment to support our user base, we anticipate that our capital expenditures related to building out our office spaces will continue to decline in future periods. The timing of our operating expenses as described below, may result in FCF to vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
The following is a reconciliation of FCF to the most comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by operating activities:
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from sales of subscriptions to our platform.
Revenue is recognized ratably over the related contractual term generally beginning on the date that our platform is made available to a customer. Our subscription agreements typically have monthly or annual contractual terms, although a small percentage have multi-year contractual terms. Our agreements are generally non-cancelable. We typically bill in advance for monthly contracts and annually in advance for contracts with terms of one year or longer. Amounts that have been billed are initially recorded as deferred revenue until the revenue is recognized.
Our revenue is driven primarily by conversions and upsells to our paid plans. We also generate revenue from transaction-based products and fees from the referral of users to our partners. We generate over 90% of our revenue from self-serve channels. No customer represented more than 1% of our revenue in the periods presented.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the storage, delivery, and distribution of our platform for both paying users and free users. These costs, which we refer to as infrastructure costs, include depreciation of our servers located in co-location facilities that we lease and operate, rent and facilities expense for those datacenters, network and bandwidth costs, support and maintenance costs for our infrastructure equipment, and payments to third-party datacenter service providers. Cost of revenue also includes costs, such as salaries, bonuses, employer payroll taxes and benefits, travel-related expenses, and stock-based compensation, which we refer to as employee-related costs, for employees whose primary responsibilities relate to supporting our infrastructure and delivering user support. Other non-employee costs included in cost of revenue include credit card fees related to processing customer transactions, and allocated overhead, such as facilities, including rent, utilities, depreciation on leasehold improvements and other equipment shared by all departments, and shared information technology costs. In addition, cost of revenue includes amortization of developed technologies, professional fees related to user support initiatives, and property taxes related to the datacenters.
We plan to continue increasing the capacity and enhancing the capability and reliability of our infrastructure to support user growth and increased use of our platform. We expect that cost of revenue will increase in absolute dollars in future periods.
Gross margin. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period based on the timing of additional capital expenditures and the related depreciation expense, or other increases in our infrastructure costs, as well as revenue fluctuations. We generally expect our gross margin to remain relatively constant in both the near term and the long term.
Operating expenses
Research and development. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for our engineering, product, and design teams, compensation expenses related to key personnel from acquisitions and allocated overhead. These groups are responsible for the design, development, testing, delivery of new technologies and features, and support of our self-serve platform. We continue to focus our product development efforts on adding new features and enhancing the functionality and ease of use of our offerings. Additionally, research and development expenses include internal development-related third-party hosting fees. We have expensed almost all of our research and development costs as they were incurred.
We plan to continue hiring employees for our engineering, product, and design teams to support our research and development efforts. We expect that research and development costs will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and fluctuate from period to period as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses relate to both self-serve and outbound sales activities, and consist primarily of employee-related costs, brand marketing costs, lead generation costs, sponsorships and allocated overhead. Sales commissions earned by our outbound sales team and the related payroll taxes, as well as commissions earned by third-party resellers that we consider to be incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer, are deferred and are typically amortized over an estimated period of benefit of five years. Additionally, sales and marketing expenses include non-employee costs related to app store fees, fees payable to third-party sales representatives and amortization of acquired customer relationships.
We plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing to grow our user base and increase our brand awareness, including marketing efforts to continue to drive our self-serve business model. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will generally increase in absolute dollars in future periods and fluctuate from period to period as a percentage of revenue. The trend and timing of sales and marketing expenses will depend in part on the timing of marketing campaigns.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for our legal, finance, human resources, and other administrative teams, as well as certain executives. In addition, general and administrative expenses include allocated overhead, outside legal, accounting and other professional fees, and non-income-based taxes.
We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses to support the growth of the Company. General and administrative expenses include the recognition of stock-based compensation expense related to the grant of restricted stock
made to our co-founder. We expect that general and administrative expenses will fluctuate in absolute dollars in future periods and will generally decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Interest income (expense), net
Interest income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on our money market funds classified as cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, partially offset by interest expense related to our finance lease obligations for infrastructure and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Other income, net
Other income, net consists of other non-operating gains or losses, including those related to equity investments, disposal of assets, lease arrangements, which include sublease income, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and realized gains and losses related to our short-term investments.
Benefit from (provision for) income taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. For the periods presented, the difference between the U.S. statutory rate and our effective tax rate is primarily due to changes to the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. Our effective tax rate is also impacted by earnings realized in foreign jurisdictions with statutory tax rates lower than the federal statutory tax rate. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets for federal and state as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our total revenue for those periods:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2)Includes impairment charges related to real estate assets as a result of our decision to shift to a Virtual First work model. See Note 9 "Leases" for further information.
(3)Fourth quarter and full-year 2021 net income was impacted by a $38.1 million one-time income tax benefit from the release of a valuation allowance on our Irish deferred tax assets.
(4)On March 19, 2020, one of our co-founders resigned as a member of the board and as an officer of the Company, resulting in the reversal of $23.8 million in stock-based compensation expense. Of the total amount reversed, $21.5 million related to expense recognized prior to December 31, 2019. See Note 12 "Stockholders' (Deficit) Equity" for further information.
The following table sets forth our results of operations for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased $244.0 million or 13% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was driven primarily by an increase in paying users, an increased mix of sales towards our higher-priced subscription plans and favorable foreign exchange rates across multiple currencies.
Cost of revenue, gross profit, and gross margin
Cost of revenue increased $29.6 million or 7% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases of $14.4 million in infrastructure costs due to an increase in depreciation expense, $8.1 million in credit card transaction fees due to higher sales and $6.3 million in employee-related costs. These increases were offset by a decrease of $3.4 million in allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters.
Our gross margin increased from 78% during the year ended December 31, 2020 to 79% during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to a 13% increase in revenue during the period, which was offset by a lower percentage increase in our cost of revenue described above.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased $28.4 million or 4% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of $45.4 million in employee-related costs. This increase was offset by a decrease of $20.8 million in allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $4.7 million or 1% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to $33.7 million related to brand and other marketing related expenses primarily due to our marketing campaigns during the second half of 2021, $6.9 million in app store fees due to increased sales, and $1.5 million in amortization of intangible assets due to our acquisition of DocSend. These increases were offset by decreases of $26.2 million in allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters and $12.0 million in employee-related costs driven by a reduction in headcount including the impact of our reduction in force in the first quarter of 2021.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense decreased $3.2 million or 1% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to decreases of $16.4 million in allocated overhead, which includes facilities-related costs for our corporate headquarters, $2.3 million in non-income-based taxes and $1.7 million in legal fees. These decreases were offset by increases of $15.3 million due to employee-related costs, including $12.2 million in stock-based compensation driven by the resignation of one of the co-founders and the forfeiture of his Co-Founder Grant in the first quarter of 2020 and $1.3 million in software license subscriptions.
Impairment related to real estate assets
Impairment related to real estate assets was $31.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as we continued to evaluate the recoverability of our real estate assets as a result of our continued adoption of our Virtual First strategy. Adjustments to market participant assumptions, primarily expected downtime prior to the commencement of future subleases, resulted in the additional impairment losses, as well as impairment related to real estate assets acquired as part of the acquisition of DocSend in the first quarter of 2021.
Interest income, net
Interest income, net decreased $6.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in interest income from our money market funds and short-term investments as a result of government-initiated interest rate reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and an increase in interest expense due to the amortization of debt issuance costs incurred as part of our convertible debt offering during the three months ended March 31, 2021.
Other income, net
Other income, net increased $5.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $13.6 million gain related to the partial termination of our headquarters head lease and $14.1 million in gains related to the disposal of infrastructure assets. These increases were offset by $17.5 million in gains related to the sale of an equity investment during the year ended December 31, 2020 and decreases of $4.7 million in foreign currency transaction gains.
Benefit from (provision for) income taxes
Benefit from income taxes increased by $42.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to tax benefits from the DocSend acquisition and the release of a valuation allowance on Irish deferred tax assets during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $533.0 million and short-term investments of $1,185.1 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments consist primarily of cash, money market funds, corporate notes and obligations, U.S. Treasury securities, certificates of deposit, asset-backed securities, commercial paper, foreign government securities, U.S. agency obligations, supranational securities, and municipal
securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had $201.4 million of our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries. We do not expect to incur material taxes in the event we repatriate any of these amounts.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through cash generated from our operations, the issuance of the Notes and equity issuances, and finance leases to finance infrastructure-related assets in co-location facilities that we directly lease and operate. We enter into finance leases in part to better match the timing of payments for infrastructure-related assets with that of cash received from our paying users. In our business model, some of our registered users convert to paying users over time, and consequently there is a lag between initial investment in infrastructure assets and cash received from some of our users.
In February 2021, we issued approximately $1.4 billion in aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes, comprised of $695.8 million in aggregate principal amount of 2026 Notes and $693.3 million in aggregate principal amount of 2028 Notes. The net proceeds from the issuance of the 2026 Notes and 2028 Notes were $684.8 million, net of debt issuance costs, and $682.3 million, net of debt issuance costs, respectively. The 2026 Notes mature on March 1, 2026 and the 2028 Notes mature on March 1, 2028. The Notes of each series will not bear regular interest and the principal will not accrete. The Notes of each series may bear special interest as the remedy relating to the Company’s failure to comply with certain of its reporting obligations. These Notes can be converted or repurchased prior to maturity if certain conditions are met.
Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations, repurchases of our Class A common stock, purchases of short-term investments, the satisfaction of tax withholdings in connection with the settlement of restricted stock units and awards, making principal payments on our finance lease obligations, and capital expenditures. In February 2020, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program for the repurchase of up to $600 million of the outstanding shares of our Class A common stock. In February 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $1 billion of the outstanding shares of our Class A common stock. In February 2022, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $1.2 billion of the outstanding shares of our Class A common stock. Share repurchases will be made from time to time in private transactions or open market purchases as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements and will be subject to a review of the circumstances in place at that time, including prevailing market prices. The program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number of shares and has no specified time limit; it may be discontinued at any time. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased and subsequently retired 41.1 million shares of our Class A common stock for an aggregate amount of $1,058.6 million. This includes $200.0 million used to repurchase 8.6 million shares of our Class A common stock in conjunction with the issuance of the Notes, which was outside of our stock repurchase program. The pace of our share repurchases may vary due to various circumstances, including market conditions and our stock price.
In April 2017, we entered into a $600.0 million credit facility with a syndicate of financial institutions, which was subsequently amended in February 2018 and February 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the revolving credit facility, we may issue letters of credit under the revolving credit facility, which reduce the total amount available for borrowing under such facility. The revolving credit facility terminates on April 4, 2022. In February 2018, we amended our revolving credit facility to, among other things, permit us to make certain investments, enter into an unsecured standby letter of credit facility, and increase our standby letter of credit sublimit to $187.5 million. We also increased our borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility from $600.0 million to $725.0 million. In February 2021, we amended our revolving credit facility to decrease our borrowing capacity from $725.0 million to $500.0 million. We may from time to time request increases in the borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility of up to $250.0 million, provided no event of default has occurred or is continuing or would result from such increase.
Interest on borrowings under the revolving credit facility accrues at a variable rate tied to SOFR, the prime rate, or the federal funds effective rate at our election. Interest is payable quarterly in arrears. Pursuant to the terms of the revolving credit facility, we are required to pay an annual commitment fee that accrues at a rate of 0.20% per annum on the unused portion of the borrowing commitments under the revolving credit facility. In addition, we are required to pay a fee in connection with letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility that accrues at a rate of 1.375% per annum on the amount of such letters of credit outstanding. There is an additional fronting fee of 0.125% per annum multiplied by the average aggregate daily maximum amount available under all letters of credit.
The revolving credit facility contains customary conditions to borrowing, events of default, and covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to incur indebtedness, grant liens, make distributions to our holders or our subsidiaries’ equity interests, make investments, or engage in transactions with our affiliates. In addition, the revolving credit facility contains financial covenants, including a consolidated leverage ratio incurrence covenant and a minimum liquidity balance. We were in compliance with all covenants under the revolving credit facility as of as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no amounts outstanding under the revolving credit facility and an aggregate of $52.2 million in letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility. Our total available borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility was $447.8 million as of December 31, 2021.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with our short-term investments, cash provided by operations and amounts available under the revolving credit facility, will be sufficient to meet our needs for the foreseeable future. In addition to the convertible notes discussed above, as of December 31, 2021, we have cash commitments due to additional known contractual obligations.
The following table presents cash commitments due to known contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under operating leases for our offices and data centers, excluding rent payments from our sub-tenants and variable operating expenses with terms of 14 years or less. As of December 31, 2021, we are entitled to non-cancelable rent payments from our sub-tenants of $76.3 million, which will be collected over the next 9 years.
(2)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under finance leases primarily for our infrastructure with terms of 4 years or less.
(3)Consists of commitments to third-party vendors for services related to our infrastructure, infrastructure warranty contracts, and asset retirement obligations for office modifications with terms of 14 years or less.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support further infrastructure development and research and development efforts, the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in collaboration spaces, our ability to sublease space at office locations where we have unused spaces, the satisfaction of tax withholding obligations for the release of restricted stock units and awards, the expansion of sales and marketing and international operation activities, the introduction of new product capabilities and enhancement of our platform, the continuing market acceptance of our platform, and the volume and timing of our share repurchases. We have and may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
Our cash flow activities were as follows for the periods presented:
Operating activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our paying users for subscriptions to our platform. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, infrastructure-related costs, and marketing expenses. Net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by our net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expenses, stock-based compensation, and impairment related to real estate assets, as well as the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $729.8 million, which primarily consisted of our net income of $335.8 million, adjusted for stock-based compensation expense of $287.1 million, depreciation and amortization expenses of $151.4 million, impairment related to real estate assets of $31.3 million, and net cash outflow of $93.9 million from operating assets and liabilities. The outflow from operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to the payment of our corporate bonus, key employee holdback payments related to the acquisition of HelloSign, and payment for partial termination of the headquarters head lease.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities is primarily impacted by purchases of short-term investments, purchases of property and equipment to make improvements or modifications to existing and new office spaces, and for purchasing infrastructure equipment in co-location facilities that we directly lease and operate.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $524.8 million, which primarily related to $396.1 million in net investment outflows, driven by the purchases of short-term investments, net of sales and maturities and $140.0 million related to cash paid for acquisitions. Additionally, cash paid for capital expenditures during the period was $22.1 million related to our office and datacenter build-outs.
Financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities is primarily impacted by cash used for repurchases of common stock, tax withholding obligations for the release of RSUs and RSAs, and principal payments on finance lease obligations for our infrastructure equipment. Additionally, in connection with the issuance of convertible senior notes, proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes, proceeds from the issuance of warrants, purchases of convertible senior note hedges, and debt issuance costs impacted net cash used in financing activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $16.2 million, which primarily consisted of $1,303.0 million in net proceeds from the 2026 Notes and 2028 Notes, offset by offering costs, and the concurrent Note Hedges and Warrants transaction, $1,058.5 million for the repurchase of our common stock, $124.8 million for the satisfaction of tax withholding obligations for the release of restricted stock units and awards, and $110.4 million in principal payments on finance lease obligations.
Significant Impacts of Stock-Based Compensation
Co-Founder Grants
In December 2017, the Board of Directors approved a grant to the Company’s co-founders of restricted stock awards (“RSAs”) with respect to 14.7 million shares of Class A Common Stock in the aggregate (collectively, the “Co-Founder Grants”), of which 10.3 million RSAs were granted to Drew Houston, the Company’s co-founder and Chief Executive Officer, and 4.4 million RSAs were granted to Arash Ferdowsi, the Company’s co-founder and former director. These Co-Founder Grants have service-based, market-based, and performance-based vesting conditions. The Co-Founder Grants are excluded from Class A common stock issued and outstanding until the satisfaction of these vesting conditions. The Co-Founder Grants also provide the holders with certain stockholder rights, such as the right to vote the shares with the other holders of Class A common stock and a right to cumulative declared dividends.
In March 2020, one of the Company's co-founders, Mr. Ferdowsi, resigned as a member of the Board of Directors and as an officer of the Company. As of the date of Mr. Ferdowsi’s resignation, none of the Stock Price Targets had been met, resulting in the forfeiture of all of his 4.4 million RSAs. As he did not provide the requisite service associated with the Co-Founder Grants, the Company reversed all stock-based compensation expense that had been recognized from the grant date through March 19, 2020. See Note 12, "Stockholders' (Deficit) Equity" for further information.
The Co-Founder Grants are eligible to vest over the ten-year period following the date the Company’s shares of Class A common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market in connection with the Company’s IPO. The Co-Founder Grants comprise nine tranches that are eligible to vest based on the achievement of stock price goals, each of which are referred to as a Stock Price Target, measured over a consecutive thirty-day trading period during the Performance Period. The Performance Period began on January 1, 2019.
During the first four years of the Performance Period, no more than 20% of the shares subject to each Co-Founder Grant would be eligible to vest in any calendar year. After the first four years, all shares are eligible to vest based on the achievement of the Stock Price Targets.
The Performance Vesting Condition for the Co-Founder Grants was satisfied on the date the Company’s shares of Class A common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market in connection with the Company’s IPO, which was March 23, 2018.
The Stock Price Target for Mr. Houston's first tranche of the Co-Founder Grant was achieved in the third quarter of 2021. As a result, the first tranche of Mr. Houston's Co-Founder Grant, or 2.1 million shares of Class A common stock, vested in the fourth quarter of 2021. The stock-based compensation expense for Mr. Houston's Co-Founder Grant is recognized utilizing the accelerated attribution method, and therefore no incremental stock-based compensation was recognized. From time to time, directors, officers, and employees of the Company enter into 10b5-1 plans. Mr. Houston adopted a 10b5-1 plan in June 2021, pursuant to which a portion of the shares issued upon achievement of the performance targets under his Co-Founder Award (the "vested shares") were sold to satisfy income taxes related to the vesting of the Co-Founder Award and, as the Company’s share price was below the share price established in Mr. Houston's 10b5-1 plan, the remainder of the vested shares were not sold. If the Company’s share price reaches or exceeds the share price established in Mr. Houston's 10b5-1 plan prior to the date on which the term of such 10b5-1 plan expires, the remainder of the vested shares will be sold.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 “Description of the Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and estimation uncertainty.
Business combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions. We allocate the purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values, with the excess recorded to goodwill. Purchase consideration includes assets transferred, liabilities assumed, and/or equity interests issued by us, all of which are measured at their fair value as of the date of acquisition. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, expected asset lives, and discount rates. The amounts and useful lives assigned to acquisition-related intangible assets impact the amount and timing of future amortization expense.
During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Impairment related to real estate assets
In accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), we evaluate our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. When the projected undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amounts, the assets are adjusted to their estimated fair value and an impairment loss is recorded as a component of operating income.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, as a result of our Virtual First strategy, we reassessed our asset groupings and evaluated the recoverability of our right-of-use and related lease assets, including leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures, and computer equipment, and determined that the carrying value of the respective assets groups was not fully recoverable. As a result, we utilized discounted cash flow models to estimate the fair value of the assets groups and calculated the corresponding impairment loss. This review required the application of significant judgment in determining market participant assumptions.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we continued to evaluate the recoverability of our real estate assets and made adjustments to market participant assumptions, primarily expected downtime prior to the commencement of future subleases, and recorded additional impairment losses.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of the Company’s assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply when taxes are actually paid or recovered. In addition, deferred tax assets are recorded for net operating loss and credit carryforwards.
A valuation allowance is provided against deferred tax assets unless it is more likely than not that they will be realized based on all available positive and negative evidence. Such evidence, which requires management's judgment, includes, but is not limited to, recent cumulative earnings or losses, expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, and the carry-forward periods available for the utilization of deferred tax assets. To the extent sufficient positive evidence becomes available, we may release all or a portion of our valuation allowance in one or more future periods. A release of the valuation allowance, if any, would result in the recognition of certain deferred tax assets and a material income tax benefit for the period in which such release is recorded. Refer to Note 14, “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, “Description of the Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recently adopted accounting pronouncements as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.