Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion analyzes our financial condition and results of operations. You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses performance during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 performance and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, but rather can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a Delaware limited partnership formed by DCP Midstream, LLC to own, operate, acquire and develop a diversified portfolio of complementary midstream energy assets. Our operations are organized into two reportable segments: (i) Logistics and Marketing and (ii) Gathering and Processing. Our Logistics and Marketing segment includes transporting, trading, marketing and storing natural gas and NGLs, and fractionating NGLs. Our Gathering and Processing segment consists of gathering, compressing, treating, and processing natural gas, producing and fractionating NGLs, and recovering condensate.
General Trends and Outlook
We anticipate our business will continue to be affected by the following key trends. Our expectations are based on assumptions made by us and information currently available to us. To the extent our underlying assumptions about, or interpretations of, available information prove to be incorrect, our actual results may vary materially from our expected results.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic, and the U.S. economy began to experience pronounced effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic caused by the COVID-19 virus and its variant strains ("COVID-19") has disrupted the U.S. economy since the first quarter of 2020 and immediately resulted in a decline in demand for our products. We began to see improvement in demand for our natural gas and NGL products and services beginning late in the second half of 2020, which continued through 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to be dynamic, and near-term challenges across the economy remain. The extent of the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain due to numerous factors outside of the Company's control, including but not limited to the severity, duration and resurgence of the outbreak, new variants, the effectiveness of public safety measures, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines, and supply chain pressures. Management continues to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic, however, the degree to which these factors will impact our business and our results of operations in 2022 and beyond remains uncertain and the related financial impact of any such disruption cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
We have taken measures to address the COVID-19 pandemic in order to maintain essential business functions at our plants and critical infrastructure with minimal disruptions. Our current continuity plan specifically addresses technology, communications, and remote operations. We continue to prioritize safe and reliable operations and have not experienced a disruption to operations or incurred significant additional costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our business is impacted by commodity prices and volumes. We mitigate a significant portion of commodity price risk on an overall Partnership basis through our fee-based assets and by executing on our hedging program. Various factors impact both commodity prices and volumes, and as indicated in