ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the "Risk Factors" section of this Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing, and commercializing important new medicines to improve the lives of people with cancer. Leveraging our proprietary switch-control kinase inhibitor platform and deep expertise in kinase biology, we design kinase inhibitors to target the switch pocket region of the kinase with the goal of developing potentially transformative medicines. Through our patient-inspired approach, we seek to develop a broad portfolio of innovative medicines to improve treatment outcomes. QINLOCK, our switch-control kinase inhibitor, was engineered using our proprietary drug discovery platform and developed for the treatment of fourth-line GIST. QINLOCK is approved in Australia, Canada, China, the EU, Hong Kong, Switzerland, Taiwan, the U.S., and the U.K. for the treatment of fourth-line GIST. We wholly own QINLOCK and all of our drug candidates with the exception of a development and commercialization out-license agreement for QINLOCK in Greater China. In addition to QINLOCK, we have identified and advanced multiple product candidates from our platform into clinical studies, including vimseltinib and DCC-3116.
We are focused on the commercialization of QINLOCK for the treatment of fourth-line GIST in the U.S., where we believe that QINLOCK has been established as the standard of care. Following QINLOCK’s EC approval in fourth-line GIST in November 2021, we have decided to focus our direct commercial efforts on Germany and France. We have launched QINLOCK in Germany and plan to transition to a post-approval paid access program in France in the first half of 2022, subject to program approval by the HAS. We plan to provide access to QINLOCK to fourth-line GIST patients in additional European countries through other channels.
We have two additional clinical-stage assets, vimseltinib and DCC-3116. In January 2022, we announced that enrollment was underway in our Phase 3 MOTION study for vimseltinib, a CSF1R inhibitor, in patients with TGCT. Our Phase 1/2 study of vimseltinib in TGCT patients is ongoing and we expect to provide updated data in the second half of 2022. We are also advancing DCC-3116, our potential first-in-class drug candidate targeting the ULK kinase to inhibit autophagy. DCC-3116 is in the dose escalation phase of a Phase 1 study in patients with mutant RAS and RAF cancers, and we expect to provide initial Phase 1 dose escalation data, as well as additional preclinical data on DCC-3116, in 2022. Following and subject to the selection of a recommended Phase 2 dose of DCC-3116 from the monotherapy dose escalation portion of the Phase 1 study of DCC-3116, we plan to initiate the Phase 1 combination dose escalation cohorts with trametinib in 2022 and, subject to feedback from regulatory authorities, expand this study to add a combination with a mutant KRAS G12C inhibitor in non-small cell lung cancer patients. In addition, we intend to continue to explore preclinical combinations of DCC-3116 with other agents. Finally, we continue to invest in our next generation of research programs, which are designed to provide first-in-class or best-in-class treatments using our proprietary switch-control inhibitor platform. Our goal for 2022 is to nominate a development candidate for our pan-RAF research program, which targets inhibition of BRAF and CRAF kinases.
Restructuring
In November 2021, we announced a corporate restructuring intended to prioritize clinical development of select programs, streamline commercial operations, maintain a focus on discovery research, and extend our cash runway.
We intend to reduce expenses and extend our existing cash runway into 2024 through the following restructuring initiatives and prioritization of our pipeline:
•We implemented an organizational restructuring that resulted in a workforce reduction of approximately 35%, or approximately 140 positions. The restructuring affected U.S. employees across all areas of the organization including the QINLOCK commercial team, research and development, and general and administrative support functions.
•We remain focused on the commercialization of QINLOCK for the treatment of fourth-line GIST in the U.S. with a reduced commercial team. In Europe, we maintain a limited direct commercial presence that support the launch of QINLOCK in two key markets, Germany and France, and work to provide access to QINLOCK in additional European countries through other channels. Further clinical development of QINLOCK will be discontinued, including the Phase 1b/2 MEK combination study, which had been planned to start in the fourth quarter of 2021.
•We are prioritizing the clinical development of our vimseltinib and DCC-3116 programs, discontinuing the development of the rebastinib program, and continuing with a focused investment in our next generation of research programs, designed to provide first-in-class or best-in-class treatments for patients.
◦Vimseltinib: We initiated the Phase 3 MOTION study for vimseltinib, an orally administered, potent, and highly selective switch-control kinase inhibitor of CSF1R, for the treatment of TGCT in December 2021.
◦DCC-3116: We continue to advance the clinical development of DCC-3116, a potential first-in-class ULK kinase inhibitor designed to inhibit autophagy for the treatment of patients with advanced or metastatic tumors with a mutant RAS or RAF gene. DCC-3116 is currently being investigated as a single agent and in combination with trametinib in an ongoing Phase 1 study. We expect to present initial data from the dose escalation phase of the Phase 1 study in 2022. In addition to the ongoing Phase 1 study, we are actively exploring preclinical combinations of DCC-3116 with multiple additional targeted oncology agents with diverse mechanisms of action.
◦Rebastinib: We discontinued development of rebastinib, which was expected to enter a Phase 3 study in patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer in 2022.
◦Research: We intend to continue to invest in the development of new product candidates using our novel switch-control inhibitor approach.
As a result of the restructuring, we recognized a one-time charge in the fourth quarter of 2021 of approximately $26.2 million. This charge includes approximately $9.8 million of employee-related termination costs and approximately $16.4 million of discontinuation costs such as contract termination fees and non-cancellable commitments related to the rebastinib and ripretinib programs.
Our Drug and Drug Candidates
QINLOCK
QINLOCK, an orally administered kinase switch control inhibitor of the KIT and PDGFRA kinases, is approved in nine territories for the treatment of advance GIST.
Following the Phase 3 INVICTUS study of QINLOCK in fourth-line GIST which met its primary endpoint of improved PFS versus placebo, on May 15, 2020, QINLOCK was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. In May 2020, we launched QINLOCK commercially in the U.S. In 2020, QINLOCK was also approved for the treatment of fourth-line GIST in Canada and Australia. In November 2020, we announced that we had entered into exclusive distribution agreements for QINLOCK in Canada, Israel, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Malaysia, and Brunei. In November 2021, we announced that the EC approved QINLOCK in the EU for the treatment of adult patients with GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. The EC decision is applicable to all 27 EU member states plus Iceland, Norway, and Liechtenstein. In 2021, QINLOCK was also approved for the treatment of fourth-line GIST in Switzerland and the U.K.
In June 2019, we entered into the Zai License Agreement, pursuant to which we granted Zai exclusive rights to develop and commercialize QINLOCK, including certain follow-on compounds (the Licensed Products), in Greater China. In March and September 2021, the China NMPA and the Taiwan Food and Drug Administration, respectively, approved QINLOCK for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. In March 2021, the Hong Kong Department of Health approved QINLOCK in Hong Kong for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with imatinib, sunitinib, and regorafenib.
In November 2021, we announced top-line data from INTRIGUE, our Phase 3 study of QINLOCK for the treatment of second-line GIST. The INTRIGUE study did not meet the primary endpoint of improved PFS compared with the standard of care sunitinib. The study did not achieve the primary efficacy endpoint of PFS as determined by independent radiologic review using modified RECIST. The INTRIGUE Phase 3 clinical study is an interventional, randomized, global, multicenter, open-label study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of QINLOCK compared to sunitinib in patients with GIST previously treated with imatinib. In the study, 453 patients were randomized 1:1 to either QINLOCK 150 mg once daily or sunitinib 50 mg once daily for four weeks followed by two weeks without sunitinib.
We are focused on the commercialization of QINLOCK for the treatment of fourth-line GIST in the U.S., where we believe QINLOCK is the standard of care. Following QINLOCK’s EC approval in fourth-line GIST in November 2021, we have decided to focus our direct commercial efforts on Germany and France. We have launched QINLOCK in Germany and plan to transition to a post-approval paid access program in France in the first half of 2022, subject to program approval by the HAS. We plan to provide access to QINLOCK to fourth-line GIST patients in additional European countries through other channels. Further clinical development of QINLOCK has been discontinued.
Vimseltinib
Vimseltinib is an investigational, orally administered, potent, and highly-selective switch-control kinase inhibitor of the colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R). We are currently studying vimseltinib in a pivotal Phase 3 study in patients with TGCT (MOTION study). The MOTION study is a two-part, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to assess the efficacy and safety of vimseltinib in patients with TGCT who are not amenable to surgery. In Part 1 of the study, eligible study participants will be assigned to receive either vimseltinib or matching placebo for 24 weeks. Participants assigned to placebo in Part 1 will have the option to receive vimseltinib for Part 2 of the study. Part 2 is a long-term treatment phase in which all participants will receive open-label vimseltinib. In January 2022, we announced that enrollment is currently underway in our Phase 3 MOTION study.
We are also conducting an international, multicenter, ongoing open-label Phase 1/2 study designed to evaluate the safety, efficacy, PK, and PD of vimseltinib in patients with solid tumors and TGCT. In September 2021, at the ESMO Congress 2021, we announced data from patients with TGCT in both the Phase 1 dose escalation portion of the study and from cohort A in the Phase 2 dose expansion portion of the study.
Cohort A includes TGCT patients with no prior anti-CSF1/CSF1R (previous therapy with imatinib or nilotinib is eligible) and cohort B includes patients with prior anti-CSF1/CSF1R (previous therapy with imatinib or nilotinib alone is not eligible). As GIST and TGCT have significant overlap in the key opinion leaders and treating physicians, we believe our QINLOCK commercial infrastructure provides a strong foundation for a potential vimseltinib product, if approved.
In November 2021, we also announced that vimseltinib had been granted fast track designation by the FDA for the treatment of patients with TGCT who are not amenable to surgery.
DCC-3116
DCC-3116 is a potential first-in-class investigational, orally administered, potent, and highly selective switch-control inhibitor of the ULK kinase. DCC-3116 is designed to inhibit autophagy, a key tumor survival mechanism in cancer cells, by inhibiting the ULK kinases, referred to collectively as ULK or ULK kinases, which have been shown to be the initiating factors that activate autophagy. We believe that DCC-3116, in combination with RTK/RAS/MAP kinase signaling pathway inhibition, has the potential to change the treatment of mutant RTK/RAS/RAF cancers, if approved.
DCC-3116 is being studied in a Phase 1 study designed to evaluate the safety, tolerability, clinical activity, PK, and PD of DCC-3116 as a single agent and in combination with trametinib, an FDA approved MEK inhibitor, in patients with advanced or metastatic tumors with a RAS or RAF mutation.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic, or the future outbreak of any other highly infectious or contagious diseases, may impact our business, including our preclinical studies, clinical trial operations, or commercialization efforts will depend on continuously changing circumstances, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, such as the duration of such pandemic including future waves of infection, new strains of the virus that causes COVID-19, or the impact of effective vaccines, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. The ongoing fluidity of this situation precludes any prediction as to the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic but it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic may also have the effect of heightening the risks to which we are subject, including various aspects of our preclinical studies and ongoing clinical trials, the reliance on third parties in our supply chain for materials and manufacturing of our drug and drug candidates, disruptions in health regulatory agencies' operations globally, the volatility of our common stock, our ability to access capital markets, and our ability to successfully commercialize and generate revenue from QINLOCK.
We are continuing to assess the long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business operations in an effort to mitigate interruption to our clinical programs, research efforts, commercialization of QINLOCK, and other business activities and to ensure the safety and well-being of our employees, as well as the physicians and patients participating in our clinical studies. COVID-19 infections continue to fluctuate in the U.S. and in many countries worldwide as local surges and new waves of infection continue to be reported, in particular as caused by new variants of the virus that causes COVID-19 and the lack of availability of effective vaccines in certain countries or regions, or failure to utilize available vaccines in other geographies. Although some of the restrictions aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19 have been and may from time to time be eased or lifted in the U.S. and other countries from the height of the pandemic, in response to local surges and waves of infection, including those caused by certain variants of the virus, some countries, states, and local governments have maintained or reinstituted these restrictions, or may reinstitute these restrictions from time to time, in response to rising rates of infection. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, partners, and patients, including encouraging all employees, other than those engaged in laboratory research activities, to work-from-home, and requiring adherence to onsite occupancy limits and appropriate safety measures designed to comply with federal, state, and local guidelines. These safety measures may be eased, lifted, or reinstituted in accordance with updates to such guidelines.
Our ability to successfully commercialize and generate revenue from QINLOCK may be adversely affected by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. While restrictive safety measures are in place, limited hospital access for non-patients, including our sales personnel, social distancing requirements, and precautionary measures due to COVID-19 may impact the ability of our sales personnel to interact in-person with customers in the same manner as they did before the COVID-19 pandemic. In response, we have implemented a virtual sales model to supplement traditional means of customer engagement. Although some of these restrictions have been, and may continue to be lifted in certain healthcare institutions, the impact of prior and continued COVID-19 related safety measures, and the potential for reimposition of restrictions due to local surges and new waves of infection, including those caused by certain variants of the virus, may adversely affect the ability of our sales professionals to effectively market QINLOCK to physicians, which may have a negative impact on our sales and our market penetration. The persistence of the COVID-19 pandemic could also impact the patient treatment paradigm and how patients are diagnosed and monitored. In addition, in the U.S. we are utilizing various programs to help patients afford our products, including patient assistance programs for eligible patients. Market disruption and higher levels of unemployment caused by the COVID-19 pandemic may lead to increased utilization of our patient assistance programs, which could reduce revenues.
In addition, we continue to actively monitor risks associated with potential interruptions to our clinical studies due to the impact of COVID-19 and are in frequent communication with clinical study sites and contract research organizations (CROs). Some clinical trial sites have maintained or reinstituted restrictions on site visits by sponsors and CROs, initiation of new trials, patient visits, and new patient enrollment as a result of COVID-19. While all of our studies remain open for enrollment, we have provided guidance to our clinical trial sites that new patient enrollment may occur at sites where resources allow these patients to be safely enrolled and closely monitored and enrollment has slowed at, or has been or may in the future be temporarily paused for new patients in some sites. In addition, we continue to work closely with our study sites and CROs to allow for utilization of remote and local assessments, such as televisits, in accordance with FDA and EMA guidance, as well as to ensure availability of study drug for patients. While study activities are continuing in the clinical trials we have underway in sites across the globe, and although some of these restrictions have been, and may from time to time, be eased or lifted, we cannot guarantee that COVID-19 precautions, either now or in the future, or the impact of the pandemic, will not directly or indirectly affect the expected timelines for some of our clinical trials.
In light of the changing circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, the operating environment remains fluid and uncertain, and the full significance of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business and the duration for which it may have an impact cannot be determined at this time.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
On May 15, 2020, QINLOCK was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. Following FDA approval of QINLOCK, in May 2020, we commenced commercial sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. and began generating product revenue. We may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from collaboration, distribution, or any potential additional license agreements that we may enter into with third parties. We expect that our revenue in the foreseeable future will be derived primarily from sales of QINLOCK and, payments owed to us under the Zai License Agreement and Zai Supply Agreement we entered into in June 2019 and February 2020, respectively, including royalty revenues under the Zai License Agreement and revenues associated with the sales of commercial inventory to Zai under the Zai Supply Agreement following the approvals of QINLOCK in the PRC and Hong Kong in March 2021. We cannot provide assurance as to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization of QINLOCK or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our drug candidates for which we may receive marketing approval, if any. Additionally, we cannot provide assurance as to the extent of future royalty payments, the timing of future milestone payments, or that we will achieve and receive any future milestone payments at all. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any drug or drug candidate other than QINLOCK.
Product Revenues, Net
Following the FDA approval of QINLOCK in May 2020, we commenced commercial sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. and began generating product revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our only source of product revenues was from the sales of QINLOCK. Product revenues are recorded net of estimates of variable consideration. Please read Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of these consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for further details of the reserves recorded for variable considerations.
Collaboration Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, collaboration revenues were associated with the Zai License Agreement and the Zai Supply Agreement, as applicable.
Zai License Agreement
Pursuant to the terms of the Zai License Agreement, we received an upfront cash payment of $20.0 million and three development milestone payments totaling $12.0 million and will be eligible to receive up to $173.0 million in potential development and commercial milestone payments, consisting of up to $38.0 million of development milestones and up to $135.0 million of commercial milestones. In addition, during the term of the Zai License Agreement, Zai will be obligated to pay us tiered percentage royalties ranging from low to high teens on annual net sales of the Licensed Products in the Territory, subject to adjustments in specified circumstances. Additionally, certain costs we incur associated with the Zai License Agreement are reimbursed by Zai.
During the second quarter of 2021, following the approvals of QINLOCK in the PRC and Hong Kong in March 2021, we began recognizing royalty revenues under the Zai License Agreement.
Zai Supply Agreement
Pursuant to the terms of the Zai Supply Agreement, costs incurred by us for external manufacturing services associated with the production of QINLOCK for use in the Territory for clinical trials and commercial inventory are reimbursed by Zai. During the second quarter of 2021, following the approvals of QINLOCK in the PRC and Hong Kong in March 2021, we began recognizing revenues associated with sales of commercial inventory of QINLOCK under the Zai Supply Agreement.
Cost of Sales
Our cost of sales includes external costs of producing and distributing inventories that are related to product revenue during the respective period of the associated sales. In addition, shipping and handling costs for product shipments are recorded in cost of sales as incurred. Further, cost of sales includes the external costs of producing and distributing commercial inventories sold under the Zai Supply Agreement. Cost of sales also includes charges related to inventory written down as a result of excess, obsolescence, unmarketability, or other reasons.
Cost of sales for newly launched products will not include the full cost of manufacturing until the initial pre-launch inventory is depleted, and additional inventory is manufactured and sold. The gross margin on sales of QINLOCK for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was enhanced by sales of the initial pre-launch inventory, and therefore, use of active pharmaceutical ingredients and components that were previously expensed as research and development expenses prior to the launch of QINLOCK, referred to as zero cost inventories. However, we do not expect that the cost of sales as a percentage of net sales of QINLOCK will increase significantly after we have sold all zero cost inventories and commenced the sales of inventories which will reflect the full cost of manufacturing.
Operating Expenses
The successful development and commercialization of our drug and drug candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
•continuing to establish sales, marketing, and distribution capabilities to support the commercial launch of QINLOCK or our drug candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others such as Zai, our licensee for QINLOCK in Greater China;
•successful completion of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•receipt and related terms of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•acceptance of QINLOCK or our drug candidates, if and when approved, by patients, the medical community, and third-party payors;
•developing and implementing marketing and reimbursement strategies;
•raising additional funds necessary to fund ongoing operations and capital expenditure requirements, including to complete clinical development of and commercialize any current or future drug candidates for which we receive approval;
•making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, or establishing manufacturing capabilities, for both clinical and commercial supplies of our drug and drug candidates;
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of our products following approval.
•obtaining and maintaining patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection, and regulatory exclusivity for our drug and drug candidates;
•protecting and enforcing our rights in our intellectual property portfolio;
•effectively competing with other therapies; and
•attracting additional licensees and/or collaborators or distributors with development, regulatory, and commercialization expertise.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the commercialization of QINLOCK or the development of any of our drug candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the commercialization of QINLOCK or development of that drug candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our drug candidates other than QINLOCK.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts and the development of our drug and drug candidates, which include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel, and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our drug candidates, including under agreements with CROs;
•the cost of consultants and contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials as well as all expenses associated with the pre-launch manufacturing of commercial inventory of QINLOCK prior to FDA approval; and
•facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, supplies, and technology-related costs.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses within our consolidated balance sheets. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, central laboratories, contractors, CMOs, and CROs in connection with our preclinical and clinical development activities. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, certain costs incurred in connection with our corporate restructuring were included in research and development expense. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our proprietary switch-control kinase inhibitor platform technology or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific drug or drug candidate development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple drug or drug candidate development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Drugs and drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development expenses associated with vimseltinib and DCC-3116 will increase in 2022 as our drug and drug candidate development programs progress. However, we expect research and development expenses will decrease overall as compared to 2021 due to the cost reduction measures included in the corporate restructuring implemented in the fourth quarter of 2021. We do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of our drug and any of our drug candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, legal, finance, commercial, human resources, and administrative functions. Selling, general, and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility- and technology-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, accounting, and audit services. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, certain costs incurred in connection with our corporate restructuring were included in selling, general, and administrative expenses.
We anticipate that our selling, general, and administrative expenses will decrease overall due to the cost reduction measures included in the corporate restructuring implemented in the fourth quarter of 2021, despite increased selling, general, and administrative expenses to be incurred related to the launch of QINLOCK in Germany and France in 2022. We also anticipate that we will continue to incur accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, and investor and public relations expenses associated with the business and continued operations as a public company.
Restructuring
We have made estimates and judgments regarding the amount and timing of our restructuring expense and liability, including current and future period termination benefits, pipeline program termination costs and other exit costs to be incurred when related actions take place. Restructuring charges are reflected in our consolidated statements of income within research and development expense and selling, general, and administrative expense. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities balances. Other income, net, consists of insignificant amounts of miscellaneous income and expenses unrelated to our core operations, including the impacts of foreign currency exchange differences.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of interest expense associated with a previously outstanding construction loan from a related party. The outstanding balance of the construction loan from a related party was repaid in December 2019, and there was therefore no interest expense during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Income Taxes
On October 2, 2017, immediately prior to the completion of our initial public offering (IPO), we engaged in a series of transactions whereby Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, LLC became a wholly owned subsidiary of Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the Conversion). Prior to the Conversion, we were treated as a partnership for tax purposes and had not been subject to U.S. federal or state income taxation. Upon the Conversion, we became subject to typical corporate U.S. federal and state income taxation; however, we do not have net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards from periods prior to October 2, 2017 available to offset taxable income earned in future periods in which we will be treated as a corporation.
Since the Conversion in October 2017, we have not recorded any U.S. federal, state or foreign income tax benefits for either the net losses we have incurred or our earned research and orphan drug credits, due to the uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items in the future. As of December 31, 2021, we had NOL carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of $870.9 million, of which $16.6 million begin to expire in 2037 and $854.3 million may be carried forward indefinitely but are subject to an 80% limitation. As of December 31, 2021, we had NOL carryforwards for state income tax purposes of $688.8 million, which begin to expire in 2035. We also had federal and state research and orphan drug credits of $36.6 million and $4.5 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021, which begin to expire in 2037 and 2032, respectively. We also had foreign NOL carryforwards of $19.3 million as of December 31, 2021, which will begin to expire in 2026.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (GAAP). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of these consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Product Revenue Reserves
We recognize product revenues, net of variable consideration related to certain allowances and accruals, when the customer takes control of the product, which is typically upon delivery to the customer. Product revenue is recorded at the net sales price, or transaction price. We record product revenue reserves, which are classified as a reduction in product revenues, to account for the components of variable consideration. Variable consideration includes the following components: chargebacks, government rebates, trade discounts and allowances, product returns, and other incentives, which are described below.
These reserves are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to our customer) or a liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than our customer). Our estimates of reserves established for variable consideration are calculated based upon a consistent application of the expected value method, which is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. These estimates reflect our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market
events and trends, industry data, forecasted customer buying, and payment patterns. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be subject to constraint and is included in net product revenues only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration received may ultimately differ from our estimates. If actual results vary, we adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment.
Chargebacks and administrative fees: Chargebacks for discounts represent our estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers and government agencies at prices lower than the list prices charged to the customers who directly purchase the product from us. The customers charge us for the difference between what the customers pay us for the product and the customer's ultimate contractually committed or government required lower selling price to the qualified healthcare providers. As part of our contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers, we pay fees for administrative services, such as account management and data reporting.
Government rebates: Government rebates consist of Medicare, Tricare, Medicaid, and other governmental rebates. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized. For Medicare, we also estimate the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom we will owe a rebate under the Medicare Part D program.
Trade discounts and allowances: We provide customers with discounts that are explicitly stated in contracts and recorded in the period the related product revenue is recognized. In addition, we also receive sales order management, inventory management, and data services from customers in exchange for certain fees.
Product returns: We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our customers and record this estimate in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We currently estimate product return liabilities based on available industry data and our visibility into the inventory remaining in the distribution channel.
Other incentives: Other incentives include co-payment assistance provided to qualified patients, whereby we may provide financial assistance to patients with prescription drug co-payments required by the patient's insurance provider. Reserves for co-payment assistance are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the associated cost incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with the preclinical development activities;
•CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials;
•CROs in connection with preclinical and clinical studies; and
•investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure all stock option awards granted to employees and directors based on the fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The straight-line method of expense recognition is applied to all awards with service-only conditions. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock-based awards, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock-based awards, and our expected dividend yield. Prior to October 2017, we were a privately-held company and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimate our expected volatility based on the historical volatility of a set of our publicly traded peer companies as well as the limited historical volatility of our own traded stock price. We estimate the expected term of our options using the "simplified" method for awards that qualify as "plain-vanilla" options. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends on common stock and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The assumptions used in determining the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Revenues
Product Revenues, Net
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our only source of product revenues was from the sales of QINLOCK, which commenced in the U.S. in May 2020 following the FDA approval of QINLOCK on May 15, 2020 and during 2020 and 2021 in certain other jurisdictions following regulatory approval or on a named patient basis.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net product revenues by geography consisted of the following:
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, net product revenues increased $47.9 million primarily due to full quarters of sales in the U.S. in the first and second quarters of 2021 compared to a partial quarter of sales in the U.S. in the second quarter of 2020 and increased sales volume in the U.S. during the third and fourth quarters of 2021 compared to the same periods in 2021 as we continued our commercialization efforts.
Collaboration Revenues
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, collaboration revenues increased $6.1 million primarily due to an increase in milestone revenues of $3.0 million and the commencement of royalty revenues under the Zai License Agreement as well as the commencement of revenues under the Zai Supply Agreement in the second quarter of 2021. The increase in milestone revenues was due to the recognition of a $5.0 million development milestone in the first quarter of 2021 associated with the approval of QINLOCK for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib, by the China NMPA in March 2021, compared to the recognition of a $2.0 million development milestone in the second quarter of 2020. Following the approvals of QINLOCK in the PRC and Hong Kong in March 2021, we began recognizing revenues associated with the sales of commercial inventory of QINLOCK under the Zai Supply Agreement and began recognizing royalty revenues under the Zai License Agreement. The first sales of commercial inventory under the Zai Supply Agreement and first royalty revenues under the Zai License Agreement were recognized during the second quarter of 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, collaboration revenues decreased $22.4 million, primarily due to the recognition of up-front and development milestone payments of $20.0 million and $5.0 million, respectively, associated with the Zai License Agreement, entered into in June 2019, in the second quarter of 2019 as compared to the recognition of a $2.0 million development milestone payment associated with the Zai License Agreement in the second quarter of 2020. The decrease in up-front and milestone payments were partially offset by revenues recognized associated with external manufacturing services for clinical trial use under the Zai Supply Agreement and reimbursements for services provided under the Zai License Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Sales
We began incurring costs of product sales during the year ended December 31, 2020 upon commencing the commercialization of QINLOCK in the U.S. We began incurring costs of collaboration sales during the year ended December 31, 2021 upon commencing sales of commercial inventory of QINLOCK under the Zai Supply Agreement.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cost of sales by type consisted of the following:
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, cost of sales increased $2.7 million primarily due to the costs of commercial inventory of QINLOCK sold under the Zai Supply Agreement, which began in the second quarter of 2021, as well as increased product sales of QINLOCK driven by full quarters of sales in U.S. in the first and second quarters of 2021 compared to a partial quarter of sales in the U.S. in the second quarter of 2020 and increased sales volume in the U.S. during the third and fourth quarters of 2021 compared to the same periods in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales also included a charge of less than $0.1 million for inventory written down as a result of excess, obsolescence, unmarketability, or other reasons. Cost of sales associated with product sales of QINLOCK was primarily related to the sales of zero cost inventories, which consisted of packaging, labeling, shipping, and distribution costs. As a result, the full costs of manufacturing QINLOCK inventory are not included in cost of sales during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Prior to receiving FDA approval for QINLOCK in May 2020, we manufactured inventory to be sold and recorded approximately $6.0 million related to this inventory build-up as research and development expense. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded approximately $1.0 million and $5.0 million, respectively, of such costs related to the build-up of this inventory as research and development expense. We did not record any such costs related to the build-up of this inventory as research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Utilizing the actual direct costs to manufacture QINLOCK prior to receiving FDA approval, had the previously expensed inventory been capitalized and recognized when sold, the total cost of sales with these manufacturing costs included for the year ended December 31, 2021 would have increased by approximately $1.9 million and $0.6 million in the prior year comparative period.
We do not expect our cost of sales for QINLOCK to increase significantly as a percentage of net sales in future periods as we continue to produce inventory for future sales, which will reflect the full cost of manufacturing, and then sell such inventory. We expect to continue to sell the zero cost inventories of QINLOCK in the U.S. during 2022.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
QINLOCK
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, research and development expenses related to QINLOCK decreased primarily as a result of decreased clinical trial expenses of $9.5 million and decreased manufacturing expenses of $3.5 million, partially offset by restructuring charges incurred in the fourth quarter of 2021 of $10.9 million related to the termination of agreements and the discontinuation of the Phase 1b/2 MEKi combination study. Clinical trial expenses for QINLOCK decreased primarily as a result of decreased expenses associated with INTRIGUE, which we initiated in December 2018 and for which we announced "top-line" results in November 2021, and INVICTUS, which we initiated in January 2018 and for which announced top-line results in August 2019. Manufacturing expenses for the QINLOCK program decreased primarily as a result of activities to support drug requirements for commercialization during the months prior to commencing capitalization of inventory following the FDA approval of QINLOCK on May 15, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, research and development expenses related to QINLOCK decreased primarily as a result of a decrease in clinical trial expenses of $6.1 million. The decrease in clinical trial expenses was primarily due to decreased expenses associated with our pivotal Phase 3 study in fourth-line and fourth-line plus GIST, INVICTUS, which we initiated in January 2018 and announced top-line results from in August 2019. In addition, clinical trial expenses decreased due to decreased expenses associated with our ongoing Phase 1 study of QINLOCK and decreased expenses associated with clinical pharmacology studies. These decreases were partially offset by increased expenses related to our pivotal Phase 3 study in second-line GIST, INTRIGUE, which we initiated in December 2018 and completed enrollment of which in December 2020.
Vimseltinib
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, expenses related to our vimseltinib program increased primarily as a result of increases in clinical trial expenses of $7.8 million and manufacturing costs of $4.2 million. Clinical trial expenses increased primarily due to start-up activities associated with our Phase 3 study of vimseltinib in patients with TGCT, MOTION, which we initiated in the fourth quarter of 2021, increased activities associated with our ongoing Phase 1/2 study of vimseltinib to assess the safety, efficacy, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics in patients with TGCT, and increased clinical pharmacology study activities. Manufacturing costs for the vimseltinib program increased as a result of increased activities to support clinical trials.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, expenses related to our vimseltinib program increased primarily as a result of increases in clinical trial expenses of $4.1 million, manufacturing costs of $2.7 million, and preclinical costs of $0.8 million. The increase in clinical trial expenses was primarily due to increased activities associated with the dose escalation portion of our ongoing Phase 1/2 study of vimseltinib to assess the safety, tolerability, PK, and PD in patients with TGCT. Manufacturing costs for the vimseltinib program increased as a result of increased activities to support clinical trials. The increase in preclinical costs was primarily due to increased ongoing studies.
Rebastinib
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, expenses related to our rebastinib program primarily increased as a result of restructuring charges incurred in the fourth quarter of 2021 of $5.5 million due to the decision to discontinue the rebastinib program and an increase in manufacturing costs of $1.1 million, partially offset by decreases in clinical trial expenses of $3.9 million. The increase in manufacturing costs is primarily due to manufacturing completed in advance of performing late stage development and registration readiness activities for the drug candidate as it was moving towards a potential pivotal trial in 2022 prior to discontinuation of the program in the fourth quarter of 2021 The decrease in clinical trial expenses was primarily associated with our Phase 1b/2 trial of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel due to the completion of enrollment of multiple cohorts in the trial, including completion of enrollment in Part 2, Stage 2 of both the endometrial and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cohorts, as announced in February 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, expenses related to our rebastinib program increased primarily as a result of increases in manufacturing costs of $1.9 million and clinical trial expenses of $1.7 million. Manufacturing costs for the rebastinib program increased as a result of increased activities to support clinical trials. The increases in clinical trial expenses were due to our Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with paclitaxel, which we initiated in October 2018 and moved to Part 2 of the Phase 1b/2 study in the second quarter of 2019, and our second Phase 1b/2 study of rebastinib in combination with carboplatin, which we initiated in January 2019 and moved to Part 2 of the Phase 1b/2 study in January 2020.
DCC-3116
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, expenses related to our DCC-3116 program changed as we completed preclinical studies, submitted our IND, and initiated our first clinical trial for DCC-3116 in the second quarter of 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, the changes in expenses resulted in increases in clinical trial expenses of $2.0 million and manufacturing costs of $1.1 million associated with our Phase 1 study of DCC-3116, partially offset by decreased preclinical activities, including IND-enabling studies, of $1.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, expenses related to our DCC-3116 program increased primarily as a result of an increase in preclinical activities of $1.4 million, including IND-enabling studies, associated with a full year of activities for this drug candidate, which we announced as an addition to our pipeline in June 2019, and increased manufacturing costs of $1.1 million to support our Phase 1 study of DCC-3116, which was initiated in the second quarter of 2021.
Preclinical
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, the increase in preclinical costs of $8.6 million, were primarily due to a $4.0 million upfront payment to Sprint to in-license our preclinical program VPS34, pursuant to the Sprint Agreement during the third quarter of 2021 in addition to increased activities for our early-stage drug research programs. For further details on the Sprint Agreement, please read Note 11, In-License Agreement, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the increase in preclinical costs was primarily due to increased costs of $3.3 million in connection with increased activities for our early-stage drug research programs.
Unallocated expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, the increase in unallocated research and development expenses was related to personnel-related costs and other research and development costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily due to an increase in headcount and stock-based compensation expense in our research and development functions as well as restructuring expense of $5.9 million. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included stock-based compensation expense of $20.7 million and $17.4 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to headcount increases, a higher value of our common stock in the first half of 2021 resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees, partially offset by $1.9 million of expenses related to the achievement of vesting events associated with performance-based restricted stock units during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other research and development costs was primarily due to increased costs for temporary staffing of $3.6 million to support our research and development functions as well as $3.1 million of other development and manufacturing costs that support multiple clinical and early-stage research programs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the increase in unallocated research and development expenses was related to personnel-related costs and other research and development costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily due to an increase in headcount and stock-based compensation expense in our research and development functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included stock-based compensation expense of $17.4 million and $7.9 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to headcount increases, a higher value of our common stock resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees, and $1.9 million of expenses related to the achievement of vesting events associated with performance-based restricted stock units during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other research and development costs is primarily due to increased costs for temporary staffing of $2.5 million to support our research and development functions.
We expect research and development expenses associated with vimseltinib and DCC-3116 will increase in 2022 as we continue to invest in the development of these programs. However, we expect research and development expenses will decrease overall as compared to 2021 due to the cost reduction measures included in the corporate restructuring implemented in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, the increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was primarily associated with personnel-related costs and professional and consultant fees. For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, the increases in personnel-related costs, including increases in
stock-based compensation of $5.7 million, were primarily a result of increases in headcount in our selling, general, and administrative functions as well as restructuring expense of $4.0 million. The increases in professional and consultant fees were primarily due to an increase in various advisory and temporary staffing fees, including those related to establishing a direct commercial infrastructure and commercialization preparedness in Germany and France to support the launch of QINLOCK in Europe.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses was related to personnel-related costs, professional and consultant fees, and other selling, general, and administrative costs. The increase in personnel-related costs was primarily a result of an increase in headcount and an increase in stock-based compensation expense in our selling, general, and administrative functions. Personnel-related costs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included stock-based compensation expense of $19.7 million and $12.5 million, respectively. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was primarily related to an increase in headcount and a higher value of our common stock resulting in increased valuations of share-based awards granted to our employees, partially offset by the modification of stock options pursuant to the transition agreement with our former President and Chief Executive Officer resulting in $2.4 million of expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in professional and consultant fees was primarily due to an increase in various advisory fees, including those related to commercialization preparedness and the launch of QINLOCK. The increase in other selling, general, and administrative costs was primarily due to a full year of expenses, including those related to rent and depreciation expenses, associated with our new headquarters (the Premises) that commenced in October 2019 (the Initial Space) and rent, depreciation, and moving expenses associated with our lease at the Premises that commenced in July 2020 (the Additional Space) as well as technology-related costs to support the growth of the business. For additional information on our leases at the Premises, please read Note 7, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
We anticipate that our selling, general, and administrative expenses will decrease overall due to the cost reduction measures included in the corporate restructuring implemented in the fourth quarter of 2021, despite increased selling, general, and administrative expenses to be incurred related to the launch of QINLOCK in Germany and France in 2022.
Interest and Other Income, Net
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, the decrease in interest and other income, net, was primarily due to decreases in interest income earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities associated with our decrease in marketable securities and holdings of lower yield investments during the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, the decrease in interest and other income, net, was primarily due to decreases in interest income earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities associated with our holdings of lower yield investments during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Inflation
Inflation generally affects us by increasing our cost of labor. We do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our business, financial condition, or results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2003, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing product and technology rights, conducting research and development activities for our drug candidates, building a commercial and marketing organization, and commercializing our first approved product, QINLOCK. Our only product approved for sale is QINLOCK, and we have not generated sufficient revenues to result in a profit.
As a result, we have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. We have generated limited revenue to date primarily from our product sales and under our Zai License Agreement and Zai Supply Agreement. On May 15, 2020, QINLOCK was approved by the FDA for the treatment of adult patients with advanced GIST who have received prior treatment with three or more kinase inhibitors, including imatinib. Following the FDA approval of QINLOCK, in May 2020, we commenced commercial sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. and began generating product revenue. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our product revenues were primarily derived from sales of QINLOCK in the U.S. We have also entered into exclusive distributor arrangements to facilitate product sales of QINLOCK in select geographies where we do not currently intend to distribute QINLOCK on our own. During the second quarter of 2021, following the approvals of QINLOCK in the PRC and Hong Kong in March 2021, we also began to recognize royalty revenues under the Zai License Agreement. However, we cannot provide
assurance as to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization of QINLOCK by us or our partners. We do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any drug candidates in the near future, if at all, unless and until we obtain marketing approval for, and begin to sell, such drug candidates. We may never generate revenues that are significant enough to achieve profitability.
On October 2, 2017, we completed the IPO of our common stock. Since October 2017, we have primarily supported our operations by completing public issuances of our common stock through our IPO, subsequent follow-on offerings, and an Open Market Sale Agreement℠ (the Sales Agreement) with Jefferies LLC (Jefferies). Through such issuances, we have sold and issued 29,669,386 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $956.5 million after deducting commissions and other offering expenses.
In August 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement with Jefferies, pursuant to which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock having aggregate offering proceeds of up to $200.0 million (the Shares) from time to time through Jefferies as our sales agent. Upon delivery of a placement notice and subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, Jefferies may sell the Shares by any method permitted by law deemed to be an "at the market offering" as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We may sell the Shares in amounts and at times to be determined by us from time to time subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, but we have no obligation to sell any Shares under the Sales Agreement. We or Jefferies may suspend or terminate the offering of Shares upon notice to the other party and subject to other conditions. As of December 31, 2021, there was $172.5 million available for future issuance under the Sales Agreement.
Public issuances of our common stock and shares issued pursuant to the underwriters' partial or full exercises of options to purchase additional shares of common stock, if applicable, associated with our IPO, subsequent follow-on offerings, and issuances of shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement have been summarized in the following table:
1.The price per share presented above represents the price per share at which shares were sold for both the public offering of shares and the underwriters' exercise of options to purchase additional shares, if applicable.
2.Proceeds are presented net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
3.Information presented above represents the total number of shares of our common stock issued, and total net proceeds from issuances of shares of our common stock, pursuant to the Sales Agreement through December 31, 2021. Shares issued pursuant to the Sales Agreement were sold on multiple days at varying prices.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $327.6 million, which consisted of cash, money market funds, U.S. government securities, commercial paper, corporate debt securities, and certificates of deposit. The primary objectives of our investment activities are to preserve principal, provide liquidity, and maximize income without significantly increasing risk. Given the nature of these investments, we believe that the market for these instruments is not illiquid.
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, net cash used in operating activities increased $1.1 million, primarily resulting from an increase in our net loss of $33.5 million and increases in net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $14.7 million, partially offset by increases in net non-cash charges of $17.7 million. Net non-cash charges increased primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation of $8.9 million. The increase in net cash flows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities were generally due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments and settlement of accounts receivable.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, net cash used in operating activities increased $90.4 million, primarily resulting from an increase in our net loss of $74.2 million and increases in net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $38.6 million, partially offset by increases in non-cash charges of $22.5 million. The increase in net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $13.9 million and an increase in inventory of $3.2 million. The increases in accounts receivable and inventory were primarily associated with sales of QINLOCK and the commencement of the capitalization of QINLOCK inventory, respectively, following the FDA approval of QINLOCK in May 2020. Other net cash outflows related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities were generally due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments. Net non-cash charges increased primarily due to an increase in share-based compensation of $16.7 million.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, net cash flows provided by investing activities increased $148.4 million, primarily resulting from a decrease in purchases of marketable securities, partially offset by a decrease in proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities and a $4.0 million upfront payment to Sprint pursuant to the Sprint Agreement during the third quarter of 2021. For further details on the Sprint Agreement, please read Note 11, In-License Agreement, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, net cash flows provided by investing activities increased $489.0 million, resulting from an increase in proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $770.1 million, partially offset by an increase in purchases of marketable securities of $279.6 million. The increase in net sales and maturities of marketable securities was partially offset by increases in our restricted investments of $1.2 million, which was made up of a $1.0 million increase to the letter of credit for our leases at the Premises associated with the commencement of the Additional Space and a $0.6 million increase to our Company credit card limit to support the growth of our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to an increase of $0.4 million to secure a Company credit card during the same period in 2019, and an increase in purchases of property and equipment of $0.4 million primarily associated with moving into the Additional Space.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, net cash flows provided by financing activities decreased $211.9 million, primarily resulting from a decrease in net proceeds from offerings of our common stock of $197.9 million and a decrease in proceeds from stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan activity of $14.0 million. Net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs, the decrease in proceeds from our offerings was due to our issuance in February 2020 of $188.4 million and our issuances in the fourth quarter of 2020 under the Sales Agreement of $17.9 million as compared to our issuances under the Sales Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $8.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, net cash flows provided by financing activities decreased $209.6 million, primarily resulting from a decrease in net proceeds from public offerings of our common
stock of $225.2 million, partially offset by an increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plans of $14.5 million, which was primarily due to increased stock option exercises associated with vesting of increased share-based awards as a result of headcount growth, and a $1.3 million decrease in repayments associated with a previous note payable to a related party, which was not outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the early repayment of the outstanding balance of the note payable to a related party in December 2019. Net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering costs, the decrease in proceeds from our public offerings was due our issuance in the third quarter of 2019 of $431.8 million as compared to our issuance in February 2020 of $188.4 million and our issuance in the fourth quarter of 2020 under the Sales Agreement of $17.9 million.
Funding Requirements
Our ability to generate product revenues sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful commercialization of QINLOCK and the development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our drug candidates. Our net loss was $300.0 million, $266.5 million, and $192.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.1 billion. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will continue in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we:
•continue to commercialize QINLOCK in the U.S., and continue to build our global commercial capability as we actively prepare to bring QINLOCK to eligible patients around the world, including in key European markets;
•continue with our ongoing and planned clinical programs for vimseltinib as a potential single agent therapy for the treatment of TGCT;
•develop DCC-3116, our ULK kinase inhibitor, for the potential treatment of mutant RAS or RAF cancers;
•continue research and development and drug discovery activities and initiate additional clinical trials;
•seek marketing approval for our drug or any of our drug candidates that successfully complete clinical development;
•develop and scale up our capabilities to support our ongoing preclinical activities and clinical trials for our drug candidates and commercialization of any of our drug candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•make payments, if any, pursuant to any license or collaboration agreement we may enter into, including those associated with the Sprint Agreement;
•maintain, expand, protect, and enforce our intellectual property portfolio; and
•maintain our operational, financial, and management systems and personnel, including to support our clinical development and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company, including international operations in key European markets and other potential geographies.
As we continue to seek regulatory approval for our drug candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to our ongoing clinical development efforts and activities related to maintaining and expanding our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, and distribution except to the extent we enter into a commercialization partnership that covers such expenses. Further, we expect to continue to incur costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Even if we are able to generate substantial product sales of QINLOCK, we may not become profitable. Until we become profitable, if ever, we expect to finance our operations primarily through a combination of equity, debt, or other financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and marketing, distribution, or additional licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. Market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors could also adversely impact our ability to access capital as and when needed. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our research, product development, or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drugs and drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of existing equity holders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures, or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution, or licensing arrangements with third parties (such as the Zai License Agreement), we may
have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, drugs, or drug candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development and commercialization, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of expenses and capital requirements or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to further reduce or terminate our operations. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•the success of our commercialization efforts and market acceptance for QINLOCK or any of our future approved drugs;
•the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our drug and drug candidates;
•the cost to develop companion diagnostics as needed for each of our drug candidates;
•our ability to establish and manage agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing;
•addition and retention of key research and development and commercial, including sales and marketing, personnel;
•the costs and timing of commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for QINLOCK, including our commercial launch of QINLOCK in key European markets, and any of our drug candidates for which we obtain marketing approval;
•the legal and patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims; and
•the terms and timing of any collaboration, license, distribution, or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any upfront, milestone, and/or royalty payments thereunder.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 of $327.6 million, together with anticipated product, royalty, and supply revenues, but excluding any potential future milestone payments under our collaboration or license agreements will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2024. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Contractual and Other Obligations
We have entered into arrangements that contractually obligate us to make payments that will affect our liquidity and cash flows in future periods. Such arrangements include those related to our lease commitments and commercial supply agreements.
Lease Commitments
Our lease commitments reflect payments due for our lease agreements for office space at the Premises that expire in November 2029, laboratory, office, and storage space in Lawrence, Kansas under lease agreements that expire in December 2030, and office space in key European markets to support European commercialization which have terms of less than 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, our contractual commitments for our leases were $40.3 million, which will be paid over the term of such leases. The amount of lease commitments reflects payments due for leases in Lawrence, Kansas that had not commenced under Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 842, Leases (ASC 842), as of December 31, 2021, and as a result, these leases are not reflected within the consolidated balance sheets. We expect these leases to commence in 2022. For additional information on our leases and timing of future payments, please read Note 7, Leases, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Commercial Supply Agreements
We have entered into commercial supply agreements related to the supply of QINLOCK that require us to make binding forecasts for a certain amount of purchases. The related cancellation clauses would as a general matter require us to pay the full amount of these binding forecasts. As of December 31, 2021, our contractual commitments for such obligations were $15.5 million, of which $14.5 million are expected to be paid within one year.
Other Obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies, and testing, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation generally consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments have not been included separately within these contractual and other obligations disclosures.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K.