Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
This section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K discusses our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. A discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed on March 1, 2021.
Overview
Datadog is the monitoring and security platform for cloud applications.
Our SaaS platform integrates and automates infrastructure monitoring, application performance monitoring and log management to provide unified, real-time observability of our customers’ entire technology stack. Datadog is used by organizations of all sizes and across a wide range of industries to enable digital transformation and cloud migration, drive collaboration among development, operations, security and business teams, accelerate time to market for applications, reduce time to problem resolution, secure applications and infrastructure, understand user behavior and track key business metrics.
We generate revenue from the sale of subscriptions to customers using our cloud-based platform. The terms of our subscription agreements are primarily monthly or annual. Customers also have the option to purchase additional products, such as additional containers to monitor, custom metrics packages, anomaly detection and app analytics. Professional services are generally not required for the implementation of our products and revenue from such services has been immaterial to date.
We employ a land-and-expand business model centered around offering products that are easy to adopt and have a very short time to value. Our customers can expand their footprint with us on a self-service basis. Our customers often significantly increase their usage of the products they initially buy from us and expand their usage to other products we offer on our platform. We grow with our customers as they expand their workloads in the public and private cloud.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $274.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash and $1,283.5 million in marketable securities. We have grown rapidly in recent periods, with revenues for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 of $1,028.8 million, $603.5 million, and $362.8 million, respectively, representing year-over-year growth of 70% from the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 and 66% from the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. Substantially all of our revenue is from subscription software sales. We have continued to make significant expenditures and investments, including in personnel-related costs, sales and marketing, infrastructure and operations, and have incurred net losses of $20.7 million, $24.5 million and $16.7 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our operating cash flow was $286.5 million, $109.1 million and $24.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our free cash flow was $250.5 million, $83.2 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See the section titled “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow” below.
Since December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which we refer to, together with other related strains of coronavirus, as “COVID-19”, has spread across the world, including to the United States and other countries in which we and our customers, partners, suppliers, vendors and other parties with whom we do business operate. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance depends on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, especially in light of the emergence of new variant strains of COVID-19, its impact on industry events, and its effect on our customers, partners, suppliers and vendors and other parties with whom we do business, and the availability, distribution and acceptance of vaccines, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. To the extent possible, we are conducting business as usual, with necessary or advisable modifications to employee travel and employee work locations and cancelling or holding virtually Datadog marketing events. We are continuing to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation related to COVID-19 and may take further actions that alter our business operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, vendors and stockholders. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our results of operations and financial condition remains uncertain. In addition, due to our subscription model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, if any, may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Acquiring New Customers
We believe there is substantial opportunity to continue to grow our customer base. We intend to drive new customer acquisition by continuing to invest significantly in sales and marketing to engage our prospective customers, increase brand awareness and drive adoption of our platform and products. We also plan to continue to invest in building brand awareness within the development and operations communities. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 18,800 customers spanning organizations of a broad range of sizes and industries, compared to approximately 14,170 as of December 31, 2020. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of our products, offerings of our competitors, and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts.
We define the number of customers as the number of accounts with a unique account identifier for which we have an active subscription in the period indicated. Users of our free trials or tier are not included in our customer count. A single organization with multiple divisions, segments or subsidiaries is generally counted as a single customer. However, in some cases where they have separate billing terms, we may count separate divisions, segments or subsidiaries as multiple customers.
Expanding Within Our Existing Customer Base
Our base of customers represents a significant opportunity for further sales expansion. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 2,010 customers with annual run-rate revenue, or ARR, of $100,000 or more, representing 83% of our ARR, up from 1,228 as of December 31, 2020, representing 78% of our ARR. We monitor our number of customers with ARR of $100,000 or more, and believe it is useful to investors, as an indicator of our ability to grow the number of customers that are exceeding this ARR threshold. We define ARR as the annual run-rate revenue of subscription agreements from all customers at a point in time. We calculate ARR by taking the monthly run-rate revenue, or MRR, and multiplying it by 12. MRR for each month is calculated by aggregating, for all customers during that month, monthly revenue from committed contractual amounts, additional usage, usage from subscriptions for a committed contractual amount of usage that is delivered as used and monthly subscriptions. We updated the definition of MRR as of the quarter ended September 30, 2021 to capture usage from subscriptions with committed contractual amounts and applied this change retrospectively. ARR and MRR should be viewed independently of revenue, and do not represent our revenue under GAAP on a monthly or annualized basis, as they are operating metrics that can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal rates. ARR and MRR are not intended to be replacements or forecasts of revenue.
A further indication of the propensity of our customer relationships to expand over time is our dollar-based net retention rate, which compares our ARR from the same set of customers in one period, relative to the year-ago period. As of each of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate was above 130%. We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period-end, or the Prior Period ARR. We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period-end, or the Current Period ARR. Current Period ARR includes any expansion and is net of contraction or attrition over the last 12 months, but excludes ARR from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the point-in-time dollar-based net retention rate. We then calculate the weighted average of the trailing 12-month point-in-time dollar-based net retention rates, to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
We believe that our land-and-expand business model allows us to efficiently increase revenue from our existing customer base. Our customers often expand the deployment of our platform across large teams and more broadly within the enterprise as they migrate more workloads to the cloud, find new use cases for our platform, and generally realize the benefits of our platform. We intend to continue to invest in enhancing awareness of our brand and developing more products, features and functionality, which we believe are important factors to achieve widespread adoption of our platform. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our solution, competition, pricing and overall changes in our customers’ spending levels.
Sustaining Innovation and Technology Leadership
Our success is dependent on our ability to sustain innovation and technology leadership in order to maintain our competitive advantage. We believe that we have built a highly differentiated platform that will position us to further extend the adoption of our platform and products. Datadog is frequently deployed across a customer’s entire infrastructure, making it ubiquitous. Datadog is a daily part of the lives of developers, operations engineers and business leaders. We employ a land-and-expand business model centered around offering products that are easy to adopt and have a very short time to value. Our efficient go-to-market model enables us to prioritize significant investment in innovation. We have proven initial success of our platform approach, through expansion beyond our initial infrastructure monitoring solution, to include APM in 2017, logs in 2018, user experience and network performance monitoring in 2019 and security monitoring in 2020. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 78% of our customers were using more than one product, up from approximately 72% a year earlier. We believe these metrics indicate strong momentum in the uptake of our newer platform products.
We intend to continue to invest in building additional products, features and functionality that expand our capabilities and facilitate the extension of our platform to new use cases. We also intend to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive product and market expansion. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market and sell existing and new products to both new and existing customers.
Expanding Internationally
We believe there is a significant opportunity to expand usage of our platform outside of North America. Revenue, as determined based on the billing address of our customers, from regions outside of North America was approximately 28% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, we have made and plan to continue to make significant investments to expand geographically, particularly in EMEA and
APAC. Although these investments may adversely affect our operating results in the near term, we believe that they will contribute to our long-term growth. Beyond North America, we now have sales presence internationally, including in Amsterdam, Dublin, London, Paris, Seoul, Singapore, Sydney, and Tokyo.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of subscriptions to customers using our cloud-based platform. The terms of our subscription agreements are primarily monthly, annual or multi-year, with the majority of our revenue coming from annual subscriptions. Our customers can enter into a subscription for a committed contractual amount of usage that is apportioned ratably on a monthly basis over the term of the subscription period, a subscription for a committed contractual amount of usage that is delivered as used, or a monthly subscription based on usage. To the extent that our customers’ usage exceeds the committed contracted amounts under their subscriptions, either on a monthly basis in the case of a ratable subscription or once the entire commitment is used in the case of a delivered-as-used subscription, they are charged for their incremental usage.
Usage is measured primarily by the number of hosts or by the volume of data indexed. A host is generally defined as a server, either in the cloud or on-premise. Our infrastructure monitoring, APM and network performance monitoring products are priced per host, our logs product is priced primarily per log events indexed and secondarily by events ingested. Customers also have the option to purchase additional products, such as additional container or serverless monitoring, custom metrics packages, anomaly detection, synthetic monitoring and app analytics.
In the case of subscriptions for committed contractual amounts of usage, revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the subscription agreement, generally beginning on the date that our platform is made available to a customer. As a result, much of our revenue is generated from subscriptions entered into during previous periods. Consequently, any decreases in new subscriptions or renewals in any one period may not be immediately reflected as a decrease in revenue for that period, but could negatively affect our revenue in future quarters. This also makes it difficult for us to rapidly increase our revenue through the sale of additional subscriptions in any period, as revenue is recognized over the term of the subscription agreement. In the case of a subscription for a committed contractual amount of usage that is delivered as used, a monthly subscription based on usage, or usage in excess of a ratable subscription, we recognize revenue as the product is used, which may lead to fluctuations in our revenue and results of operations. In addition, historically, we have experienced seasonality in new customer bookings, as we typically enter into a higher percentage of subscription agreements with new customers in the fourth quarter of the year.
Due to ease of implementation of our products, professional services generally are not required and revenue from such services has been immaterial to date.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of expenses related to providing our products to customers, including payments to our third-party cloud infrastructure providers for hosting our software, personnel-related expenses for operations and global support, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, payment processing fees, information technology, depreciation and amortization related to the amortization of acquired intangibles and internal-use software and other overhead costs such as allocated facilities.
We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our platform infrastructure and our customer support and success organizations to expand the capability of our platform and ensure that our customers are realizing the full benefit of our platform and products. The level, timing and relative investment in our infrastructure could affect our cost of revenue in the future.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit represents revenue less cost of revenue. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of revenue. Our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as our revenue fluctuates, and as a result of the timing and amount of investments to expand our products and geographical coverage.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense and sales commissions. Operating expenses also include overhead costs for facilities and shared IT-related expenses, including depreciation expense.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel costs for our engineering, service and design teams. Additionally, research and development expense includes contractor fees, depreciation and amortization and allocated overhead costs. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect that our research and development expense will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, particularly as we incur additional costs related to continued investments in our platform.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of personnel costs for our sales and marketing organization, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, including the free tier and free introductory trials of our products, travel-related expenses, amortization of acquired customer relationships, and allocated overhead costs. Sales commissions earned by our sales force are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which we have determined to be four years. We expect that our sales and marketing expense will increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales and marketing efforts.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs and contractor fees for finance, legal, human resources, information technology and other administrative functions. In addition, general and administrative expense includes non-personnel costs, such as legal, accounting and other professional fees, hardware and software costs, certain tax, license and insurance-related expenses and allocated overhead costs.
We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations and professional services. We expect that our general and administrative expense will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows.
Other Income (Loss), Net
Other income (loss), net consists of interest income, primarily due to income earned on money market funds included in cash and cash equivalents and on marketable securities, partially offset by interest expense due on the 2025 Notes and amortization of premiums on our marketable securities.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We recorded a full valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
____________________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
____________________
(2)Includes amortization of acquired intangibles expense as follows:
(3)Includes non-cash benefit related to tax adjustment as follows:
_____________________
(4)Includes employer payroll taxes on employee stock transactions as follows:
____________________
(5)Includes amortization of debt discount and issuance costs as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the periods indicated:
_____________________
(1)Certain items may not total due to rounding.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $425.3 million or 70%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately 71% of the increase in revenue was attributable to growth from existing customers, and the remaining 29% was attributable to growth from new customers.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $104.0 million, or 80%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $88.3 million in third-party cloud infrastructure hosting and software costs, an increase of $7.9 million in personnel expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $4.4 million of depreciation and amortization expense, an increase of $3.0 million in credit card processing fees and other fees, and an increase of $0.4 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of an increase in overall costs necessary to support the growth of the business and related infrastructure.
Our gross margin decreased by 1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as the result of the timing and amount of our investments to expand the capacity of our third-party cloud infrastructure providers.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $209.1 million, or 99%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $152.8 million in personnel costs for our engineering, product and design teams as a result of increased headcount, and an increase of $49.5 million in cloud infrastructure related investments.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $85.8 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $72.2 million in personnel costs for our sales and marketing organization as a result of increased headcount and increased variable compensation for our sales personnel, an increase of $7.1 million in allocated overhead costs as a result of an increase in overall costs necessary to support the growth of the business and related infrastructure, and an increase of $3.4 million in marketing and promotional activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $31.7 million, or 50%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $22.8 million in personnel expenses as a result of increased headcount, an increase of $2.9 million related to charitable donations, an increase of $2.7 million related to outside professional fees primarily related to finance and legal fees, and an increase of $0.3 million in allocated overhead expenses related to an increase in overall costs necessary to support the growth of the business and related infrastructure.
Other Income (Loss), Net
Other income (loss), net increased by $9.2 million, or 109% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the early option of ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity. As a result of the adoption, the debt discount on our 2025 Notes is no longer amortized into income as interest expense over the life of the instrument, which led to a decrease in the interest expense incurred during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collection from sales of subscriptions to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel expenses, hosting expenses, facility expenses, and marketing expenses. We have generated positive cash flows from operations during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, and have supplemented working capital requirements through net proceeds from the sale of debt and equity securities. When assessing sources of liquidity, we also include cash and cash equivalents of $271.0 million and marketable securities of $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2021. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to support our cash requirements for the next 12 months and beyond.
Our working capital requirements are principally comprised of workforce salaries, bonuses, commissions, and benefits and, to a lesser extent, cancellable and non-cancelable licenses and services arrangements that are integral to our business operations, and operating lease obligations. Non-cancelable purchase commitments for business operations and operating lease obligations total $688.4 million and $97.0 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021, due primarily over the next five years. Purchase commitments for business operations are primarily related to cloud hosting and other software-based services.
We have also issued long-term debt to finance our business. In June 2020, we issued $747.5 million aggregate principal amount of the 2025 Notes in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the
Securities Act. The total net proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Notes, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and debt issuance costs, were approximately $730.2 million. The principal and future interest payments related to our 2025 Notes is $750.8 million.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $177.5 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 to $286.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenue of $106.5 million and non-cash charges of $97.8 million. The increase in deferred revenue resulted primarily from increased billings for subscriptions. Further, the increase in non-cash charges related primarily to an increase of $89.3 million in stock-based compensation as we continued to increase headcount to support the growth of the business.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $878.9 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 to $273.7 million, primarily driven by a decrease in the investment in marketable securities of $669.0 million, an increase in proceeds of $540.0 million from maturities of marketable securities and an increase in capitalized software development costs of $5.6 million. The decrease in cash used by investing activities was offset by an increase in cash paid for acquisition of businesses net of cash acquired of $224.1 million, a decrease in the proceeds from sale of marketable securities of $95.9 million and an increase in purchases of property and equipment of $4.5 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $635.3 million from the year ended December 31, 2020 to $34.9 million, primarily due to the receipt of proceeds from the issuance of the 2025 Notes of $730.2 million, net of issuance costs, in 2020. Further, the purchase of the capped call in connection with the 2025 Notes for $89.6 million offset the decrease in cash provided by financing activities as there were no additional purchases in 2021.
Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow
We report our financial results in accordance with U.S. GAAP. To supplement our consolidated financial statements, we provide investors with the amount of free cash flow, which is a non-GAAP financial measure. Free cash flow represents net cash used in operating activities, reduced by capital expenditures and capitalized software development costs, if any. Free cash flow is a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our liquidity and to generate future operating plans. The reduction of capital expenditures and amounts capitalized for software development facilitates comparisons of our liquidity on a period-to-period basis and excludes items that we do not consider to be indicative of our liquidity. We believe that free cash flow is a measure of liquidity that provides useful information to our management, board of directors, investors and others in understanding and evaluating the strength of our liquidity and future ability to generate cash that can be used for strategic opportunities or investing in our business. Nevertheless, our use of free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under GAAP. Further, our definition of free cash flow may differ from the definitions used by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. You should consider free cash flow alongside our other GAAP-based financial performance measures, such as net cash used in operating activities, and our other GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, for each of the periods indicated:
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from the sale of subscriptions to customers using our cloud-based platform. The terms of our subscription agreements are primarily monthly or annual, with the majority of our revenue coming from annual subscriptions. Our customers can enter into a subscription for a committed contractual amount of usage that is apportioned ratably on a monthly basis over the term of the subscription period, a subscription for a committed contractual amount of usage that is delivered as used, or a monthly subscription based on usage. To the extent that our customers’ usage exceeds the committed contracted amounts under their subscriptions, either on a monthly basis in the case of a ratable subscription or once the entire commitment is used in the case of a delivered-as-used subscription, they are charged for their incremental usage.
We account for revenue contracts with customers through the following steps:
(1)identify the contract with a customer;
(2)identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3)determine the transaction price;
(4)allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5)recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our subscriptions are generally non-cancellable. Once we have determined the transaction price, the total transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation in the contract on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, or SSP. The determination of a relative stand-alone SSP for each distinct performance obligation requires judgment. We determine SSP for performance obligations based on overall pricing objectives, which take into consideration market conditions and customer-specific factors. This includes a review of internal discounting tables, the service(s) being sold, and customer demographics.
Revenue is recognized when control of these services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those services. We determine an output method to be the most appropriate measure of progress because it most faithfully represents when the value of the services is simultaneously received and consumed by the customer, and control is transferred.
For committed contractual amounts of usage, revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the subscription agreement generally beginning on the date that the platform is made available to a customer. For committed contractual amount of usage that is delivered as used, a monthly subscription based on usage, or usage in excess of a ratable subscription, we recognize revenue as the services are rendered.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense related to stock-based awards based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We historically issued options to purchase shares of our common stock under our 2012 equity incentive plan, or the 2012 Plan. Following the IPO, we ceased granting awards under the 2012 Plan, and all shares that remained available for issuance under the 2012 Plan at that time were transferred to our 2019 equity incentive plan, or the 2019 Plan. Under the 2019 Plan, we may grant stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, restricted stock units, or RSUs, and performance-based and other awards, each valued or based on our Class A common stock, to our employees, directors, consultants, and advisors. For further information see Note 13 in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee, consultant, and non-employee director stock option awards, is measured and recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on fair value. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black Scholes option-pricing model. Expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. Forfeitures are accounted for in the period in which the awards are forfeited.
Our option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•Fair value. Prior to our IPO, the fair value of common stock underlying the stock options had historically been determined by our Board of Directors, with input from our management. Our Board of Directors previously determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of grant of the options by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including the results of contemporaneous independent third-party valuations of our common stock, the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible Preferred Stock relative to those of our common stock, the prices of common or convertible preferred stock sold to third-party investors by us and in secondary transactions or repurchased by us in arm’s-length transactions, the lack of marketability of our common stock, actual operating and financial results, current business conditions and projections, the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a merger or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions. Subsequent to our IPO, the fair value of the underlying common stock is determined by the closing price, on the date of grant, of our Class A common stock, as reported by the Nasdaq.
•Expected volatility. Expected volatility is a measure of the amount by which the stock price is expected to fluctuate. Since we do not have sufficient trading history of our common stock, we estimate the expected volatility of our stock options at the grant date by taking the average historical volatility of a group of comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected life of the options.
•Expected term. We determine the expected term based on the average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding using the simplified method, generally calculated as the midpoint of the stock options’ vesting term and contractual expiration period, as we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior.
•Risk-free rate. We use the U.S. Treasury yield for our risk-free interest rate that corresponds with the expected term.
•Expected dividend yield. We utilize a dividend yield of zero, as we do not currently issue dividends, nor do we expect to do so in the future.
The following assumptions were used to calculate the fair value of stock options granted to employees:
_____________________
1) There were no stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Assumptions used in valuing non-employee stock options are generally consistent with those used for employee stock options with the exception that the expected term is over the contractual life, or 10 years.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Internal Use Software Development Costs
We capitalize certain costs related to the development of our platform and other software applications for internal use. In accordance with authoritative guidance, we begin to capitalize our costs to develop software when preliminary development efforts are successfully completed, management has authorized and committed project funding, and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used as intended. We stop capitalizing these costs when the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use, including the completion of all significant testing. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related asset, generally estimated to be two years. We also capitalize costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable the expenditure will result in additional functionality and expense costs incurred for maintenance and minor upgrades and enhancements. Costs incurred prior to meeting these criteria together with costs incurred for training and maintenance are expensed as incurred and recorded within research and development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations.
We exercise judgment in determining the point at which various projects may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized. To the extent that we change the manner in which we develop and test new features and functionalities related to our platform, assess the ongoing value of capitalized assets or determine the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, the amount of internal-use software development costs we capitalize and amortize could change in future periods.
Convertible Senior Notes
In accounting for the issuance of the 2025 Notes, the 2025 Notes were separated into liability and equity components through December 31, 2020. The carrying amount of the liability component was calculated by measuring the fair value of similar liabilities that do not have associated convertible features. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was determined by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the par value of the respective 2025 Notes. This difference represents the debt discount that is amortized to interest expense over the contractual terms of the 2025 Notes using the effective interest rate method. The carrying amount of the equity component representing the conversion option was $177.2 million. The equity component was recorded in additional paid-in capital and is not remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification.
In accounting for the debt issuance costs of $17.3 million related to the 2025 Notes, we allocated the total amount incurred to the liability and equity components of the 2025 Notes in the same proportion as the allocation of the proceeds. Issuance costs attributable to the liability component were $13.2 million and will be amortized, along with the debt discount, to interest expense over the contractual term of the 2025 Notes at an effective interest rate of 5.97%. Issuance costs attributable to the equity component were $4.1 million and are netted against the equity component in additional paid-in capital.
On January 1, 2021, we adopted ASU No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. As a result of the adoption, the debt conversion option of $177.2 million and debt issuance costs of $4.1 million previously attributable to the equity component are no longer presented in equity. Similarly, the debt discount, that is equal to the carrying value of the embedded conversion feature upon issuance, is no longer amortized into income as interest
expense over the life of the instrument. This resulted in a $16.8 million decrease to the opening balance of accumulated deficit, a $173.1 million decrease to the opening balance of additional paid-in capital and a $156.3 million increase to the opening balance of convertible senior notes, net on the consolidated balance sheet.
Business Combinations
When we acquire a business, the purchase consideration is allocated to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated respective fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to other income, net in the consolidated statement of operations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.