Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, included in this Report. Some of the information contained in this Report may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1933, as amended (the “Act”) and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). This information may involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by any forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies and expectations, are generally identifiable by the use of the words “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology. These forward-looking statements are based on assumptions that may be incorrect, and there can be no assurance that the projections included in these forward-looking statements will come to pass. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements for any reason, even if new information becomes available or other events occur in the future.
Our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm’s report contains a statement that our net loss and limited working capital raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our independent registered public accountants have stated in their report (included in Item 8 of the Financial Statements) that our significant operating losses and working capital deficit raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We incurred a net loss of $11,571,783 for the year ended June 30, 2022, and net income of $1,221 during the year ended June 30, 2021. Although the Company continues to rely on equity and debt investors to finance its losses, it is implementing plans to achieve cost savings and other strategic objectives to address Company profitability. In addition to raising debt and equity financing, the Company continues to focus on growing the subsidiaries anticipated to be most profitable while reducing investments in areas that are not expected to have long-term benefits. The Company will continue to pursue synergistic opportunities to enhance its business portfolio.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth the results of our operations for the years ended June 30, 2022, and 2021:
Dalrada operates numerous diverse business activities through its Corporate segment as well as its four operating segments: 1) Health; 2) Energy; 3) Manufacturing; and 4) Technology. The business segment data (Note 13 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements) should be read in conjunction with this discussion.
During the year we established products and services through a strategic vertical integration approach. Dalrada leveraged its resources to increase market share across all operating segments as well as acquired companies to enhance and strengthen the existing suite of businesses.
In the first quarter of the year, we entered into a joint venture agreement with a diagnostic laboratory as well as expanded our wholly owned diagnostic laboratory to conduct both molecular diagnostic and antibody tests to support the diagnosis of COVID-19.
In the third quarter of the year, due to strong market demands, we expanded our presence in the green energy industry when launching Dalrada Energy Services (“DES”) to service the Environment, Social and Governance (“ESG”) space. DES provides an end-to-end solution that will simultaneously help achieve ESG responsibilities while producing significant cost savings. DES deploys a proprietary financial model (Patent In process) that helps realize reductions in usage through reliable, efficient, and secure protocols meeting long-term clean energy and net-zero sustainability initiatives with no capital investment requirement.
During the third quarter of the year, Dalrada launched Ignite I.T. (“Ignite”), as a manufacturer and seller of eco-friendly deep cleaners, parts washers and degreasers that are specially formulated to lift hydrocarbon-based dirt and grease from virtually all surfaces. Ignite and its family of products directly address global demand and increased government regulation to reduce employee exposure to harmful chemicals and toxic substances. Ignite is a complementary business to the Manufacturing segment of services and products.
Also, in the third quarter of the year, Solas Corp. (“Solas”) expanded its management services agreements to three health and wellness clinics throughout San Diego, California.
Acquisitions
In April 2022, we entered into an agreement to acquire 100% of Silicon Services Consortium (Europe) LTD which is operating as Deposition Technologies (“DepTec”). DepTec was founded in 2004 and has since specialized in delivering precision manufacturing equipment and services for semiconductor, micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS), and medical and optoelectronics device companies. DepTec manufactures chemical vapor and physical vapor deposition systems. DepTec also designs, develops, manufactures, and services advanced vacuum and plasma technology-based systems as well as control systems and software solutions for the semiconductor industry. In 2014, DepTec developed its own unique PVD system, the EVOS, and entered the OEM arena. DepTec currently features multiple systems, including robotics, that assist in producing devices used in the latest medical devices, communications products and virtually all systems utilizing microelctronics. Additionally, DepTec provides refurbished Varian PVD Systems, including the 3180/3190, 3290 and XM-90 systems as well as the Novellus Concept 1 and 2 PECVD Systems.
In June 2022, we entered into an agreement to acquire 100% of RxHealth LLC which is operating as Watson Rx. Watson Rx is a Pharmacy operating in Alabama and focused on managing complex disease states and licensed in all 50 states plus Washington D.C. Its services/products provided include Pharmaceutical, Diabetes Care, Durable Medical Equipment, Health Screenings, and Medication Therapy.
Through the acquisition and integration into Dalrada Life Sciences, Watson Rx further establishes a comprehensive healthcare solution for all Dalrada Health clients with unique offerings that will now include: a pharmacy to facilitate prescription processing, physicians and clinicians at treatment clinics, expanding into telemedicine, engagement of Dalrada-owned testing facilities and laboratories, and utilization of Company-specific technologies to facilitate immediate growth of the business. Watson Rx has a long history of providing excellent pharmacy services and allows Dalrada to expand its healthcare footprint and continue to build a total health management solution on an already successful turnkey operation. Through comprehensive prescription management, education, nursing, and total health management, Watson Rx Solutions” leadership team holds more than six decades of combined experience in various complex pharmacy disease states and retail services, always putting patients first. Dalrada has entered the pharmaceutical space with an accelerated strategic plan to leverage the Company’s existing capabilities.
Revenues and Cost of revenues
Dalrada Health
Total Revenues for Dalrada Health increased $11,878,249 , or 683% from the prior year.
Pala Diagnostics (“Pala”) and Empower Genomics (“Empower”) generated $11,824,717, or 87% of the total revenue for Dalrada Health through its complexity CLIA diagnostic laboratories, focusing primarily on Covid-19 testing services with validated PCR and Rapid antigen testing. Our diagnostic laboratories saw an immediate increase in revenue as a result of the COVID-19 Omicron surge during the summer of 2021 and into Spring of 2022. Our Covid Response Field Tech teams were deployed to senior cares, schools and universities, businesses, and community sites throughout Southern California. During the year, Empower developed proprietary digital registration and reporting software that met all compliance benchmarks required by county, state, and federally funded Covid-19 programs. In March 2022, the HRSA COVID-19 Uninsured Program ceased and stopped accepting claims on March 22, 2022. The cost of revenue was $3,612,891, or 31% of revenue.
IHG’s revenue increased by $334,727 from the prior year and represented 5.78% of the total revenue for Dalrada Health. The increase in revenue was a result of a rising number of students entering and graduating from IHG’s Certified Nursing Assistant (“CNA”), Medical Assistant and Home Health Aid (“HHA”) Certification programs. The cost of revenues increased by 172% from the prior year.
Solas began managing a suite of wellness therapies during fiscal year 2022 and expanded its management services agreements to three locations during fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022. The revenue generated was $723,215, or 5.31% of total revenue for Dalrada Health. The cost of revenue was $750,565.
Watson generated $69,160, or .51% of the total revenue for Dalrada Health between the acquisition date of June 7, 2022 and the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. The revenue was a driven from subscriptions filled on its existing customer base. The cost of revenue was $12,305.
Dalrada Health and Shark’s sale of alcohol-free natural sanitizers and sanitizing kits decreased by 78% from the prior year. The decrease was a result of a highly competitive sanitization market. Total cost of revenue was $74,420, or 0.55% of total Revenue for Dalrada Health.
Dalrada Precision Manufacturing
Total Revenue for Dalrada Precision Manufacturing rose $1,642,124, or 341% from the prior year. The increase in revenue was a direct result of obtaining an increased customer base in the Dalrada Precision Parts market. Furthermore, the launch of Ignite generated revenue to Precision Manufacturing.
Dalrada Precision Parts generated $1,347,816, or 63% of the total revenue for Dalrada Precision Manufacturing. Revenue for Dalrada Precision Parts increased by $1,197,756, or 233% from the prior year. The increase was a result of an expansion of its customer base in the United States. Additionally, Dalrada Precision Parts purchased several Likido units from Likido Ltd (UK) and sold them to a third party. The cost of revenue was $762,873.
Likido Ltd. generated $155,218, or 7% of the total revenue for Dalrada Precision Manufacturing. Revenue for Likido Ltd. decreased by $176,035, or 53% from the prior year. The decrease was a result of additional R&D completed on the Likido®ONE heat pump in anticipation for an increase in manufacturing volumes. Likido Ltd. sold several Likido®ONE and Likido®CRYO units to Dalrada Precision Parts which was eliminated in consolidation. During the year Likido Ltd. began working with Likido Corp. (USA) to ramp up manufacturing in the United States. The cost of revenues was $946,890 and includes a write down of inventory.
DepTec generated $570,225, or 27% of the total revenue for Dalrada Precision Manufacturing between the acquisition date of April 6, 2022, and the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. DepTec records its revenue on a percentage of completion method. The cost of revenues was $290,368.
Ignite’s cleaners, parts washers and degreasers products generated $50,178, or 2% of total revenue for Dalrada Precision Manufacturing. The cost of revenue was $23,916.
Dalrada Energy Services
Dalrada Energy Services generated $1,261,774 during the year through implementing robust energy savings strategies to several properties of a related party. The Revenue was a result of a sales-type lease arrangement for obtaining energy savings over a 20-year contract. The cost of revenue was $172,231.
DES made significant investments to meet strong market demand from is strategically working global public and private sector organizations to adopt real, measurable, and repeatable Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) measures. These measures also allow our clients and DES to benefit from ESG focused laws and mandates that require businesses to create and adhere to their own sustainability plans. This includes the elimination of legacy lighting, oil and natural gas boilers and other high carbon producing infrastructure. DES implements the following upgrades and enhancements as part of its energy savings strategies:
· Lighting (LED Enhancement)
· HVAC Upgrades
· Building Management
· Power Factor Correction Technology
· Air Handling / Thermal Equalization
· Likido® High Efficiency Heat Pumps
· Advanced Water Conservation Technology
· Solar
· Metaverse
Dalrada Technologies
Total Revenue for Dalrada Technologies” sole subsidiary, Prakat, rose $1,053,781, or 89% from the prior year. The increase in revenue was a direct result of a small number of larger contracts in Asia.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022, was $20,941,591 compared to operating expenses of $9,504,869 during the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $11,436,722.
Corporate
Operating expenses for the corporate segment increased by $6,089,806 from the prior year and represented 52% of the total operating expenses.
The Corporate segment’s Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist of the following:
· Employee compensation and benefits increased by $3,193,462, or 165% from the prior year and is a result of the rapid expansion of the Company as well as adding several key members to our management team that have significant operating experience. Several employees are shared resources across the four business segments and are included in the corporate segment.
· Legal and professional fees increased by $946,428, or 105% from the prior year and is a result of the Company’s acquisitions and continued vertical growth within each segment.
· Sales and marketing costs decreased by $167,343, or 37% from the prior year as a result of paid media, content creation expenses and other marketing expenses being recognized across each segment. Marketing costs are geared towards customer acquisition and retention and building brand awareness.
· Other general and administrative costs for general corporate expenses, including information technology, rent, travel, and insurance increased by $146,161, or 22% from the prior year and is a result of the Company’s rapid expansion.
Interest Expense increased by $593,938, or 100% from the prior year as a result of related party debt, PPP loans, and convertible debt. See “Note 7. Notes Payable” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our outstanding debt.
Stock-based compensation includes expenses related to equity awards issued to employees and non-employee directors. Stock-based compensation increased by $1,971,098, or 246% from the prior year. See “Note 12. Stock-Based Compensation” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our stock-based compensation.
Dalrada Health
Operating expenses for the Dalrada Health segment increased by $4,006,142 from the prior year and represented 29% of the total operating expenses.
The Dalrada Health segment’s Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist of the following:
· Employee compensation and benefits increased by $343,873, or 85% from the prior year and is a result of the joint venture with Pala Diagnostics, the expansion of Empower Genomics and Solas as well as the acquisition of Watson.
· Legal and Professional Fees increased by $900,811, or 197% from the prior year and is a result of clinical studies related to the CerVIA kit, consulting related to diagnostics and acquisitions for Dalrada Health. The increase in legal fees was a result of the lawsuit with Vivera Pharmaceuticals.
· Sales and marketing costs increased by $109,592, or 90% from the prior year as a result of paid media, content creation expenses, events and other marketing expenses related to Empower Genomics, Pala Diagnostics, Solas, and GlanHealth.
· Other general and administrative costs for general corporate expenses, including information technology, rent, travel, and insurance increased by $2,434,558, or 210% from the prior year and is a result of the joint venture with Pala Diagnostics, the expansion of Empower Genomics and Solas as well as the acquisition of Watson.
Dalrada Precision Manufacturing
Operating expenses for the Dalrada Precision Manufacturing segment increased by $2,993,732 from the prior year and represented 14% of the total operating expenses.
The Dalrada Precision Manufacturing Segment’s Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist of the following:
· Employee compensation and benefits increased by $9,923, or 3% from the prior year.
· Legal and Professional Fees increased by $265,763, or 68% from the prior year and is a result of consulting fees for the growth in manufacturing of precision parts in Asia as well as consulting related to establishing manufacturing capabilities of the Likido®ONE in the United States. The increase in legal fees was a result of the Likido Ltd.’s lawsuit with MAPtech Packaging, Inc.
· Sales and marketing costs decreased by $3,729, or 9% from the prior year.
· Other general and administrative costs for general corporate expenses, including information technology, rent, travel, and insurance increased by $795,360, or 171% from the prior year and is a result of expansion in the Precision Parts and Ignite businesses.
Dalrada Energy Services
The Dalrada Energy Services Segment’s Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist of the following:
· Legal and Professional Fees include consultants related to the implementation of energy savings strategies for the segment.
· Other general and administrative costs for general corporate expenses, including travel and taxes.
Dalrada Technologies
The Dalrada Technologies segment’s Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist of the following:
· Employee compensation and benefits increased by $128,546, or 66% from the prior year and is a result of a larger customer base and wage inflation.
· Legal and Professional Fees decreased by $156,804, or 32% from the prior year.
· Sales and marketing costs decreased by $30,630, or 85% from the prior year.
· Other general and administrative costs for general corporate expenses, including information technology, rent, travel, and insurance increased by $72,954, or 48% from the prior year.
Other Income (Expense)
Other Income decreased by $9,575,398, or 112% from the prior year. The change in Other Income (Expense) was a result of additional interest of $1,303,714 related to additional related party debt, EIDL loans, and convertible debt. See “Note 7. Notes Payable” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our outstanding debt. The change in Other Income (Expense) was also related to a $9,054,041 “Gain on expiration of accrued payroll taxes” as a result of quarterly tax liabilities that expired during fiscal 2021.
Net Income (Loss)
Net Loss for the year ended June 30, 2022, was $11,571,783 compared to a Net Income of $1,221 during the year ended June 30, 2022
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of June 30, 2022, the Company had current assets of $9,563,566 and current liabilities of $20,416,745 compared with current assets of $1,640,511 and current liabilities of $17,175,111 at June 30, 2021. The increase in the working capital deficit of was due to the fact that the Company recovered tax liability during the prior year which was used to offset outstanding obligations. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon the successful financing through equity and/or debt investors and growing the subsidiaries anticipated to be profitable while reducing investments in areas that are not expected to have long-term benefits.
The Company anticipates an increase in sales of Likido’s Likido®ONE heat pump through DES’ energy savings projects as well as its current and future customer base. Furthermore, the United States General Services Administration (GSA) and the Department of Energy (DOE) have chosen the Company’s Likido®ONE heat pump to help reduce greenhouse emissions from commercial buildings through high performance, low-carbon solutions set forth by the Green Proving Ground (GPG) program.
The company has completed and anticipates obtaining material ESG contracts through its DES subsidiary and expects to sell these contracts to various investment firms and energy brokerages.
The Company is owed a material amount of account receivable from insurance providers related to the COVID-19 testing services. Furthermore, the Company wrote down $1,758,000 of revenue during the year ended June 30, 2022 which it is actively working to recoup through its third-party billing company.
Additional sales are expected through the Company’s increased Precision Parts sales channels, expansion of Prakat’s technology services, IHG’s increased educational footprint through launching the LVN program, opportunities within the pharmaceutical business and other new business opportunities (see “Subsequent Events”). These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
Cash flow from Operating Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company used $10,349,808 of cash for operating activities compared to $5,583,788 used during the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in the use of cash for operating activities was primarily due to an overall increase in day-to-day operating costs while the Company continues to grow in addition to its new business units.
Cash flow from Investing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company used $574,040 of cash for investing activities compared to $385,830 used during the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in the use of cash for investing activities was due to the purchase of equipment and the acquisition of DepTec and Watson.
Cash flow from Financing Activities
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company received $11,668,585 of cash for financing activities compared to $5,964,554 used during the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was due to the issuance of related party and convertible notes payables in the amount of $11,492,218 and $2,880,000, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, Revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Subsequent Events
In July 2022 through October 31, 2022, the Company issued 8,132,415 shares of common stock for the conversion of $1,231,471 in convertible notes held by YA II PN, LTD at an average conversion price of $0.1514.
On July 1, 2022, the Company issued 500,000 shares of common stock as part of the consideration for the acquisition of Deposition Technologies.
On October 10, 2022, the Company acquired 100% of Bothof Brothers Construction, Inc., a California corporation, for a transaction valued at $1,530,000, of which $1,080,000 will be paid in salary to the seller over a 36-month period, plus 3,000,000 cashless warrants with a strike price of $0.15 per share, valued at $450,000. The warrants will vest quarterly over a 24-month period.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our financial statements. A complete summary of these policies is included in note (1) of the notes to our financial statements. In general, management's estimates are based on historical experience, on information from third party professionals, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management.
Accrued Payroll Taxes
The total balance for Federal Accrued Payroll Taxes is accumulated on a quarterly basis beginning on their respective quarterly filing dates. Accrued Interest is compounded daily at an Effective Annual Interest Rate of approximately seven percent. The individual quarterly sub-totals have a calculated expiration date of Ten years according to the Internal Revenue Service statute of limitations. This timeline can be extended as a result of bankruptcy or other legal action that is filed by the Company (Code 520 per IRS Federal Account Transcripts). Code 520 effectively stops the clock for the Statute of limitations until the Bankruptcy or other legal action has been removed (Code 521 per IRS Federal Account Transcripts). In addition to the number of days between Code 520 and 521, every Code 520 automatically extends the IRS Statute of limitations by 30 days. As the quarterly sub-totals surpass their respective “Calculated Expiration Date” the Company removes the liability from the Consolidated Balance Sheets and an equivalent amount is recognized as “Gain on expiration of accrued payroll taxes” on the Statements of Operations. The amount owing may be subject to additional late filing fees and penalties that are not quantifiable as at the date of these consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes and accounts for revenue in accordance with ASC 606 as a principal on the sale of goods and services. Pursuant to ASC 606, revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer, and excludes any sales incentives and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. The Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a customer.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (U.S. GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates and assumptions take into account historical and forward-looking factors that the Company believes are reasonable, including but not limited to the potential impacts arising from the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) and related public and private sector policies and initiatives. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. A couple key categories that use estimates are Goodwill, Intangible Assets, and Impairment.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company records stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation, using the fair value method. All transactions in which goods or services are the consideration received for the issuance of equity instruments are accounted for based on the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instrument issued, whichever is more reliably measurable. Equity instruments issued to employees and the cost of the services received as consideration are measured and recognized based on the fair value using quoted market prices of the equity instruments issued.
Business Combination
ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”), applies the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations to all acquisitions where the acquirer gains a controlling interest, regardless of whether consideration was exchanged. ASC 805 establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer: a) recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree; b) recognizes and measures the goodwill acquired in the business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase; and c) determines what information to disclose to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. Accounting for acquisitions requires the Company to recognize, separately from goodwill, the assets acquired, and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition-date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred and the net of the acquisition-date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While the Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company accounts for goodwill and intangible assets in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). ASC 350 requires that goodwill and other intangibles with indefinite lives should be tested for impairment annually or on an interim basis if events or circumstances indicate that the fair value of an asset has decreased below its carrying value.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis (June 30 for the Company) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. The Company considers its market capitalization and the carrying value of its assets and liabilities, including goodwill, when performing its goodwill impairment test. When conducting its annual goodwill impairment assessment, the Company initially performs a qualitative evaluation of whether it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. If it is determined by a qualitative evaluation that it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired, the Company then applies a two-step impairment test. The two-step impairment test first compares the fair value of the Company's reporting unit to its carrying or book value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired and the Company is not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company determines the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill and if the carrying value of the reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then an impairment loss equal to the difference is recorded in the consolidated statements of operations. There was impairment of goodwill in the amount of $218,308 as of June 30, 2022.
An intangible asset is an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical substance. Such an asset is identifiable when it is separable, or when it arises from contractual or other legal rights. Separable assets can be sold, transferred, licensed, etc. Examples of intangible assets include computer software, licenses, trademarks, patents, films and copyrights. The Company’s intangible assets are finite lived assets and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Purchase Price Allocation
Upon the completion of a business combination, the consideration transferred as well as the assets and liabilities acquired must be recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Upon identification of the acquirer and determination of the acquisition date, business combinations are accounted for through the preparation of a Purchase Price Allocation (PPA). We take into consideration the five steps when completing a PPA:
Step 1: Determine the fair value of consideration paid;
Step 2: Revalue all existing assets and liabilities (excluding intangible assets and goodwill which are addressed in step 3 to 5 below) to their acquisition date fair values;
Step 3: Identify the intangible assets acquired;
Step 4: Determine the fair value of identifiable intangible assets acquired; and,
Step 5: Allocate the remaining consideration to goodwill and assess the reasonableness of the overall
Related Party Transactions
Related party transactions are conducted with parties with which DFCO has a close association, such as majority owned subsidiaries, its executive, managers, and their families. The types of transactions that can be conducted between related parties are many, such as sales, asset transfers, leases, lending arrangements, guarantees, allocations of common costs, and the filing of consolidated tax returns. DFCO discloses any transaction that would impact the decision making of the users of a company’s financial statements. This involves the following disclosures:
· General. DFCO discloses all material related party transactions, including the nature of the relationship, the nature of the transactions, the dollar amounts of the transactions, the amounts due to or from related parties.
· Receivables. DFCO separately discloses any receivables from officers, employees, or affiliated entities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740), Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in this Update simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. For public business entities, the amendments in this Update are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company adopted this pronouncement on July 1, 2020, and there was not a material impact on the financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, as part of its overall simplification initiative to reduce costs and complexity of applying accounting standards while maintaining or improving the usefulness of the information provided to users of financial statements. Among other changes, the new guidance removes from GAAP separation models for convertible debt that require the convertible debt to be separated into a debt and equity component, unless the conversion feature is required to be bifurcated and accounted for as a derivative or the debt is issued at a substantial premium. As a result, after adopting the guidance, entities will no longer separately present such embedded conversion features in equity, and will instead account for the convertible debt wholly as debt. The new guidance also requires use of the “if-converted” method when calculating the dilutive impact of convertible debt on earnings per share, which is consistent with the Company’s current accounting treatment under the current guidance. The guidance is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted, but only at the beginning of the fiscal year. The Company adopted this pronouncement on July 1, 2021.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-08 - Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers (“ASU 2021-08”). Under current accounting standards, contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination are to be recorded at fair value using the ASC 805 measurement principle. ASU 2021-08 requires the acquirer to recognize and measure contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination in accordance with Topic 606: Revenue from Contracts with Customers as if the acquirer had originated the contracts rather than at fair value. ASU 2021-08 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. The Company elected to early adopt ASU 2021-08 on a prospective basis as of July 1, 2021. The election to use practical expedients allowed under ASU 2021-08 will be applied on an acquisition-by-acquisition basis. There was no impact to the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of the adoption date.
We have reviewed all the recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and we do not believe any of these pronouncements will have a material impact on the Company.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and are not required to provide the information under this item.