ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on June 23, 2020 in Delaware and formed for the purpose of effectuating an initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the private warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our securities in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from June 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $1,910,487, which resulted from a gain on change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $3,517,171, and an net gain on investments held in trust account in the amount of $23,715, which was partially offset by warrant issuance costs of $18,797 associated with the Initial Public Offering, operating and formation costs of $292,074, loss on sale of private warrants of $1,253,928, and franchise tax expense of $65,600.
For the period from June 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,000, which resulted entirely from operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $799,808 and $25,000 in cash held outside of the trust account, respectively, and a working capital surplus of $988,186 and $24,000, respectively.
The Company’s liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the proceeds of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares, and a loan of up to $250,000 under an unsecured and non-interest bearing promissory note. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity will be satisfied through the net proceeds from the private placement held outside of the trust account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any such loans.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $547,052, which was due to the change in fair value of warrants of $3,517,171, changes in operating assets and liabilities of $189,378, and net gain on investments in the trust account of $23,715, partially offset by our net income of $1,910,487, loss on sale of private warrants of $1,253,928, and warrant issuance costs of $18,797.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $128,397,500, which was due to the amount of net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering being deposited to the trust account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $129,719,360, which was comprised of $126,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of units in the Initial Public Offering net of underwriter’s discount paid, $4,303,907.94 in proceeds from the issuance of private warrants, and proceeds from issuance of the promissory note with the Sponsor of $155,000, offset in part by payment of $580,140 for offering costs associated with the Initial Public Offering and repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to the Sponsor of $155,000.
For the period from June 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, there were proceeds of $25,000 from the issuance of founder shares to the Sponsor.
On August 13, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 11,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $110,000,000. Each unit consisted of one public share and three-quarters of one public warrant. Each public warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole share.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, Warrant Holdings purchased an aggregate of 4,361,456 private warrants at a price of $0.93 per private warrant ($4,052,000 in the aggregate). Each private warrant entitles the holder to purchase three-fourths of one share of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
On August 18, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option and, purchased an additional 1,650,000 units at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $16,500,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the exercise of the over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of 266,402 private warrants at a purchase price of $0.93 per private warrant in a private placement to Warrant Holdings, generating gross proceeds of $247,500.
A portion of the proceeds from the private warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the trust account. If we do not complete our initial business combination by August 13, 2022 (or November 13, 2022 or February 13, 2023, as applicable, if the time period is extended), the proceeds of the sale of the private warrants will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the private warrants and all underlying securities will be worthless. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to the private warrants.
We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering, including the funds held in the trust account, to acquire a target business or businesses and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our share capital is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees that we incur prior to the completion of our initial business combination, if the funds available to us outside of the trust account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following our Initial Public Offering to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations. We entered into an administrative services agreement pursuant to which we pay the Sponsor for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month.
Registration and Stockholder Rights Agreement
The holders of the founder shares and private warrants (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private warrants) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to Registration Rights Agreement. The holders of a majority of these securities are entitled to make up to two demands that the Company register such securities. The holders of the majority of the founder shares can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time commencing three months prior to the date on which these shares of common stock are to be released from escrow. The holders of a majority of the private warrants (and underlying securities) can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time after the Company consummates a business combination. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of a business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 1,650,000 additional units to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On August 18, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,650,000 units at an offering price of $10.00 per unit for an aggregate purchase price of $16,500,000. In addition, the underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $500,000 upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
The Company has engaged Chardan as an advisor in connection with the Company’s business combination to assist the Company in holding meetings with the stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce the Company to potential investors that are interested in purchasing the Company’s securities, assist the Company in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist the Company with press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. The Company will pay Chardan a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of the Company’s initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering. As a result, Chardan will not be entitled to such fee unless the Company consummates the initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480 and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants will be recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
The Company accounts for the private warrants issued concurrently in connection with the Initial Public Offering in accordance with ASC 815-40, under which the private warrants will not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the private warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the private warrants will be measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement (“ASC 820”), with changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations in the period of change.
The public warrants are not precluded from equity classification, and are accounted for as such on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock feature certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 12,650,000 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from the initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock is affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net earnings by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the Warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 14,115,358 shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the Warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging -Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for the Company on January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021 using the full retrospective method of transition. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements