Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis constitutes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K particularly under “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” which immediately follows “Risk Factors.” Unless otherwise specified, references to Notes to our consolidated financial statements are to the Notes to our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Introduction and Overview
Discover Financial Services (“DFS”) is a digital banking and payment services company. We provide digital banking products and services and payment services through our subsidiaries. We offer our customers credit card loans, private student loans, personal loans, home loans and deposit products. We also operate the Discover Network, the PULSE network (“PULSE”) and Diners Club International (“Diners Club”), collectively known as the Discover Global Network. The Discover Network processes transactions for Discover-branded credit and debit cards and provides payment transaction processing and settlement services. PULSE operates an electronic funds transfer network, providing financial institutions issuing debit cards on the PULSE network with access to ATMs domestically and internationally and merchant acceptance throughout the United States of America (“U.S.”) for debit card transactions. Diners Club is a global payments network of licensees, which are generally financial institutions, that issue Diners Club branded credit and charge cards and/or provide card acceptance services.
Our primary revenues consist of interest income earned on loan receivables and fees earned from customers, financial institutions, merchants and issuers. The primary expenses required to operate our business include funding costs (interest expense), credit loss provisions, customer rewards and expenses incurred to grow, manage and service our loan receivables and networks. Our business activities are funded primarily through consumer deposits, securitization of loan receivables and the issuance of unsecured debt.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact
The coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) pandemic has continued to have a widespread and unprecedented impact on a global scale. While the U.S. economy continues to recover from a brief but severe recession triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, its future effects are uncertain and it may be difficult to assess or predict the extent of the impacts of the pandemic on us as many factors are beyond our control and knowledge. For a discussion of the risks we face with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic, the associated economic uncertainty, the steps taken to mitigate the pandemic and the resulting economic contraction, see "Risk Factors" in Part I of this annual report on Form 10-K. This section includes a discussion of the significant areas of potential impact on us of the COVID-19 pandemic and specific actions we are taking or expect to take in this time of uncertainty.
Financial Results and Outlook
During 2021, the U.S. economy showed strong recovery from a brief but severe recession in 2020 caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The easing of certain COVID-19 containment measures fostered economic expansion, and government stimulus and disaster relief programs increased consumer liquidity which positively impacted credit performance and elevated payment rates.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net income was $5.4 billion, or $17.83 per diluted share, compared to $1.1 billion, or $3.60 per diluted share, for the prior year. In comparing to the prior year, we saw an increase in sales volume, as well as increases in total loans and credit card loans. We also reduced our allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. Refer to “- Loan Quality - Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses” for more details on the current period allowance for credit losses.
For our 2022 outlook, we expect loans to grow based on current expectations of sales trends and recent account growth, further aided by an expected slight decline in payment rates. Net interest margin is expected to remain relatively flat to 2021, with some variability from quarter to quarter. We expect the total net charge-offs rate to increase due to credit normalization from historically low levels in 2021. We remain committed to disciplined expense management and will continue to make investments for profitable long-term growth.
Regulatory and Legislative
Federal, state and local governments and independent banking agencies have taken extraordinary measures to support the U.S. economy and mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and society at large. These policies have included regulatory relief and flexibility to financial institutions, liquidity to capital markets and financial support to businesses and consumers, including fiscal stimulus, payment forbearance, small business lending programs, increased unemployment payments and other forms of assistance. Lawmakers continue to offer proposals in an attempt to mitigate harm to the economy and consumers. The ultimate impact of these programs and policies, as well as from their expiration, on our business, results of operations and financial condition is difficult to quantify and may not be known for some time. For more information, see “- Regulatory Environment and Developments” below.
Loan Receivables and Allowance for Credit Losses
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we continued to lend to customers but tightened our credit standards for new accounts and for growing existing accounts across all products in our loan portfolio. Additionally, we temporarily reduced our customer acquisition and brand marketing in response to the significant economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the strong credit performance observed and positive economic outlook, we returned most of our underwriting criteria to pre-pandemic standards during the second quarter of 2021. Additionally, we increased our credit card and private student loan marketing and business development spend in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2021 to support our loan growth initiatives.
In 2021, we decreased our allowance for credit losses in anticipation of lower credit losses driven by improving macroeconomic forecasts and continued stable credit performance. Our allowance for credit losses includes the risk associated with all loans and considers the effects of all loan modifications, including troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) and loan modifications exempt from the TDR designation under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act”). As of December 31, 2021, the allowance for credit losses took into account our best estimate of the impact of both active and expired economic support and disaster relief programs put in place by federal and state governments and agencies to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is unclear whether the measures employed to date are complete or whether federal and state governments and agencies may take additional actions that could impact our business. For example, President Biden extended the freeze on federal student loan repayments to May 1, 2022, while the expanded federal child tax credit and child and dependent care credit expired on December 31, 2021. Refer to "- Loan Quality" for more details regarding these and other assumptions used to estimate the current period allowance for credit losses.
Capital and Liquidity
As financial and capital markets conditions improved throughout 2021, we exercised prudent stewardship of our liquidity and deposit balances, which grew rapidly at the onset of the pandemic. Credit spreads tightened materially and remained near record-low levels as of December 31, 2021. Consequently, we opportunistically issued $1.8 billion of credit card asset-backed securities during the third quarter of 2021. We also diversified our funding channels by becoming a member of the FHLB Chicago. Furthermore, we acted to stem our deposit balance growth by spending less on marketing and lowering our deposit rates, which helped return our liquidity portfolio balances to pre-pandemic levels by December 31, 2021.
We remain well-capitalized with capital ratios in excess of regulatory minimums and took prudent actions to preserve and augment our capital when the macroeconomic and operating environment turned uncertain last year. Our capital levels allow us to return excess capital to shareholders through share repurchases and finance loan receivable growth as customers moderate loan payment rates and continue to increase spending as certain COVID-19 containment measures ease and the economy more fully recovers from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Payment Services
As governments across the world have taken steps to minimize the transmission of COVID-19, the number of cross-border transactions processed on the Discover Global Network has declined. Certain negatively impacted categories such as travel may have an outsized impact on some of our Diners Club franchisees. The impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic may result in lasting changes in consumer payment behaviors, such as a shift from credit to debit, a decline in the use of cash, increasing online sales and rapid adoption of contactless payment. As economic uncertainty persists, these shifts may continue to result in changes to the Payment Services segment’s results of operations.
Fair Value and Impairments
With the uncertain nature of the pandemic's overall impact on the economy, we continue to assess the effects of COVID-19 with respect to our goodwill, investment securities and other long-term assets. See Note 7: Goodwill and Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements for more information on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on intangible assets.
Business Continuity and Operations
We have managed the risk of COVID-19 by giving all non-essential employees the choice to work from home or to come into our physical locations with appropriate health and safety measures and capacity limitations. Notwithstanding the shift to work-from-home, we have been able to successfully operate with no significant impact to our operations or service levels. As a result, upon the return to our physical locations, we will offer flexible work-from-home arrangements that will provide our employees the option to work remotely on a more frequent basis than before the pandemic.
Operational changes necessitated by the rapid shift in employee location have not thus far had a material adverse effect on us or our financial condition; however, the shift has caused us to grow increasingly dependent on third-party service providers, including those with which we have no direct relationship such as our employees’ internet service providers. For more information on the risks associated with reliance on third-party service providers and the shift to work from home, see our risk factors disclosed in "Risk Factors" in Part I of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Regulatory Environment and Developments
COVID-19 Economic Recovery
As the U.S. and global economies attempt to normalize from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Administration and banking agencies continue to evaluate whether additional actions are warranted to assist consumers, financial institutions and the overall economy.
In addition, the U.S. Congress has taken legislative action to address the economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the March 2020 CARES Act and December 2020 Omnibus and COVID Relief and Response Act. Additionally in March 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 ("ARPA"), contained additional stimulus payments, increased unemployment benefits and increased small business funding under the Payment Protection Program. The ARPA also significantly increased and expanded the Child Tax Credit for one year and provides additional funding for rental assistance programs. These Congressional efforts offered financial assistance and benefits to consumers and small businesses.
As the COVID-19 pandemic and recovery continues, additional legislative and regulatory action may be proposed and could include provisions that significantly impact our prospects and business practices. The impact of these legislative and regulatory initiatives on our business, the economy and the U.S. consumer will depend upon a wide variety of factors, some of which are yet to be identified.
Banking
Capital Standards and Stress Testing
As a bank holding company, DFS is subject to mandatory supervisory stress tests every other year and is required to submit annual capital plans to the Federal Reserve based on forward-looking internal analysis of income and capital levels under expected and stressful conditions. DFS is also subject to capital buffer requirements, including the Stress Capital Buffer ("SCB"), which requires maintenance of regulatory capital levels above a threshold established based on the results of supervisory stress tests after accounting for planned dividend payments.
Due to economic uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve restricted capital distributions in 2020 and the beginning of 2021. Following an announcement by the Federal Reserve on June 24, 2021, these restrictions were lifted and, effective June 30, 2021, DFS was authorized to make capital distributions that are consistent with the Federal Reserve’s capital rule, inclusive of DFS’ final SCB requirement of 3.5% that was previously announced by the Federal Reserve on August 10, 2020, and that remained in effect until the conclusion of the 2021 Comprehensive Capital and Analysis Review (“CCAR”) process and the subsequent, related announcement of DFS’ adjusted SCB requirement.
On January 19, 2021, the Federal Reserve finalized regulatory amendments that made targeted changes to the capital planning, regulatory reporting and SCB requirements for firms subject to Category IV standards, including DFS, to be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s regulatory tailoring framework. The final rules generally align to instructions the Federal Reserve previously provided to Category IV firms regarding their respective capital plan submissions. The amended rules also provide Category IV firms with the option to submit to supervisory stress tests during off years if they wish for the Federal Reserve to reset the stress test portion of their SCB requirement. In connection with the final rulemaking, the Federal Reserve revised the scope of application of its existing regulatory guidance for capital planning to align with the tailoring framework. However, the timing and substance of any additional changes to existing guidance or new guidance are uncertain.
On June 24, 2021, the Federal Reserve publicly announced the results of its supervisory stress tests for the firms required to participate in the 2021 CCAR process. In accordance with the capital plan rule amendments that were finalized in January 2021, DFS elected not to participate in the 2021 supervisory stress tests. Nevertheless, DFS was required to submit a capital plan based on a forward-looking internal assessment of income and capital under baseline and stressful conditions. This plan was submitted by DFS to the Federal Reserve on April 5, 2021. The Federal Reserve used our 2021 capital plan submission to assess its capital planning process and positions and on August 5, 2021, announced DFS' adjusted SCB requirement of 3.6% to reflect DFS' planned common stock dividends. This adjusted SCB is effective as of October 1, 2021.
London Interbank Offered Rate
On July 27, 2017, the UK Financial Conduct Authority ("FCA") announced that it would no longer encourage or compel banks to continue to contribute quotes and maintain the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") after 2021. To support a smooth transition away from LIBOR, the Federal Reserve and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee ("ARRC"), a group of private-market participants tasked with facilitating a successful transition from U.S. dollar ("USD") LIBOR to a more robust reference rate. The ARRC initially identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR") as its recommended alternative reference rate for USD LIBOR. The ARRC has also established several priorities and milestones to support the use of SOFR and SOFR-based indices, including developing contractual fallback language for capital markets and consumer products; providing clarity on legal, tax, accounting and regulatory matters; promoting broad outreach and education efforts around the LIBOR transition; and recommending spread adjustments for SOFR and SOFR-based indices, which will be of critical importance to market participants once USD LIBOR settings cease in 2023.
With regard to recent LIBOR transition developments, on March 5, 2021, the FCA announced the future cessation and loss of representativeness for all LIBOR benchmark settings. While non-USD and several less frequently referenced USD LIBOR settings ceased publication immediately after December 31, 2021, commonly referenced USD LIBOR settings will cease publication immediately after June 30, 2023; this future cessation event will trigger fallback provisions in many financial contracts to convert their benchmark index from LIBOR to an alternative rate. On July 29, 2021, the ARRC announced its recommendation of forward-looking term rates based on SOFR as additional alternative reference rate options.
On December 7, 2021, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (“CFPB”) finalized a rule to facilitate transition from LIBOR, which is effective April 1, 2022. Specifically, this final rule provides guidance on LIBOR replacements and the LIBOR transition for purposes of Regulation Z. We have been communicating with the CFPB regarding our plans for the LIBOR transition.
A cross-functional team is overseeing and managing our transition away from the use of LIBOR. This team assesses evolving industry and marketplace norms and conventions for LIBOR-indexed instruments, evaluates the impacts stemming from the future cessation of LIBOR publication and oversees and takes actions to transition our LIBOR exposures to alternative benchmark rates, usually SOFR. Our existing LIBOR exposures are limited primarily to two instruments - variable-rate student loans and capital markets securities.
As of December 31, 2021, LIBOR-indexed variable-rate loans comprised approximately 44% of our private student loan portfolio and approximately 5% of our aggregate loan portfolio. These outstanding student loans indexed to LIBOR will convert to a SOFR index in 2023 when 3-month USD LIBOR will no longer be published. U.S. banking regulators have directed banks to cease entering into new contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference rate after December 31, 2021. Therefore, as of November 2021, we no longer originate new variable-rate student loans indexed to LIBOR. Instead, new originations of such loans are indexed solely to 3-month term SOFR published by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (“CME”).
We ceased entering into new LIBOR-indexed interest rate derivatives in 2018 and have since actively reduced LIBOR exposures in our derivatives portfolio. During the third quarter of 2021, we terminated our last LIBOR-indexed interest rate swap maturing after June 2023; our one remaining LIBOR-indexed interest rate swap matured in January 2022.
Most of our capital markets securities indexed to USD LIBOR are floating-rate asset-backed securities. Beginning in 2018, we included fallback provisions in all newly-issued securities that will facilitate an orderly transition from LIBOR to an appropriate reference rate, which may be based on SOFR, once 1- and 3-month LIBOR cease to be published after June 2023. Approximately $1.5 billion of our capital markets securities that mature after June 2023 with no fallback provisions would be covered under New York LIBOR legislation or pending federal legislation, which would preempt the New York LIBOR legislation. This legislation would allow us to replace the LIBOR index with SOFR under a safe harbor provision. Approximately $500 million of our capital markets securities have a rate reset in August 2023 that contains a fallback provision that may not be covered under the New York LIBOR legislation or the pending federal legislation; however, we may decide to exercise our right to call and redeem those securities on their reset date.
We have prepared for the cessation of USD LIBOR by taking steps to avoid new exposures and actively reduce our remaining exposures. We completed scheduled transition work before year-end 2021, including providing our stakeholders with information about the cessation of USD LIBOR and how it will affect their contracts with us. The transition process will continue through the end of 2023.
Consumer Financial Services
The CFPB regulates consumer financial products and services and examines certain providers of consumer financial products and services, including Discover. The CFPB’s authority includes rulemaking, supervisory and enforcement powers with respect to federal consumer protection laws; preventing “unfair, deceptive or abusive acts or practices” and ensuring that consumers have access to fair, transparent and competitive financial products and services. Historically, the CFPB’s policy priorities focused on several financial products of the type we offer (e.g. credit cards and other consumer lending products). In addition, the CFPB is required by statute to undertake certain actions including its biennial review of the consumer credit card market.
Former Federal Trade Commissioner Rohit Chopra was sworn in as the Director of the CFPB on October 12, 2021. Under Director Chopra’s leadership, the CFPB’s priorities are expected to focus on, among other things, increased enforcement of existing consumer protection laws, with a particular focus on unfair, deceptive and abusive acts and practices and fair lending, student lending and servicing, debt collection and credit reporting. Additionally, the CFPB released an inquiry on fees charged to consumers for financial products, including credit cards and banking products. Enhanced regulatory requirements, potential supervisory findings, or enforcement actions and ratings could negatively impact our ability to implement certain consumer-focused enhancements to product features and functionality and business strategies, limit or change our business practices, limit our consumer product offerings, cause us to invest more management time and resources in compliance efforts or limit our ability to obtain related required regulatory approvals. The additional expense, time and resources needed to comply with ongoing or new regulatory requirements may adversely impact the cost of and access to credit for consumers and results of business operations.
In December 2020, certain of our subsidiaries entered into a consent order with the CFPB regarding identified private student loan servicing practices. See Note 19: Litigation and Regulatory Matters to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Data Security and Privacy
Policymakers at the federal and state levels remain focused on enhancing data security and data breach incident response requirements. Furthermore, regulations and legislation at various levels of government have been proposed and enacted to augment consumer data privacy standards. The California Consumer Privacy Act ("CCPA") creates a broad set of privacy rights and remedies modeled in part on the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation. The CCPA went into effect on January 1, 2020, and the California Attorney General’s final regulations became effective on August 14, 2020, with enforcement beginning July 1, 2020. The California Privacy Rights Act ("CPRA"), a ballot measure led by the original proponent of the CCPA, passed on November 3, 2020, and largely enters into force on January 1, 2023. The CPRA replaces the CCPA to enhance consumer privacy protections further and creates a new California Privacy Protection Agency (“CPPA”). In September 2021, the CPPA Board initiated the CPRA regulatory phase by issuing a request for preliminary comments. While the CPRA retains an exemption for information collected,
processed, sold, or disclosed subject to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, we continue to evaluate the impact of the CPRA on our businesses and other providers of consumer financial services.
Environmental, Social and Governance Matters
Environmental, social and governance (“ESG”) issues, including climate change, human capital and governance practices, are a significant area of focus by lawmakers, regulatory agencies, shareholders and other stakeholders. Proposed legislation and rulemakings have been issued or are being considered, including proposals to require disclosure of climate and other ESG metrics and risks. The potential impact to us of these legislative and regulatory developments is uncertain at this time.
Results of Operations
The discussion below provides a summary of our results of operations and information about our loan receivables as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, for discussion of our results of operations and loan receivables information as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Segments
We manage our business activities in two segments, Digital Banking and Payment Services, based on the products and services provided. For a detailed description of the operations of each segment, as well as the allocation conventions used in our business segment reporting, see Note 22: Segment Disclosures to our consolidated financial statements.
The following table presents segment data (dollars in millions):
(1)Prior to adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
The following table presents information on transaction volume (dollars in millions):
(1)Diners Club volume is derived from data provided by licensees for Diners Club branded cards issued outside North America and is subject to subsequent revision or amendment.
(2)Represents gross Discover card sales volume on the Discover Network.
(3)Represents Discover card activity related to sales net of returns, balance transfers, cash advances and other activity.
(4)Represents Discover card activity related to sales net of returns.
Digital Banking
Our Digital Banking segment reported pretax income of $6.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net interest income increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by lower funding costs, partially offset by a lower average level of outstanding loan receivables and lower yields on loans. Interest income decreased over prior year primarily due to a lower average level of card loan receivables, driven by higher payment rates, as well as lower yields on loans due to lower market rates. Interest expense decreased compared to the prior year due to a decrease in deposit pricing, lower costs associated with declines in average market rates, a lower level of funding requirements, a shift in the mix to lower cost funding and higher coupon maturities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the provision for credit losses decreased as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a reserve release in the current period compared to a reserve build in the prior period and lower net charge-offs. The reserve release during the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by improvements in the macroeconomic forecast and continued stable credit performance, partially offset by modest credit card loan receivables growth during the period. The reserve build during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the unfavorable change in economic outlook resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. For a detailed discussion on provision for credit losses, see “- Loan Quality - Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses.”
Total other income for the Digital Banking segment increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to an increase in discount and interchange revenue. The increase in discount and interchange revenue was partially offset by an increase in rewards costs, both of which were the result of higher sales volume.
Total other expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in marketing and business development, employee compensation and benefits and professional fees. Marketing and business development increased due to growth investments, primarily in card, and increased brand marketing. Employee compensation and benefits increased as a result of higher bonus accruals and higher average salaries, partially offset by lower headcount. The professional fees increase was driven primarily by an increase in recovery fees.
Discover card sales volume was $182.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was an increase of 27.5% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This volume growth was primarily driven by higher consumer spending across all spending categories, reflecting the easing of COVID-19 restrictions, continued economic expansion and government stimulus programs.
Payment Services
Our Payment Services segment reported pretax income of $533 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to pretax income of $172 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in segment pretax income was primarily due to unrealized gains on equity investments. Unrealized gains on equity investments are the result of investments in payment services entities that are carried at fair value because the shares are actively traded. The increase was partially offset by the existence of realized gains on equity investments in the prior year but not in the current year.
Critical Accounting Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”), management must make judgments and use estimates and assumptions about the effects of matters that are uncertain. For estimates that involve a high degree of judgment and subjectivity, it is possible that different estimates could reasonably be derived for the same period. For estimates that are particularly sensitive to changes in economic or market conditions, significant changes to the estimated amount from period to period are also possible. Management believes the current assumptions and other considerations used to estimate amounts reflected in our consolidated financial statements are appropriate. However, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used in estimating amounts in our consolidated financial statements, the resulting changes could have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations and, in certain cases, could have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition. Management has identified the estimates related to our allowance for credit losses as a critical accounting estimate.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses was $6.8 billion at December 31, 2021, which reflects a $1.4 billion release from the amount of the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020. The allowance for credit losses represents management’s estimate of expected credit losses over the remaining expected life of our financial assets measured at amortized cost and certain off-balance sheet loan commitments. Changes in the allowance for credit losses, and in the related provision for credit losses, can materially affect net income.
In estimating the expected credit losses, we use a combination of statistically-based models and qualitative analysis. There is a significant amount of judgment applied in selecting inputs and analyzing the results produced to estimate the allowance for credit losses. For more information on these judgments and our accounting policies and methodologies used to determine the allowance for credit losses, see "- Loan Quality," Note 4: Loan Receivables and Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements.
One of the key assumptions requiring significant judgment in estimating the current expected credit losses on a quarterly basis is the determination of the macroeconomic forecasts used in the loss forecast models. For the reasonable and supportable loss forecast period, we consider forecasts of multiple economic scenarios that generally include a base scenario with one or more optimistic (upside) or pessimistic (downside) scenarios. These scenarios incorporate a variety of macroeconomic variables, including annualized gross domestic product growth and unemployment rate. The scenarios that are chosen each quarter and the amount of weighting given to each scenario depend on a variety of factors including recent economic events, leading economic indicators, views of internal and third-party economists and industry trends. Assumptions about the macroeconomic environment are inherently uncertain and, as a result, actual changes in the allowance for credit losses may be different from the simulated scenario presented below.
To demonstrate the sensitivity of the estimated credit losses to the macroeconomic scenarios, we compared the modeled credit losses determined using our base and one or more adverse macroeconomic scenarios. If we applied 100% weight to the most adverse scenario in our sensitivity analysis to reflect the economic deterioration from the resurgence of COVID-19 and resulting economic restrictions, our allowance for credit losses would increase by approximately $166 million at December 31, 2021.
The sensitivity disclosed above is hypothetical. It is difficult to estimate how potential changes in any one factor or input, such as the weighting of macroeconomic forecasts, might affect the overall allowance for credit losses because we
consider a variety of factors and inputs in estimating the allowance for credit losses. The macroeconomic scenarios used are constructed with interrelated projections of multiple economic variables, and loss estimates are produced that consider the historical correlation of those economic variables with credit losses. The inputs in the macroeconomic scenarios may not change at the same rate and may not be consistent across all geographies or product types, and changes in factors and inputs may be directionally inconsistent, such that improvement in one factor or input may offset deterioration in others. As a result, the sensitivity analysis above does not necessarily reflect the nature and extent of future changes in the allowance for credit losses. It is intended to provide insights into the impact of different judgments about the economy on our modeled loss estimates for the loan portfolio and does not imply any expectation of future losses. Furthermore, the hypothetical increase in our allowance for credit losses for loans does not incorporate the impact of management judgment for qualitative factors applied in the current allowance for credit losses, which may have a positive or negative effect on the results.
The overall economic environment directly impacts the macroeconomic variables that are used in the loss forecast models. If management used different assumptions about the economic environment in estimating expected credit losses, the impact to the allowance for credit losses could have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. In addition, if we experience a rapidly changing economic environment, as experienced recently under the COVID-19 pandemic, the uncertainty around the credit loss forecasts may increase, both due to the uncertainty of the economic forecasts and the challenges our models may have in incorporating them.
Earnings Summary
The following table outlines changes in our consolidated statements of income (dollars in millions):
(1)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
Net Interest Income
The tables that follow this section have been provided to supplement the discussion below and provide further analysis of net interest income, net interest margin and the impact of rate and volume changes on net interest income. Net interest income represents the difference between interest income earned on our interest-earning assets and the interest expense incurred to finance those assets. We analyze net interest income in total by calculating net interest margin (net interest income as a percentage of average total loan receivables) and net yield on interest-earning assets (net interest income as a percentage of average total interest-earning assets). We also separately consider the impact of the level of loan receivables and the related interest yield and the impact of the cost of funds related to each of our funding sources, along with the income generated by our liquidity portfolio, on net interest income.
Our interest-earning assets consist of: (i) cash and cash equivalents primarily related to amounts on deposit with the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; (ii) restricted cash; (iii) other short-term investments; (iv) investment securities; and (v) loan receivables. Our interest-bearing liabilities consist primarily of deposits, both direct-to-consumer and brokered, and long-term borrowings, including amounts owed to securitization investors. The following factors influence net interest income:
•The level and composition of loan receivables, including the proportion of credit card loans to other loans, as well as the proportion of loan receivables bearing interest at promotional rates as compared to standard rates;
•The credit performance of our loans, particularly with regard to charge-offs of finance charges, which reduce interest income;
•The terms of long-term borrowings and certificates of deposit upon initial offering, including maturity and interest rate;
•The interest rates necessary to attract and maintain direct-to-consumer deposits;
•The level and composition of other interest-earning assets, including our liquidity portfolio and interest-bearing liabilities;
•Changes in the interest rate environment, including the levels of interest rates and the relationships among interest rate indices, such as the prime rate, the Federal Funds rate, interest rate on excess reserves and LIBOR; and
•The effectiveness of interest rate swaps in our interest rate risk management program.
Net interest income increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by lower funding costs, partially offset by a lower average level of outstanding loan receivables and lower yields on loans. Interest income decreased over prior year primarily due to a lower average level of card loan receivables, driven by higher payment rates, as well as lower yields on loans due to lower market rates. Interest expense decreased compared to the prior year due to a decrease in deposit pricing, lower costs associated with declines in average market rates, a lower level of funding requirements, a shift in the mix to lower cost funding and higher coupon maturities.
Average Balance Sheet Analysis
(dollars in millions)
(1)Average balances of loan receivables and yield calculations include non-accruing loans. If the non-accruing loan balances were excluded, there would not be a material impact on the amounts reported above.
(2)Interest income on credit card loans includes $295 million, $298 million and $281 million of amortization of balance transfer fees for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(3)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
(4)The return on average assets, based on net income, was 4.90%, 0.99% and 2.66% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(5)Includes the impact of interest rate swap agreements used to change a portion of floating-rate funding to fixed-rate funding for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(6)Includes the impact of one terminated derivative formerly designated as a cash flow hedge for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(7)Includes the impact of interest rate swap agreements used to change a portion of fixed-rate funding to floating-rate funding for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
(8)Includes the impact of terminated derivatives formerly designated as fair value hedges for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(9)The return on average stockholders’ equity, based on net income, was 43.12%, 11.28% and 25.73% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(10)Net interest margin represents net interest income as a percentage of average total loan receivables.
(11)Net yield on interest-earning assets represents net interest income as a percentage of average total interest-earning assets.
(12)Interest rate spread represents the difference between the rate on total interest-earning assets and the rate on total interest-bearing liabilities.
Rate/Volume Variance Analysis(1)
(dollars in millions)
(1) The rate/volume variance for each category has been allocated on a consistent basis between rate and volume variances between the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 based on the percentage of the rate or volume variance to the sum of the two absolute variances.
Loan Quality
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Loan Portfolio
The COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the economy have significantly affected our sales volume and credit card loan growth. We tightened credit standards for new accounts and for growing existing accounts across all products and reduced our marketing and customer acquisition expenditures at the onset of the pandemic. Due to the strong economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic-induced recession, we returned most of our underwriting criteria to pre-pandemic standards and resumed our investment in marketing and business development during the second quarter of 2021. This change in our credit underwriting, in addition to changes in consumer spending behavior, increased marketing and the re-opening of the U.S. economy upon the easing of certain COVID-19 containment measures, contributed to an increase in sales volume for the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, our outstanding credit card loan receivables as of December 31, 2021, increased when compared to December 31, 2020. Additionally, higher seasonal consumer spending and payment patterns around the winter holidays contributed to an increase in our ending outstanding loan receivables. The credit card loan receivables growth during the period was partially offset by elevated payment rates resulting from government stimulus and disaster relief programs.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expanded borrower relief offerings to include Skip-a-Pay (payment deferral) (“SaP”) and other loan modification programs, complementing the assistance already available through our existing loan modification programs. On August 31, 2020, we ceased offering enrollments in the SaP and other loan modification programs specifically developed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The accounts using these modifications as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic were evaluated for potential exclusion from the TDR designation either due to the insignificance of the concession or because they qualified for an exemption pursuant to the CARES Act. The SaP programs provided only an insignificant delay in payment on the enrolled accounts or loans and therefore those deferrals were not classified as TDRs.
Section 4013 of the CARES Act provided certain financial institutions with the option to suspend the application of accounting and reporting guidance for TDRs for a limited period of time for loan modifications made to address the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Section 541of the Omnibus and COVID Relief and Response Act extended the TDR accounting and reporting relief provided by the CARES Act through the earlier of January 1, 2022, or the date that is 60 days after the termination of the presidentially-declared national emergency. We elected to apply the option to suspend the application of accounting and reporting guidance for TDRs as provided under Section 4013 of the CARES Act and as subsequently extended. As such, the number of accounts and corresponding balances designated as a TDR for the year ended December 31, 2021 has been favorably impacted by the exclusion of certain modifications from the TDR designation pursuant to these exemptions and were lower than they otherwise would have been. The payment status of modified accounts excluded from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act is reflected in our delinquency reporting. Section 4013 of the CARES Act expired on January 1, 2022. Upon expiration, the characterization of modified accounts that were exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to Section 4013 of the CARES Act is not reconsidered. Accordingly, these accounts continue to be exempt from the TDR designation unless a subsequent modification is made. Loan modifications made subsequent to the expiration of Section 4013 are evaluated under GAAP to determine whether the TDR designation applies based on the cumulative length of the concession period and credit quality of the borrower.
The table below reflects the number and balance of both new loan modifications reported as TDRs and new loan modifications excluded from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act (dollars in millions)(1):
(1)SaP programs were not considered TDRs and therefore are not included in accounts excluded from TDR designation by the CARES Act.
(2)As the TDR exemption pursuant to the CARES Act took effect in March 2020, the year ended December 31, 2021, is not comparable to the same period in 2020.
The number and balance of new credit card and personal loan modifications, including the combined total of those identified as TDRs and those exempt from the TDR designation, decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021, when compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs, which reduced the need for our customers to enroll in a loan modification program. The number and balance of loan modifications across all products, including the combined total of those identified as TDRs and those exempt from the TDR designation, during the year ended December 31, 2020, were favorably impacted by the utilization of SaP programs in lieu of traditional loan modification programs. Additionally, enrollments in personal loan modification programs were favorably impacted by tighter underwriting standards that were implemented in early 2020.
The following table provides the number of accounts that exited a temporary loan modification program that were exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act and corresponding outstanding balances along with the amount of the outstanding balances that were delinquent (30 or more days past due) upon exiting the temporary loan modification program (dollars in millions)(1):
(1)As the TDR exemption pursuant to the CARES Act took effect in March 2020, the year ended December 31, 2021, is not comparable to the same period in 2020.
(2)Includes balances charged-off at the end of the month the account exited the temporary loan modification program. The balances charged-off were not meaningful for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our estimate of expected loss reflected in our allowance for credit losses includes the risk associated with all loans. We consider the effects of all loan modifications, including TDRs, loan modifications exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act and SaP programs. We believe we have appropriately reflected the risk of the accounts using these programs and the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers in the allowance for credit losses. Refer to Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements for more details on modification programs, TDRs and the allowance for credit losses.
Loan receivables consist of the following (dollars in millions):
Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses is the expense related to maintaining the allowance for credit losses at an appropriate level to absorb the estimate of credit losses anticipated over the remaining expected life of loan receivables at each period end date. In deriving the estimate of expected credit losses, we consider the collectability of principal, interest and fees associated with our loan receivables. We also consider expected recoveries of amounts that were either previously charged-off or are expected to be charged-off. Establishing the estimate for expected credit losses requires significant management judgment. The factors that influence the provision for credit losses include:
•Increases or decreases in outstanding loan balances, including:
•Changes in consumer spending, payment and credit utilization behaviors;
•The level of originations and maturities; and
•Changes in the overall mix of accounts and products within the portfolio;
•The credit quality of the loan portfolio, which reflects our credit granting practices and the effectiveness of collection efforts, among other factors;
•The impact of general economic conditions on the consumer, including national and regional conditions, unemployment levels, bankruptcy trends and interest rate movements;
•The level and direction of historical losses; and
•Regulatory changes or new regulatory guidance.
Refer to "- Critical Accounting Estimates - Allowance for Credit Losses" and Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements for more details on how we estimate the allowance for credit losses.
The following tables provide changes in our allowance for credit losses (dollars in millions):
(1)Excludes a $9 million and $17 million reclassification of the liability for expected credit losses on unfunded commitments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as the liability is recorded in accrued expenses and other liabilities in our consolidated statements of financial condition.
(2)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, credit losses were estimated using the incurred loss approach.
(3)Represents the adjustment to the allowance for credit losses as a result of the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020.
(4)Prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, net charge-offs on purchased credit-deteriorated (“PCD”) loans generally did not result in a change to earnings.
(5)Net change in reserves on PCD pools having no remaining non-accretable difference (prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020).
The allowance for credit losses was approximately $6.8 billion at December 31, 2021, which reflects a $1.4 billion release from the amount of the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020. The release in the allowance for credit losses between December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by improvements in the macroeconomic forecast and continued stable credit performance, partially offset by modest credit card loan receivables growth during the period. The increase in credit card loan receivables was driven by the robust sales trends during the period as COVID-19 restrictions continue to ease and the U.S. economy continues to more fully reopen. The loan receivables growth during the period was partially offset by elevated payment rates resulting from government stimulus and disaster relief programs.
In estimating the allowance at December 31, 2021, we used a macroeconomic forecast that projected (i) a peak unemployment rate of 5.7%, decreasing to 4.0% by the end of 2022 with slow improvement over the next few years and (ii) 3.3% annualized growth in the real gross domestic product in 2022. Labor market conditions, which historically have been an important determinant of credit loss trends, continued to improve as of December 31, 2021, despite the spread of the Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19. While initial jobless claims have returned to pre-pandemic levels, continuing unemployment claims and the unemployment rate remain moderately elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels as of December 31, 2021.
In estimating expected credit losses, we considered the uncertainties associated with borrower behavior, payment trends and credit performance subsequent to the expiration of government stimulus programs, such as the CARES Act and ARPA, and disaster relief programs, such as foreclosure moratoriums and federal student loan and mortgage payment forbearance. During the third and fourth quarters of 2021, several disaster relief programs expired or were rescinded entirely. As the government’s response to the pandemic wanes and the economy continues to experience aspects of stress resulting from the pandemic, there is uncertainty regarding the sustainability of the recent credit quality trends in our loan receivables portfolio. Accordingly, the estimation of the allowance for credit losses has required significant management judgment.
The forecast period we deemed to be reasonable and supportable was 18 months for all periods presented except March 31, 2020, where the forecast period was 12 months due to the uncertainty caused by the rapidly changing economic environment experienced at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 18-month reasonable and supportable forecast period was deemed appropriate based on the observed stability of the economic outlook and relative consistency among the macroeconomic forecasts. For all periods presented, we determined that a reversion period of 12 months was appropriate for similar reasons. Due to the uncertainties associated with borrower behavior resulting from government stimulus and disaster relief programs, we applied a weighted reversion method to provide a more reasonable transition to historical losses for all loan products for all periods presented with the following exceptions: at March 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we applied a straight-line method for all loan products. At June 30, 2020, we applied a weighted reversion method for credit card loans and a straight-line method for all other loan products.
The provision for credit losses is the amount of expense realized after considering the level of net charge-offs in the period and the required amount of allowance for credit losses at the balance sheet date. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the provision for credit losses decreased by $4.9 billion, or 96%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to a reserve release in the current period compared to a reserve build in the prior period and lower net charge-offs. The reserve release during the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily driven by improvements in the macroeconomic forecast and continued stable credit performance, offset by modest credit card loan receivables growth during the period. The reserve build during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the unfavorable change in economic outlook resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net Charge-offs
Our net charge-offs include the principal amount of losses charged off less principal recoveries and exclude charged-off and recovered interest and fees and fraud losses. Charged-off and recovered interest and fees are recorded in interest income and loan fee income, respectively, which is effectively a reclassification of the provision for credit losses, while fraud losses are recorded in other expense.
The following table presents amounts and rates of net charge-offs of key loan products (dollars in millions):
(1) Prior to adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 on January 1, 2020, net charge-offs on PCD loans generally did not result in a charge to earnings.
The net charge-offs and charge-off rate on our credit card loans for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in the number of delinquent loans and lower average balances charged-off. These factors are a result of the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The net charge-offs and net charge-off rate on private student loans for the year ended December 31, 2021, remained relatively flat when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The net charge-offs and net charge-off rate on personal loans for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs and tighter underwriting standards that were implemented in early 2020.
Delinquencies
Delinquencies are an indicator of credit quality at a point in time. A loan balance is considered delinquent when contractual payments on the loan become 30 days past due.
The following table presents the amounts and delinquency rates of key loan products that are 30 and 90 days or more delinquent, loan receivables that are not accruing interest regardless of delinquency and loans restructured in TDR programs (dollars in millions):
(1)Credit card loans that were 90 or more days delinquent at December 31, 2021 and 2020, included $73 million and $44 million, respectively, in modified loans exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act. Within private student and personal loans that were 90 or more days delinquent at December 31, 2021 and 2020, the respective amounts associated with modifications exempt from the TDR designation under the CARES Act were immaterial.
(2)We estimate that interest income recognized on credit card loans restructured in TDR programs was $105 million, $221 million and $347 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We do not separately track interest income on loans in TDR programs. We estimate this amount by applying an average interest rate to the average loans in the various TDR programs.
(3)We estimate that the incremental interest income that would have been recorded in accordance with the original terms of credit card loans restructured in TDR programs was $137 million, $181 million and $202 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We do not separately track the amount of incremental interest income that would have been recorded if the loans in TDR programs had not been restructured and interest had instead been recorded in accordance with the original terms. We estimate this amount by applying the difference between the average interest rate earned on non-modified loans and the average interest rate earned on loans in the TDR programs to the average loans in the TDR programs.
(4)Credit card loans restructured in TDR programs include $45 million, $94 million and $184 million at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are also included in loans 90 or more days delinquent.
(5)Private student loans restructured in TDR programs include $7 million, $6 million and $10 million at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are also included in loans 90 or more days delinquent.
(6)Personal loans restructured in TDR programs include $4 million, $6 million and $7 million at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which are also included in loans 90 or more days delinquent.
The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates in the table above include all loans, including TDRs, modified loans exempt from TDR status and prior modifications that are no longer required to be reported as TDRs. The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates for credit card and personal loans at December 31, 2021, decreased compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to the impacts of government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates for personal loans were favorably impacted by tighter underwriting standards that were
implemented in early 2020. The 30-day and 90-day delinquency rates for private student loans increased at December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was due to the payment relief provided by SaP and other payment programs in late 2020 that drove delinquency rates lower at December 31, 2020, as accounts enrolled in the SaP program did not advance through the delinquency cycle.
The balance of credit card, private student, and personal loans reported as TDRs decreased at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020, due to elevated payment rates resulting from government stimulus and disaster relief programs. The balance of credit card and private student loans reported as TDRs also benefited from the exclusion of accounts qualifying for the exemption from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act, which expired on January 1, 2022. Upon expiration, the characterization of modified accounts that were exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to Section 4013 of the CARES Act is not reconsidered. Accordingly, these accounts continue to be exempt from the balance of loans reported as TDRs unless a subsequent modification is made. Loan modifications made subsequent to the expiration of Section 4013 are evaluated under GAAP to determine whether the TDR designation applies based on the cumulative length of the concession period and credit quality of the borrower. The balance of personal loans reported as TDRs was also favorably impacted by tighter underwriting standards that were implemented in early 2020, which resulted in fewer enrollments in loan modification programs.
The following table provides the balance of loan receivables restructured through a temporary loan modification program that were exempt from the TDR designation pursuant to the CARES Act (dollars in millions):
We believe loan modification programs are useful in assisting customers experiencing financial difficulties and help to prevent defaults. We plan to continue to use loan modification programs as a means to provide relief to customers experiencing financial difficulties. See Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements for additional description of our use of loan modification programs to provide relief to customers experiencing financial hardship.
Modified and Restructured Loans
For information regarding modified and restructured loans, see “- Delinquencies,” “- Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Loan Portfolio, “- COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact - Loan Receivables and Allowance for Credit Losses” and Note 4: Loan Receivables to our consolidated financial statements.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loan Receivables to Changes in Interest Rates
Our loan portfolio had the following maturity distribution(1) (dollars in millions):
(1) Because of the uncertainty regarding loan repayment patterns, the above amounts have been calculated using contractually required minimum payments. Historically, actual loan repayments have been higher than such minimum payments and, therefore, the above amounts may not necessarily be indicative of our actual loan repayments.
At December 31, 2021, approximately $43.5 billion of our loan portfolio due after one year had interest rates tied to an index and approximately $25.9 billion were fixed-rate loans.
Other Income
The following table presents the components of other income (dollars in millions):
(1)Net of rewards, including Cashback Bonus rewards, of $2.5 billion, $1.9 billion and $1.9 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Total other income increased $712 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to unrealized gains on equity investments and an increase in net discount and interchange revenue. Unrealized gains on equity investments are the result of investments in payment services entities that are carried at fair value because the shares are actively traded. The increase in discount and interchange revenue was partially offset by an increase in rewards costs, both of which were the result of higher sales volume. The increase in total other income was partially offset by the existence of realized gains on equity investments in the prior year but not in the current year.
Other Expense
The following table represents the components of other expense (dollars in millions):
Total other expense increased $286 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in marketing and business development, employee compensation and benefits and professional fees. Marketing and business development increased due to growth investments, primarily in card, and increased brand marketing. Employee compensation and benefits increased as a result of higher bonus accruals and higher average salaries, partially offset by lower headcount. The increase in professional fees was primarily driven by an increase in recovery fees.
Income Tax Expense
The following table reconciles our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, income tax expense increased $1.3 billion, and the effective income tax rate increased 2.4 percentage points as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax expense was primarily driven by an increase in pretax income. The effective tax rate increased primarily due to tax credits having a lower rate benefit on higher pretax income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Liquidity and Capital
The U.S. recorded strong real GDP growth during 2021 as it recovered from a brief but severe recession in 2020 caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Labor market conditions also improved considerably as the unemployment rate fell more than two percentage points and job openings exceeded the number of unemployed workers for much of the year. In response to improved economic conditions and higher inflation rates, the Federal Reserve has begun to alter its monetary policy by reducing its monthly asset purchases.
We remain well-capitalized with capital ratios in excess of regulatory minimums and our own internal targets and maintain ample capital to finance loan receivable growth. To deploy excess capital, we resumed our common stock repurchase program during the first quarter of 2021, repurchasing $2.2 billion of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2021.
As financial and capital markets conditions improved throughout 2021, we exercised prudent stewardship of our liquidity and deposit balances, which grew rapidly at the onset of the pandemic. Credit spreads tightened materially and remained near record-low levels as of December 31, 2021. Consequently, we opportunistically issued $1.8 billion of credit card asset-backed securities during the third quarter of 2021. We also diversified our funding channels by becoming a member of the FHLB Chicago. Furthermore, we acted to stem our deposit balance growth by spending less on marketing and lowering our deposit rates, which helped return our liquidity portfolio balances to pre-pandemic levels by December 31, 2021.
Funding and Liquidity
We seek to maintain stable, diversified and cost-effective funding sources and a strong liquidity profile to fund our business and repay or refinance our maturing obligations under normal operating conditions and periods of economic or financial stress. In managing our liquidity risk, we seek to maintain a prudent liability maturity profile and ready access to an ample store of primary and contingent liquidity sources. Our primary funding sources include direct-to-consumer and brokered deposits, public term asset-backed securitizations and other short-term and long-term borrowings. Our primary liquidity sources include a portfolio composed of highly liquid, unencumbered assets, including cash and cash equivalents and investment securities, as well as secured borrowing capacity through private term asset-backed securitizations and Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) advances. In addition, we have unused borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve discount window, which provides another source of contingent liquidity.
Funding Sources
Deposits
We offer deposit products to customers through two channels: (i) direct marketing, internet origination and affinity relationships (“direct-to-consumer deposits”) and (ii) contractual arrangements with securities brokerage firms (“brokered deposits”). Direct-to-consumer deposits include online savings accounts, certificates of deposit, money market accounts, IRA savings accounts, IRA certificates of deposit and checking/debit accounts. Brokered deposits include certificates of deposit and sweep accounts. In December 2020, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ("FDIC") issued the final rule on revisions to its brokered deposits regulations. In accordance with this final rule, our regulatory reporting reflects the changes required to deposit categorizations. Specifically, certain retail deposit products such as affinity deposits and deposits generated through certain sweep deposit relationships will no longer be categorized as brokered for regulatory reporting purposes. At December 31, 2021, we had $61.9 billion of direct-to-consumer deposits and $10.5 billion of brokered deposits, of which there are $65.5 billion of deposit balances due in less than one year and $6.9 billion of deposit balances due in one year or thereafter.
Credit Card Securitization Financing
We securitize credit card receivables as a source of funding. We access the asset-backed securitization market using the Discover Card Master Trust I (“DCMT”) and the Discover Card Execution Note Trust (“DCENT”). In connection with our securitization transactions, credit card receivables are transferred to DCMT. DCMT has issued a certificate representing the beneficial interest in its credit card receivables to DCENT. We issue DCENT DiscoverSeries notes in public and private transactions, which are collateralized by the beneficial interest certificate held by DCENT. From time to time, we may add credit card receivables to DCMT to create sufficient funding capacity for future securitizations while managing seller’s interest. We retain significant exposure to the performance of the securitized credit card receivables through holding the seller’s interest and subordinated classes of DCENT DiscoverSeries notes. At December 31, 2021, we had $9.4 billion of outstanding public asset-backed securities and $3.9 billion of outstanding subordinated asset-backed securities that had been issued to our wholly-owned subsidiaries.
The securitization structures include certain features designed to protect investors. The primary feature relates to the availability and adequacy of cash flows in the securitized pool of receivables to meet contractual requirements, the insufficiency of which triggers early repayment of the securities. We refer to this as “economic early amortization,” which is based on excess spread levels. Excess spread is the amount by which income received with respect to the securitized credit card receivables during a collection period including interest collections, fees and interchange, exceeds the fees and expenses of DCENT during such collection period, including interest expense, servicing fees and charged-off receivables. In the event of an economic early amortization, which would occur if the excess spread fell below 0% on a three-month rolling average basis, we would be required to repay all outstanding securitized borrowings using available collections received with respect to the securitized credit card receivables. For the three months ended December 31, 2021, the DiscoverSeries three-month rolling average excess spread was 15.50%. The period of ultimate repayment would be determined by the amount and timing of collections received.
Through our wholly-owned indirect subsidiary, Discover Funding LLC, we are required to maintain an interest in a contractual minimum level of receivables in DCMT in excess of the face value of outstanding investors’ interests. This minimum interest is referred to as the minimum seller’s interest. The required minimum seller’s interest in the pool of trust receivables is approximately 7% in excess of the total investors’ interests, which includes interests held by third parties as well as those interests held by us. If the level of receivables in DCMT were to fall below the required minimum, we would be required to add receivables from the unrestricted pool of receivables, which would increase the amount of credit card receivables restricted for securitization investors. A decline in the amount of the excess seller’s interest could occur if balance repayments and charge offs exceeded new lending on the securitized accounts or as a result of changes in total outstanding investors’ interests. Seller’s interest exhibits seasonality as higher receivable balance repayments tend to occur in the first calendar year quarter. If we could not add enough receivables to satisfy the minimum seller’s interest requirement, an early amortization (or repayment) of investors’ interests would be triggered.
An early amortization event would impair our liquidity and may require us to utilize our available non-securitization related contingent liquidity or rely on alternative funding sources, which may or may not be available at the time. We have several strategies we can deploy to prevent an early amortization event. For instance, we could add receivables to DCMT, which would reduce our available borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve discount window. As of December 31, 2021, there were $25.2 billion of credit card receivables in the trust and no accounts were added to those restricted for securitization investors for the year ended December 31, 2021. Alternatively, we could employ structured discounting, which was used effectively in 2009 to bolster excess spread and mitigate early amortization risk.
The following table summarizes expected contractual maturities of the investors’ interests in credit card securitizations, excluding those that have been issued to our wholly-owned subsidiaries (dollars in millions):
The “AAA(sf)” and “Aaa(sf)” ratings of the DCENT DiscoverSeries Class A Notes issued to date have been based, in part, on an FDIC rule, which created a safe harbor that provides that the FDIC, as conservator or receiver, will not use its power to disaffirm or repudiate contracts, seek to reclaim or recover assets transferred in connection with a securitization, or recharacterize assets transferred in connection with a securitization as assets of the insured depository institution, provided such transfer satisfies the conditions for sale accounting treatment under previous GAAP. Although the implementation of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification Topic 860, Transfers and Servicing, no longer qualified certain transfers of assets for sale accounting treatment, the FDIC approved a final rule that preserved the safe-harbor treatment applicable to revolving trusts and master trusts, including DCMT, so long as those trusts would have satisfied the original FDIC safe harbor if evaluated under GAAP pertaining to transfers of financial assets in effect prior to December 2009. However, other legislative and regulatory developments may impact our ability or desire to issue asset-backed securities in the future.
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances
Discover Bank is a member bank of the FHLB of Chicago, one of 11 FHLBs that, along with the Office of Finance, compose the FHLB System. The FHLBs are government-sponsored enterprises of the U.S. (“U.S. GSEs”) chartered to improve the availability of funds to support home ownership. As such, senior debt obligations of the FHLBs feature the same credit ratings as U.S. Treasury securities and are considered high-quality liquid assets for bank regulatory purposes. Consequently, the FHLBs benefit from consistent capital market access during nearly all macroeconomic and financial market conditions and low funding costs, which they pass on to their member banks when they borrow advances. Thus, we consider FHLB advances a stable and reliable funding source for Discover Bank for short-term contingent liquidity and long-term asset-liability management.
As a member of the FHLB of Chicago, Discover Bank has access to short- and long-term advance structures with maturities ranging from overnight to 30 years. As of December 31, 2021, we had total committed borrowing capacity of $1.4 billion based on the amount and type of assets pledged, of which $1.3 billion of short-term advances were outstanding with the FHLB of Chicago to meet seasonal funding needs. Under certain stressed conditions, we could pledge our liquidity portfolio securities and borrow against them at a modest reduction to their value.
Other Long-Term Borrowings - Private Student Loans
At December 31, 2021, $104 million of principal was outstanding on securitized debt assumed as part of our acquisition of The Student Loan Corporation. Principal and interest payments on the underlying private student loans will reduce the balance of these secured borrowings until the debt matures in June 2031.
Other Long-Term Borrowings - Corporate and Bank Debt
The following table provides a summary of DFS (Parent Company) and Discover Bank outstanding fixed-rate debt (dollars in millions):
As of December 31, 2021, $420 million of interest on our fixed-rate debt is due in less than one year and $1.2 billion of interest is due in one year and thereafter. See Note 9: Long-Term Borrowings to our consolidated financial
statements for more information on the maturities of our long-term borrowings. Certain DFS senior notes require us to offer to repurchase the notes at a price equal to 101% of their aggregate principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest in the event of a change of control involving us and corresponding ratings downgrade below investment grade.
Short-Term Borrowings
As part of our regular funding strategy, we may, from time to time, borrow short-term funds in the federal funds market or the repurchase (“repo”) market through repurchase agreements. Federal funds are short-term, unsecured loans between banks or other financial entities with a Federal Reserve account. Funds borrowed in the repo market are short-term, collateralized loans, usually secured with highly-rated investment securities such as U.S. Treasury bills or notes, or mortgage bonds or debentures issued by government agencies or U.S. GSEs. At December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding balances in the federal funds market or under repurchase agreements. Additionally, we have access to short-term advance structures through the FHLB of Chicago and privately placed asset-backed securitizations. At December 31, 2021, there were $1.3 billion and $500 million of short-term advances outstanding from the FHLB and private asset-backed securitizations, respectively.
Additional Funding Sources
Private Asset-Backed Securitizations
We have access to committed borrowing capacity through privately placed asset-backed securitizations. While we may utilize funding from these private securitizations from time to time for normal business operations, their committed nature also makes them a reliable contingency funding source. Therefore, we reserve some undrawn capacity, informed by our liquidity stress test results, for potential contingency funding needs. At December 31, 2021, we had a total committed capacity of $4.0 billion, $500 million of which was drawn to meet seasonal funding needs. We seek to ensure the stability and reliability of these securitizations by staggering their maturity dates, renewing them approximately one year prior to their scheduled maturity dates and periodically drawing them for operational tests and seasonal funding needs.
Federal Reserve
Discover Bank has access to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s discount window. As of December 31, 2021, Discover Bank had $34.3 billion of available borrowing capacity through the discount window based on the amount and type of assets pledged, primarily consumer loans. As of December 31, 2021, we have no borrowings outstanding under the discount window and reserve this capacity as a source of contingent liquidity.
Funding Uses
Our primary uses of funds include the extensions of loans and credit to customers, primarily through Discover Bank; the maintenance of sufficient working capital for routine operations; the service of our debt and capital obligations, including interest, principal, and dividend payments; and the purchase of investment securities for our liquidity portfolio.
In addition to originating consumer loans to new customers, we also extend credit to existing customers, which primarily arises from agreements for unused lines of credit on certain credit cards and certain other loan products, provided there is no violation of conditions established in the related agreement. At December 31, 2021, our unused credit arrangements were approximately $220.7 billion. These arrangements, substantially all of which we can terminate at any time and which do not necessarily represent future cash requirements, are periodically reviewed based on account usage, customer creditworthiness and loan qualification.
In the normal course of business, we enter into various contracts for goods and services, such as consulting, outsourcing, data, sponsorships, software licenses, telecommunications, global merchant acceptance, and cashback rewards, among other things. These contracts are legally binding and specify all significant terms, including any applicable fixed future cash payments.
As of December 31, 2021, we have debt obligations, common stock, and preferred stock outstanding. Refer to “- Funding Sources” and “- Capital” for more information related to our debt obligations and capital service, respectively, and the timing of expected payments.
We assess funding uses and liquidity needs under stressed and normal operating conditions, considering primary uses of funding, such as on-balance sheet loans and contingent uses of funding, such as the need to post additional
collateral for derivatives positions. To anticipate funding needs under stress, we conduct liquidity stress tests to assess the impact of idiosyncratic, systemic and hybrid (i.e., idiosyncratic and systemic) scenarios with varying levels of liquidity risk reflecting a range of stress severity. If we determine we have excess cash and cash equivalents, we may invest in highly liquid, unencumbered assets that we expect to be able to convert to cash quickly and with little loss of value using the repo market or outright sales.
Guarantees
Guarantees are contracts or indemnification agreements that may require us to make payments to a guaranteed party based on changes in an underlying asset, liability, or equity security of a guaranteed party, rate or index. Also included in guarantees are contracts that may require the guarantor to make payments to a guaranteed party based on another entity’s failure to perform under an agreement. Our guarantees relate to transactions processed on the Discover Network and certain transactions processed by PULSE and Diners Club. In the ordinary course of business, we guarantee payment on behalf of subsidiaries relating to contractual obligations with external parties. The activities of the subsidiaries covered by any such guarantees are included in our consolidated financial statements. See Note 18: Commitments, Contingencies and Guarantees to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding our guarantees.
Credit Ratings
Our borrowing costs and capacity in certain funding markets, including those for securitizations and unsecured senior and subordinated debt, may be affected by the credit ratings of DFS, Discover Bank and the securitization trusts. Downgrades in these credit ratings could result in higher interest expense on our unsecured debt and asset securitizations, as well as higher credit enhancement requirements for both our public and private asset securitizations. In addition to increased funding costs, deterioration in our credit ratings could reduce our borrowing capacity in the unsecured debt and asset securitization capital markets.
When the COVID-19 pandemic emerged in 2020, rating agencies cited their expectation that the banking industry would experience heightened loan delinquencies and charge offs from deterioration in the labor market. During the second quarter of 2020, Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s and Fitch Ratings affirmed our credit ratings, but Standard and Poor’s and Fitch changed their outlooks on DFS’ and Discover Bank’s senior unsecured credit ratings from “stable” to “negative” while Moody’s retained a “stable” outlook on our credit ratings. On March 25, 2021, Standard and Poor's upgraded its outlook on DFS' and Discover Bank's senior unsecured debt from "negative" to "stable" recognizing better-than-expected operating performance in 2020 and our strong loss-absorbing capacity. For similar reasons, on May 3, 2021, Fitch Ratings also affirmed the credit ratings on DFS' and Discover Bank's senior unsecured debt and revised its outlook on those ratings from "negative" to "stable." On May 27, 2021, Moody's affirmed its credit ratings for DFS and Discover Bank while upgrading its outlook on those ratings from "stable" to "positive." On July 12, 2021, Moody's upgraded Discover Bank's long-term subordinate debt rating to "Baa2" from "Baa3", driven by revisions to their Advanced Loss Given Failure analysis.
The table below reflects our current credit ratings and outlooks:
(1)An “sf” in the rating denotes rating agency identification for structured finance product ratings.
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any
other rating. A credit rating outlook reflects an agency's opinion regarding the likely rating direction over the medium term, often a period of about a year, and indicates the agency's belief that the issuer's credit profile is consistent with its current rating level at that point in time.
Liquidity
We seek to ensure that we have adequate liquidity to sustain business operations, fund asset growth and satisfy debt obligations under stressed and normal operating conditions. In addition to the funding sources discussed in the previous section, we also maintain highly liquid, unencumbered assets in our liquidity portfolio that we expect to be able to convert to cash quickly and with little loss of value using either the repo market or outright sales.
We maintain a liquidity risk and funding management policy, which outlines the overall framework and general principles we follow in managing liquidity risk across our business. The Board of Directors approves the policy and the Asset and Liability Management Committee (the “ALCO”) is responsible for its implementation. Additionally, we maintain a liquidity management framework document that outlines the general strategies, objectives and principles we utilize to manage our liquidity position and the various liquidity risks inherent in our business model. We seek to balance the trade-offs between maintaining too much liquidity, which may be costly, with having too little liquidity, which could cause financial distress. The ALCO, chaired by our Treasurer, has cross-functional membership and manages liquidity risk centrally. The ALCO monitors the liquidity risk profiles of DFS and Discover Bank and oversees any actions Corporate Treasury may take to ensure that we maintain ready access to our funding sources and sufficient liquidity to meet current and projected needs. In addition, the ALCO and our Board of Directors regularly review our compliance with our liquidity limits at DFS and Discover Bank, which are established in accordance with the liquidity risk appetite set by our Board of Directors.
We employ a variety of metrics to monitor and manage liquidity. We utilize early warning indicators (“EWIs”) to detect emerging liquidity stress events and a reporting and escalation process designed to be consistent with regulatory guidance. The EWIs include both idiosyncratic and systemic measures and are monitored daily and reported to the ALCO regularly. A warning from one or more of these indicators triggers prompt review and decision-making by our senior management team and, in certain instances, may lead to the convening of a senior-level response team and activation of our contingency funding plan.
In addition, we conduct liquidity stress tests regularly and ensure contingency funding is in place to address potential liquidity shortfalls. We evaluate a range of stress scenarios that are designed according to regulatory requirements, including idiosyncratic, systemic and a combination of such events that could impact funding sources and our ability to meet liquidity needs. These scenarios measure the projected liquidity position at DFS and Discover Bank across a range of time horizons by comparing estimated contingency funding needs to available contingent liquidity.
Our primary contingent liquidity sources include our liquidity portfolio securities, which we could sell, repo or borrow against, and private securitizations with unused borrowing capacity. In addition, we could borrow FHLB advances by pledging securities to the FHLB of Chicago. Moreover, we have unused borrowing capacity with the Federal Reserve discount window, which provides an additional source of contingent liquidity. We seek to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy all maturing obligations and fund business operations for at least 12 months in a severe stress environment. In such an environment, we may also take actions to curtail the size of our balance sheet, which would reduce the need for funding and liquidity.
At December 31, 2021, our liquidity portfolio is composed of highly liquid, unencumbered assets, including cash and cash equivalents and investment securities. Cash and cash equivalents were primarily deposits with the Federal Reserve. Investment securities primarily included debt obligations of the U.S. Treasury and U.S. GSEs and residential mortgage-backed securities (“RMBS”) issued by U.S. government agencies or U.S. GSEs. These investments are considered highly liquid and we expect to have the ability to raise cash by selling them, utilizing repurchase agreements or pledging certain of these investments to access secured funding. The size and composition of our liquidity portfolio may fluctuate based on the size of our balance sheet as well as operational requirements, market conditions and interest rate risk management objectives.
At December 31, 2021, our liquidity portfolio and undrawn credit facilities were $52.9 billion, which was $10.5 billion lower than the balance at December 31, 2020. Our liquidity portfolio and undrawn credit facilities shrunk during 2021 as we managed excess liquidity through the reduction of marketing spend and deposit rates, which resulted in lower aggregate deposit balances, and the redemption and/or maturity of certain outstanding retail notes, senior bank notes and securitized debt. We partially offset these balance declines by becoming a member of the FHLB
of Chicago. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the average balance of our liquidity portfolio was $23.4 billion and $24.6 billion, respectively. Our liquidity portfolio and undrawn facilities consist of the following (dollars in millions):
(1)Cash in the process of settlement and restricted cash are excluded from cash and cash equivalents for liquidity purposes.
(2)Excludes $27 million and $117 million of U.S. Treasury securities that have been pledged as swap collateral in lieu of cash as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(3)See “- Additional Funding Sources” for additional information.
Bank Holding Company Liquidity
The primary uses of funds at the unconsolidated DFS level include debt service obligations (interest payments and return of principal) and capital service and management activities, including dividend payments on capital instruments and the periodic repurchase of shares of our common stock. Our primary sources of funds at the bank holding company level include the proceeds from the issuance of unsecured debt and capital securities, as well as dividends from our subsidiaries, notably Discover Bank. Under periods of idiosyncratic or systemic stress, the bank holding company could lose or experience impaired access to the capital markets. In addition, our regulators have the discretion to restrict dividend payments from Discover Bank to the bank holding company.
We utilize a measure referred to as Number of Months of Pre-Funding to determine the length of time DFS can meet upcoming funding obligations, including common and preferred stock dividend payments and debt service obligations, using existing cash resources. In managing this metric, we structure our debt maturity schedule to manage prudently the amount of debt maturing within a short period. See Note 9: Long-Term Borrowings to our consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our debt.
Capital
Our primary sources of capital are the earnings generated by our businesses and the proceeds from issuances of capital securities. We seek to manage capital to a level and composition sufficient to support our businesses’ growth and risks and to meet regulatory requirements, rating agency targets and debt investor expectations. Within these constraints, we are focused on deploying capital in a manner that provides attractive returns to our stockholders. The level, composition and utilization of capital are influenced by changes in the economic environment, strategic initiatives and legislative and regulatory developments.
Under regulatory capital requirements adopted by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC, DFS, along with Discover Bank, must maintain minimum capital levels. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in the initiation of certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could limit our business activities and have a direct material effect on our financial condition and operating results. We must meet specific capital requirements that involve quantitative measures of assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items, as calculated under regulatory guidance and regulations. Current or future legislative or regulatory reforms, such as those related to the adoption of the Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”) accounting model, may require us to hold more capital or adversely impact our capital level. We consider the potential impacts of these reforms in managing our capital position.
DFS and Discover Bank are subject to regulatory capital rules issued by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC, respectively, under the Basel Committee’s December 2010 framework (“Basel III rules”). Under the Basel III rules, DFS and Discover Bank are classified as “standardized approach” entities, as they are U.S. banking organizations with consolidated total assets over $50 billion but not exceeding $250 billion and consolidated total on-balance sheet foreign exposures less than $10 billion. The Basel III rules require DFS and Discover Bank to maintain minimum risk-based capital and leverage ratios and define what constitutes capital for purposes of calculating those ratios.
On March 27, 2020, federal bank regulatory agencies announced an interim and now final rule that allows banks that have implemented the CECL accounting model to delay the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years, followed by a three-year transition period. For purposes of calculating regulatory capital, we have elected to defer recognition of the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital for two years in accordance with the final rule; after that period of deferral, the estimated impact of CECL on regulatory capital will be phased in over three years, beginning in 2022. We estimate that electing this option raised our Common Equity Tier 1 ("CET1") capital ratios in 2021 and 2020. For additional information regarding the risk-based capital and leverage ratios, see Note 17: Capital Adequacy to our consolidated financial statements.
On March 4, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced the SCB final rule, which imposes limitations on DFS’ capital distributions if we do not maintain our risk-based capital ratios above stated regulatory minimum ratios based on the results of supervisory stress tests. Under this rule, DFS is required to assess whether our planned capital actions are consistent with the effective capital distribution limitations that will apply on a pro-forma basis throughout the planning horizon.
The SCB requirement is institution-specific and is calculated as the greater of (i) 2.5% and (ii) the sum of (a) the difference between DFS' actual CET1 ratio at the beginning of the forecast and the projected minimum CET1 ratio based on the Federal Reserve's models in its nine-quarter Severely Adverse stress scenario, plus (b) the sum of the dollar amount of DFS' planned common stock dividend distributions for each of the fourth through seventh quarters of its nine-quarter capital planning horizon, expressed as a percentage of RWAs. For Category IV firms, including DFS, the Federal Reserve calculates each firm’s SCB biennially in even-numbered calendar years. In odd-numbered years, including 2021, each firm subject to Category IV standards that did not opt-in to such year’s supervisory stress tests as part of the Federal Reserve’s CCAR process receives an adjusted SCB requirement that is updated to reflect its planned common stock dividends per the firm’s annual capital plan. DFS elected to not participate in the Federal Reserve's supervisory stress test in 2021, but will be a participant in 2022.
As part of CCAR, DFS must submit an annual capital plan, which it did on April 5, 2021 ("2021 Capital Plan"). The 2021 Capital Plan employed forward-looking internal assessments of income and capital under baseline and stressful conditions. On August 5, 2021, the Federal Reserve notified DFS of its adjusted SCB requirement of 3.6% based on the planned common stock dividends in the 2021 Capital Plan. DFS' SCB was effective on October 1, 2021 and slightly increased the SCB in effect for the preceding year, which was 3.5%. See "- Regulatory Environment and Developments - Banking - Capital Standards and Stress Testing" for additional information.
At December 31, 2021, DFS and Discover Bank met the requirements for “well-capitalized” status under the Federal Reserve’s Regulation Y and the prompt corrective action rules and corresponding FDIC requirements, respectively, exceeding the regulatory minimums to which they were subject under the applicable rules.
Basel III rules also require disclosures relating to market discipline. This series of disclosures is commonly referred to as "Pillar 3." The objective is to increase the transparency of capital requirements for banking organizations. We are required to make prescribed regulatory disclosures quarterly regarding our capital structure, capital adequacy, risk exposures and risk-weighted assets. We make the Pillar 3 disclosures publicly available on our website in a report called "Basel III Regulatory Capital Disclosures."
We disclose tangible common equity, which represents common equity less goodwill and intangibles. Management believes that common stockholders’ equity excluding goodwill and intangibles is meaningful to investors as a measure of our true net asset value. As of December 31, 2021, tangible common equity is considered to be a non-GAAP financial measure as it is not formally defined by GAAP or codified in the federal banking regulations. Other financial services companies may also disclose this measure and definitions may vary. We advise users of this information to exercise caution in comparing this measure for different companies.
The following table reconciles total common stockholders’ equity (a GAAP financial measure) to tangible common equity (dollars in millions):
(1)Total common stockholders’ equity is calculated as total stockholders’ equity less preferred stock.
Our Board of Directors declared the following common stock dividends during years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
On January 18, 2022, we declared a quarterly cash dividend on our common stock of $0.50 per share, payable on March 3, 2022, to holders of record on February 17, 2022, which is consistent with the quarterly amount paid in the second half of 2021. In light of the pandemic-induced economic downturn in 2020, the Federal Reserve required all large banks participating in the CCAR supervisory stress test to cap common stock dividends at the lower of the prior quarter's dividend or the average of a firm’s net income over the preceding four quarters. The Federal Reserve lifted this restriction as of July 1, 2021. See "- Regulatory Environment and Developments - Banking - Capital Standards and Stress Testing" for additional information.
Our Board of Directors declared the following Series C preferred stock dividends during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Our Board of Directors declared Series D preferred stock dividends during the year ended December 31, 2021, as follows:
(1)The dividend includes $30.63 semi-annual dividend per depositary share plus $15.48 to account for the long first dividend period.
On January 18, 2022, we declared a semi-annual cash dividend on our Series C and Series D of $27.50 and $30.625 per depositary share, respectively, payable on May 2, 2022 and March 23, 2022, respectively, to holders of record on April 15, 2022 and March 8, 2022, respectively.
In light of improved macroeconomic conditions and our strong financial results, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program in July 2021. The new program authorizes up to $2.4 billion of share repurchases through March 31, 2022. This share repurchase authorization replaces our prior $1.1 billion share repurchase program, which was scheduled to expire on December 31, 2021. During the three months ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased approximately 6.5 million shares, or 2.0% of our outstanding common stock as of September 30, 2021, for approximately $770 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased approximately 18.9 million shares, or 6.2% of our outstanding common stock as of December 31, 2020, for $2.2 billion. We may use various methods to repurchase shares under the program, including open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or other purchases, including block trades, accelerated share repurchase transactions, or any combination of such methods.
The amount and size of any future dividends and share repurchases will depend on our results of operations, financial condition, capital levels, cash requirements, future prospects, regulatory review and other factors. The declaration and payment of future dividends and the amount thereof are subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors. Holders of our shares of common stock are subject to the prior dividend rights of holders of our preferred stock or the depositary shares representing such preferred stock outstanding. No dividend may be declared or paid or set aside for payment on our common stock if full dividends have not been declared and paid on all outstanding shares of preferred stock in any dividend period. In addition, as noted above, banking laws and regulations and our banking regulators may limit our ability to pay dividends and make share repurchases, including limitations on the extent our banking subsidiary (Discover Bank) can provide funds to us through dividends, loans or otherwise. Further, current or future regulatory reforms may require us to hold more capital or could adversely impact our capital level. As a result,
there can be no assurance that we will declare and pay any dividends or repurchase any shares of our common stock in the future.