ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes, and other financial information included in this report.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains not only statements that are historical facts, but also statements that are forward-looking. Forward-looking statements are, by their very nature, uncertain and risky. Forward-looking statements are often identified by words like: “believe”, “expect”, “estimate”, “anticipate”, “intend”, “project” and similar expressions, or words that, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical results or our predictions. These risks and uncertainties include international, national, and local general economic and market conditions; our ability to sustain, manage, or forecast growth; our ability to successfully make and integrate acquisitions; new product development and introduction; existing government regulations and changes in, or the failure to comply with, government regulations; adverse publicity; competition; the loss of significant customers or suppliers; fluctuations and difficulty in forecasting operating results; change in business strategy or development plans; business disruptions; the ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; the ability to protect technology; the risk of foreign currency exchange rate; and other risks that might be detailed from time to time in our filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Although the forward-looking statements in this annual report on Form 10-K reflect the good faith judgment of our management, such statements can only be based on facts and factors currently known by them. Consequently, and because forward-looking statements are inherently subject to risks and uncertainties, the actual results and outcomes may differ materially from the results and outcomes discussed in the forward-looking statements. You are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in herein and in our other reports as we attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors that may affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations and prospects.
Our financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (USD or US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. All references to “common stock” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
Overview
Deep Green Waste & Recycling, Inc. (f/k/a Critic Clothing, Inc.) (“Deep Green”, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, or “our”) is a publicly quoted company seeking to create value for its shareholders by seeking to acquire other operating entities for growth in return for shares of our common stock.
The Company was organized as a Nevada Corporation on August 24, 1995 under the name of Evader, Inc. On May 25, 2012, the Company filed its Foreign Profit Corporation Articles of Domestication to change the domicile of the Company from Nevada to Wyoming. On November 4, 2015, the Company filed an Amendment to its Articles of Incorporation to change the name of the Company to Critical Clothing, Inc. and on August 28, 2017 an Amendment was filed to change the Company name to Deep Green Waste & Recycling, Inc.
Deep Green was a full-service waste & recycling company that managed services to and logistics for large commercial properties throughout the continental U.S. The Company served retail malls and shopping centers, multi-family apartment and townhome communities, hospitals, hotels, correctional institutions, office parks and more. Our unique value proposition was in the design and execution of end-to-end waste management programs for our clients. Our programs not only saved money on direct waste disposal, lower administrative costs and equipment costs, but they also provided income from direct recycling rebates. We had a presence in over 30 states across all regions of the United States and served approximately 300 commercial customers.
On August 10, 2017, our majority shareholder and our board of directors approved an amendment to our Articles of Incorporation for the purpose of approving a reverse split of one to one thousand in which each shareholder will be issued one common share in exchange for every one thousand common shares of their currently issued common stock. Prior to approval of the reverse split, we had a total of 99,997,102,862 issued and outstanding shares of common stock, par value $0.0001. On September 27, 2017, the effective date of the reverse split, we had a total of 99,997,102 issued and 90,697,102 outstanding shares of common stock, par value $0.0001.
On August 24, 2017, the Company entered into an Agreement of Conveyance, Transfer and Assignment of Assets and Assumption of Obligations (the “Agreement”) with St. James Capital Management, LLC. Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company transferred and assigned all of the assets of the Company related to its extreme sports apparel design and manufacturing business in exchange for the assumption of certain liabilities and cancellation of 3,000,000,000 shares of common stock of the Company.
On August 24, 2017, the Company entered into a Merger Agreement (the “Merger Agreement”) with Deep Green Acquisition, LLC, a Georgia limited liability company and wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”) and Deep Green Waste and Recycling, LLC, a privately held Georgia limited liability company (“Deep Green Waste”). In connection with the closing of this merger transaction, Merger Sub merged with and into Deep Green Waste (the “Merger”) on August 24, 2017, with the filing of Articles of Merger with the Georgia Secretary of State.
On October 1, 2017, the Company acquired Compaction and Recycling Equipment Inc (CARE), a Portland, Oregon based company that sells and services waste and recycling equipment. The Company purchased 100% of the common stock for $902,700, of which $586,890 was paid in cash at closing and a promissory note was executed in the amount of $315,810. The note pays simple interest at the rate of 7% per annum on the outstanding balance due, amortized over forty-eight months and payable in quarterly installments, with the first payment being due on the first day of the first month following 90 days after closing. Please see NOTE G - DEBT for further information.
On October 1, 2017, the Company acquired Columbia Financial Services Inc (CFSI), a Portland, Oregon based company that finances the purchases of waste and recycling equipment. Deep Green purchased 100% of the common stock for $597,300, of which $418,110 was paid in cash at closing and a promissory note was executed in the amount of $179,190. The note pays simple interest at the rate of 7% per annum on the outstanding balance due, amortized over forty-eight months and payable in quarterly installments, with the first payment being due on the first day of the first month following 90 days after closing. Please see NOTE G - DEBT for further information.
On August 7, 2018, the Company entered into an Agreement of Conveyance, Transfer and Assignment of Subsidiaries and Assumption of Obligations (the “Agreement”) with Mirabile Corporate Holdings, Inc. Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company transferred all capital stock of its two wholly owned subsidiaries, Compaction and Recycling Equipment, Inc. and Columbia Financial Services, Inc., to Mirabile Corporate Holdings, Inc. in exchange for the assumption and cancellation of certain liabilities.
On February 8, 2021, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary DG Research, Inc. (the “Buyer”), entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Amwaste, Inc. (the “Seller”). Under the terms of the Agreement, the Buyer has agreed to purchase from the Seller certain assets (the “Assets”) utilized in the Seller’s waste management business located in Glynn County, Georgia. In consideration for the purchase of the Assets, the Buyer shall pay the seller $150,000 and issue the Seller 2,000,000 shares of the Company’s restricted common stock. The Buyer shall remit $50,000 at Closing and shall issue the Seller a Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of $110,000. The Note principal shall be reduced by $10,000 if the Note is paid in full on or before March 8, 2021. The Note is secured by the Assets purchased through the Agreement. The transaction closed on February 11, 2021. At Closing, the Buyer remitted the $50,000 payment. On February 16, 2021, the Company issued the Seller the 2,000,000 shares of restricted common stock.
On July 11, 2021, the Company’s Board unanimously approved an Amendment to our Articles of Incorporation (the “Authorized Share Amendment”) to increase the number of authorized shares of Common Stock of the Company from 250,000,000 to 500,000,000 and to increase the number of authorized shares of Preferred Stock of the Company from 2,000,000 to 5,000,000 with the Board maintaining the discretion of whether or not to implement the increase in authorized shares of Common and Preferred Stock. On July 11, 2021, the Majority Stockholders delivered an executed written consent in lieu of a special meeting (the “Stockholder Consent”) authorizing and approving the Authorized Share Amendment and the increase in authorized shares of Common and Preferred Stock.
On August 11, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Jeremy Lyell (the “Shareholder”) and Lyell Environmental Services, Inc. (hereinafter “LES”). On October 19, 2021, the Company closed on the Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Jeremy Lyell (the “Shareholder”). In consideration for the purchase of all Lyell Environmental Services, Inc. shares from the Shareholder, the Company was to pay the Shareholder (i) $50,000 upon execution of the Agreement that was held in escrow, (ii) $1,300,000 at Closing, and (iii) 2,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. Under the amended Agreement (the “Amended Agreement”), the Company paid to the Shareholder (i) the $50,000 paid upon execution of the Agreement and that was held in escrow, (ii) $1,000,000 at Closing, and (iii) 2,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. The Company also issued the Shareholder a Promissory Note (the “Promissory Note”) in the amount of $186,537.92. The Promissory Note accrues interest at 7% per annum and is due on December 18, 2021. The transaction closed on October 19, 2021. The Company made a payment of $140,000 on March 7, 2022 against the Promissory Note.
On December 21, 2021, the Company entered into a Letter of Intent (“LOI”) with FoamShield, Inc. (the “Seller”) whereby the Company would acquire all the assets used or useful in the operation of the Seller’s business, including all of the tangible and intangible assets owned by the principals of the Seller. As consideration for the acquisition of the assets, the Company shall issue the Seller 2,000,000 shares of common stock and a 4% royalty payment on all collected net sales revenues of the FoamShield product. Upon completion of its due diligence, the Company elected to terminate the transaction during the first quarter of 2022.
Results of Operations
Operating Revenues
Since our inception on August 24, 1995, we have generated minimal revenue from our operations. We cannot guarantee we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including the financial risks associated with the limited capital resources currently available to us and risks associated with the implementation of our business strategies.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated $363,056 and $- in revenue, respectively.
Operating Expenses and Net Loss
Our operating expenses were $1,024,457 and $471,991 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We anticipate that our cost of revenues will increase in 2022 and for the foreseeable future as we expand our operations in the waste and recycling sector.
We incurred $0 and $0 in advertising expenses during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We incurred $491,770 and $149,619 in officer compensation during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company anticipates that it will need to expand its management team with future acquisitions or joint ventures.
Loss from Operations
The Company’s loss from operations increased to $1,024,457 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $471,991 in 2020, an increase of $552,466.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses) included loss on derivative liability, loss on conversions of notes payable and interest expense offset by gain on settlement of a note payable in the amount of ($2,376,405) the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to ($260,579) the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of ($2,115,826). The increase in other income (expenses) in fiscal year 2021 was largely attributable to the loss on derivative liability and interest expense.
Net Income (Loss)
For the fiscal year ended 2021, our net loss increased to ($3,400,862), as compared to a net loss of ($732,570) for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of ($2,668,292). The increase in net loss was largely attributable to the loss on derivative liability and interest expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
At December 31, 2021, the Company had cash of $36,619 and total current assets of $231,280 compared with cash of $757 and total current assets of $757 at December 31, 2020. The increase in total current assets is largely attributable to an increase in accounts receivable acquired in the Amwaste asset purchase.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had total current liabilities of $5,992,412 compared to $4,373,037 at December 31, 2020. The increase in total current liabilities was largely attributable to an increase in derivative liability and an increase in the convertible notes payable as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The overall working capital deficit increased from $4,372,280 at December 31, 2020 to $5,761,132 at December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
Cashflow from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used cash of $493,003 in operating activities compared to cash used of $131,453 from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used from operating activities was largely attributable to an increase in derivative liability expense and loss on conversion of notes payable.
Cashflow from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used cash of $1,320,045 in investing activities compared to cash used of $- from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used from investing activities was largely attributable to its acquisition of its subsidiary, Lyell Environmental Services, Inc.
Cashflow from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $1,848,910 compared to $131,475 for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received $1,706,500 from the issuance of convertible notes payable and $110,045 from other debt.
We currently have no external sources of liquidity, such as arrangements with credit institutions or off-balance sheet arrangements that will have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition or immediate access to capital.
We are dependent on our product sales to fund our operations and may require the sale of additional common stock to maintain operations. Our officers and directors have made no written commitments with respect to providing a source of liquidity in the form of cash advances, loans, and/or financial guarantees.
If we are unable to raise the funds required to fund our operations, we will seek alternative financing through other means, such as borrowings from institutions or private individuals. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations from the sale of our securities. We have not located any sources for these funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations. If we fail to raise funds, we expect that we will be required to seek protection from creditors under applicable bankruptcy laws.
Convertible Debentures
(i) On June 23, 2020, the Company issued GPL Ventures LLC (“GPL”) a Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of One Hundred Thousand and NO/100 Dollars ($100,000). The Note was convertible, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity (June 23, 2021) at the option of the holder at the Conversion Price that shall equal the lesser of a) $0.01 or b) Sixty Percent (60%) of the lowest Trading Price (defined below) during the Valuation Period (defined below), and the Conversion Amount shall be the amount of principal or interest electively converted in the Conversion Notice. The total number of shares due under any conversion notice (“Notice Shares”) was equal to the Conversion Amount divided by the Conversion Price. “Trading Price” means, for any security as of any date, any trading price on the OTC Markets, or other applicable trading market (the “OTCBB”) as reported by a reliable reporting service (“Reporting Service”) mutually acceptable to Maker and Holder (i.e. Bloomberg) or, if the OTCBB is not the principal trading market for such security, the price of such security on the principal securities exchange or trading market where such security is listed or traded. The “Valuation Period” shall mean twenty (20) Trading Days, commencing on the first Trading Day following delivery and clearing of the Notice Shares in Holder’s brokerage account, as reported by Holder (“Valuation Start Date”). The Note had a term of one (1) year and beared interest at 10% annually. The Company and GPL also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement (“RRA”) that provided for the Company to file a Registration Statement with the SEC covering the resale of shares underlying the Note and the warrant and to have declared effective such Registration Statement (which occurred on July 13, 2020). In the event that the Company didn’t maintain the registration requirements provided for in the RRA, the Company was obligated to pay GPL certain payments for such failures. As of December 31, 2021, there was no remaining principal or interest due on the Note.
(ii) On July 2, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with Labrys Fund, LP (“Labrys”) and issued Labrys a Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of One Hundred Thousand and NO/100 Dollars ($100,000). The Note is convertible, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity (July 2, 2022) at the option of the holder at the Conversion Price that shall equal $0.015. If at any time the Conversion Price as determined hereunder for any conversion would be less than the par value of the Common Stock, then at the sole discretion of the Holder, the Conversion Price hereunder may equal such par value for such conversion and the Conversion Amount for such conversion may be increased to include Additional Principal, where “Additional Principal” means such additional amount to be added to the Conversion Amount to the extent necessary to cause the number of conversion shares issuable upon such conversion to equal the same number of conversion shares as would have been issued had the Conversion Price not been adjusted by the Holder to the par value price. The Conversion Price is subject to equitable adjustments for stock splits, stock dividends or rights offerings by the Borrower relating to the Borrower’s securities or the securities of any subsidiary of the Borrower, combinations, recapitalization, reclassifications, extraordinary distributions and similar events. Holder shall be entitled to deduct $1,750.00 from the conversion amount in each Notice of Conversion to cover Holder’s fees associated with each Notice of Conversion. The Note has a term of one (1) year and bears interest at 12% annually. The transaction closed on July 2, 2021. As part and parcel of the foregoing transaction, Labrys was issued a warrant granting the holder the right to purchase up to 5,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.02 for a term of 5-years. On July 8, 2021, the Company issued Labrys 1,000,000 shares of common stock as Commitment Shares as per the terms of the SPA. As of December 31, 2021, $100,000 principal plus $2,959 interest were due.
(iii) On October 14, 2021, the Company (the “Borrower”) entered into a Note Purchase Agreement (“NPA”) with each of BHP Capital NY Inc. and Quick Capital, LLC (together, the “Investors”) and issued each of the Investors a Secured Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of Six Hundred Sixty-Six Thousand Six Hundred Sixty-Seven and NO/100 Dollars ($666,667). The Note is convertible, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity (October 14, 2022) at the option of the holder at the Fixed Conversion Price that shall be the lesser of: (a) $0.01 or (b) 70% multiplied by the Market Price (as defined herein) (representing a discount rate of 30%) (the “Fixed Conversion Price”). “Market Price” means the average of the two lowest Closing Prices (as defined below) for the Common Stock during the twenty (20) Trading Day period ending on the latest complete Trading Day prior to the Conversion Date “Trading Day” shall mean any day on which the Common Stock is tradable for any period on the OTCBB, OTCQB or on the principal securities exchange or other securities market on which the Common Stock is then being quoted or traded. To the extent the Conversion Price of the Borrower’s Common Stock closes below the par value per share, the Borrower will take all steps necessary to solicit the consent of the stockholders to reduce the par value of the Common Stock to the lowest value possible under law. The Borrower agrees to honor all conversions submitted pending this adjustment. If the shares of the Borrower’s Common Stock have not been delivered within three (3) business days to the Holder, the Notice of Conversion may be rescinded by the Holder. If the Trading Price cannot be calculated for such security on such date in the manner provided above, the Trading Price shall be the fair market value as mutually determined by the Borrower and the Holder for which the calculation of the Trading Price is required in order to determine the Conversion Price of such Notes. If at any time the Conversion Price as determined hereunder for any conversion would be less than the par value of the Common Stock, then at the sole discretion of the Holder, the Conversion Price hereunder may equal such par value for such conversion and the Conversion Amount for such conversion may be increased to include Additional Principal, where “Additional Principal” means such additional amount to be added to the Conversion Amount to the extent necessary to cause the number of conversion shares issuable upon such conversion to equal the same number of conversion shares as would have been issued had the Conversion Price not been adjusted by the Holder to the par value price. The Note has a term of one (1) year and bears interest at 10% annually. As part and parcel of the foregoing transaction, each of the Investors was issued 2,298,852 shares of common stock as Commitment shares and a warrant (the “Warrant”) granting the holder the right to purchase up to 66,666,667 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.015 for a term of 5-years. The transaction closed on October 19, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $592,004 principal plus $0 interest were due on the Quick Capital Note.
(iv) On October 14, 2021, the Company (the “Borrower”) entered into a Note Purchase Agreement (“NPA”) with each of BHP Capital NY Inc. and Quick Capital, LLC (together, the “Investors”) and issued each of the Investors a Secured Convertible Promissory Note (the “Note”) in the amount of Six Hundred Sixty-Six Thousand Six Hundred Sixty-Seven and NO/100 Dollars ($666,667). The Note is convertible, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time before maturity (October 14, 2022) at the option of the holder at the Fixed Conversion Price that shall be the lesser of: (a) $0.01 or (b) 70% multiplied by the Market Price (as defined herein) (representing a discount rate of 30%) (the “Fixed Conversion Price”). “Market Price” means the average of the two lowest Closing Prices (as defined below) for the Common Stock during the twenty (20) Trading Day period ending on the latest complete Trading Day prior to the Conversion Date “Trading Day” shall mean any day on which the Common Stock is tradable for any period on the OTCBB, OTCQB or on the principal securities exchange or other securities market on which the Common Stock is then being quoted or traded. To the extent the Conversion Price of the Borrower’s Common Stock closes below the par value per share, the Borrower will take all steps necessary to solicit the consent of the stockholders to reduce the par value of the Common Stock to the lowest value possible under law. The Borrower agrees to honor all conversions submitted pending this adjustment. If the shares of the Borrower’s Common Stock have not been delivered within three (3) business days to the Holder, the Notice of Conversion may be rescinded by the Holder. If the Trading Price cannot be calculated for such security on such date in the manner provided above, the Trading Price shall be the fair market value as mutually determined by the Borrower and the Holder for which the calculation of the Trading Price is required in order to determine the Conversion Price of such Notes. If at any time the Conversion Price as determined hereunder for any conversion would be less than the par value of the Common Stock, then at the sole discretion of the Holder, the Conversion Price hereunder may equal such par value for such conversion and the Conversion Amount for such conversion may be increased to include Additional Principal, where “Additional Principal” means such additional amount to be added to the Conversion Amount to the extent necessary to cause the number of conversion shares issuable upon such conversion to equal the same number of conversion shares as would have been issued had the Conversion Price not been adjusted by the Holder to the par value price. The Note has a term of one (1) year and bears interest at 10% annually. As part and parcel of the foregoing transaction, each of the Investors was issued 2,298,852 shares of common stock as Commitment shares and a warrant (the “Warrant”) granting the holder the right to purchase up to 66,666,667 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.015 for a term of 5-years. The transaction closed on October 19, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $666,667 principal plus $0 interest were due on the BHP Note.
Notes in General
The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of common stock of the Company based upon a discount to the market price. The conversion terms of these Convertible Notes are based upon a discount to the then-prevailing average of the lowest trading bid prices (as described above for each separate note) and, as a result, the lower the stock price at the time the holders convert the Convertible Notes, the more shares of our common stock the holders will receive. The number of shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of these Convertible Notes is indeterminate. If the trading price of our common stock is lower when the conversion price of these Convertible Notes is determined, we would be required to issue a higher number of shares of our common stock, which could cause substantial dilution to our stockholders. In addition, if the holders opt to convert these Convertible Notes into shares of our common stock and sell those shares it could result in an imbalance of supply and demand for our common stock and resulting in lower trading prices for our common stock as reported by the OTCQB. The further our stock price declines, the further the adjustment of the conversion price will fall and the greater the number of shares we will have to issue upon conversion.
In addition, the number of shares issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Note is potentially limitless. While the overall ownership of each individual Holder at any one moment may be limited to 9.99% of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock, each holder may be free to sell any shares into the market that have previously been issued to them, thereby enabling them to convert the remaining portion of these Convertible Notes.