ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
- 7 -
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “initial business combination”). Our Sponsor is Digital Health Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Sponsor”). While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry or geographic region, we intend to focus on established, technology and healthcare focused businesses that have an aggregate enterprise value of approximately $175 million to $500 million and would benefit from access to public markets and the operational and strategic expertise of our management team and board of directors. We will seek to capitalize on the significant experience of our management team in consummating an initial business combination with the ultimate goal of pursuing attractive returns for our stockholders.
The Registration Statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on November 3, 2021 (the “Initial Public Offering,” or “IPO”). On November 8, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 11,500,000 units (the “Units”) at $10.00 per Unit including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000, and incurring transaction costs of approximately $6,877,164 million, consisting of $1,955,000 of underwriting fees, $4,370,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $552,164 of other offering costs.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the private sale of 557,000 Units (the “Private Placement Units”) at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit (the “Private Placement”), to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5,570,000.
Approximately $116,725,000 ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of one hundred eighty-five (185) days or less, or in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as otherwise permitted under our amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within twelve (12) months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten (10) business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation, our initial public offering, and since the closing of our initial public offering, a search for business combination candidates. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 30, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $280,701 which consisted of approximately $282,671 in general and administrative expenses, and changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $140,163, partially offset by income from our investments held in the trust account of approximately $1,970, and prepaid expenses of $457,0605.
- 8 -
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $760,012 in cash and no cash equivalents.
Our liquidity needs up to the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our Sponsor and certain of our executive officers, directors and advisors in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and loans from our Sponsor for an aggregate amount of $602,720 to cover organizational expenses and expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to promissory notes (the “Notes”).
On November 8, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 11,500,000 Units, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $115 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the private sale of 557,000 Units (the “Private Placement Units”) at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit (the “Private Placement”), to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $5,570,000. As of November 8, 2021, the Company received $3,680,000 from the proceeds of the Private Placement and recorded $1,890,000 in subscription receivable. The Sponsor paid the subscription in full on November 12, 2021.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, a total of $116,725,000 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $9,478 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $6,877,164 in transaction costs, consisting of $1,955,000 of underwriting fees, $4,370,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $552,164 of other offering costs.
We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, including the funds held in the Trust Account, to acquire a target business or businesses and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our share capital is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our initial business combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
In addition, in the short term and long term, in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of our initial business combination or one year from the date of this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
- 9 -
Registration Rights
The holders of our founder shares which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of the Initial Public Offering, as well as the holders of the private placement units (and underlying securities), will be entitled to customary registration rights pursuant to an agreement to registration rights agreement. The holders of a majority of these securities are entitled to make up to two demands that we register such securities. The holders of the majority of these securities can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time on or after the date we consummate a business combination. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our consummation of a business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement and Deferred Underwriting Commission
The company paid an underwriting discount of $0.17 per Unit, or $1,955,000 in the aggregate, at the closing of the Initial Public Offering. An additional fee equal to 3.8% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $4,370,000, will be payable to A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (the “Representative”) as a deferred underwriting commission in connection with the business combination. This deferred underwriting commission will become payable to the Representative from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement dated November 3, 2021.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on The Nasdaq Global Market and continuing until the earlier of our consummation of an initial business combination or our liquidation, we have agreed to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial support and administrative services, subject to deferral until consummation of our initial business combination. We recorded administrative services expenses of $20,000 for the period from March 30, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, in general and administrative expenses in connection with the related agreement in the accompanying statement of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common stock subject to possible redemption
We account for the common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events.
Risks and Uncertainties
Our management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the balance date.
- 10 -
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements except for the following:
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1,2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 at inception on March 30, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five (5) years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we otherwise no longer qualify as an “emerging growth company.”