ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In this Item 7, we discuss and analyze our consolidated results of operations for the past three fiscal years and other factors that may affect our future financial performance. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and Selected Financial Data contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Environment
The performance of the U.S. and international equity markets, as well as the U.S. fixed income market, have a direct impact on our operations and financial position.
2021 closed out another year of strong gains for equity markets globally. The MSCI All Country World Index advanced 18.5%, with the majority of those returns driven by developed markets as emerging markets stocks fell -2.5% as measured by the MSCI Emerging Markets Index. US markets, as measured by the Russell 3000® Index, rose 25.7%. Early in 2021, we saw continued distribution of COVID-19 vaccines globally, gradual steps to reopening economies, and broad gains in stocks across sectors. As economic recoveries progressed and the pandemic persisted, economies began facing rising inflation, supply chain disruptions and surging energy prices.
For only the fourth time in its history, in 2021, the U.S. investment-grade fixed income market (as measured by the Bloomberg U.S. Aggregate Index) delivered negative returns in a calendar year due largely to a combination of rising rates, economic resurgence post-pandemic shutdowns, and supply/demand dislocations fueling historic inflation levels. The Federal Reserve gradually shifted from viewing inflation as transitory to a matter that needed to be actively addressed, accelerating expectations for rate hikes from year-end 2021 to early 2022. The Federal Reserve also shifted its stance on tapering-from discussing it as a potential option to proceeding with executing it-and is now accelerating the process to complete it by March 2022. While the longer end of the Treasury curve experienced gyrations throughout the year as the Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19 increased investor uncertainty, the shorter end of the curve generally remained anchored. Only after the Federal Reserve began laying the groundwork for tapering and potential rate hikes in 2022 did the two-year Treasury rate begin to move higher, rising from an average yield of 0.166% from the beginning of the year through the end of August, then climbing through the final four months to finish the year at 0.732%.
We continue to believe we can deliver market-beating returns over a full market cycle through active management. Our commitment to managing our portfolios with a strict capacity discipline helps protect our ability to deliver excellent investment outcomes for clients through the use of more concentrated portfolios than the broader market can offer. Our long-standing relationships with professional buyer groups enable us to reach investors who share our long-term perspective. Our priority continues to be helping clients to achieve their desired investment outcomes, and we believe our commitment to capacity discipline, alignment of interests with our clients and strong investment results will result in a successful and sustainable future.
Investment Results
It is imperative we provide our clients excellent investment returns over long periods of time. We are pleased that during our history as an investment advisory firm, we have delivered what we believe are strong long-term investment returns. Investment returns have been a key driver in the long-term success we have achieved in growing AUM.
The following is a summary of the investment returns for each of our strategies as of December 31, 2021, relative to their respective indices, as applicable.
_______________________
- Composite returns are net of fees.
- Index returns do not reflect any fees.
Key Financial Performance Indicators
There are a variety of key performance indicators that we monitor to evaluate our business results. The following table presents the results of certain key performance indicators over the past three fiscal years:
(a) Net operating income, as adjusted, and operating profit margin, as adjusted, are non-GAAP (as defined below) performance measures. See Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measure section within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Assets Under Management
The Company derives revenue primarily from DHCM's investment advisory and administration fees. Investment advisory and administration fees paid to DHCM are generally based on the value of the investment portfolios it manages and fluctuate with changes in the total value of its AUM. The Company, through DHCM, recognizes revenue when it satisfies its performance obligations under the terms of a contract with a client.
The Company’s revenues are highly dependent on both the value and composition of AUM. The following is a summary of the Company’s AUM by product and investment objective, and a roll-forward of the change in AUM, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
(a) The Diamond Hill Global Fund was liquidated on December 17, 2021.
(b) The Diamond Hill Corporate Credit and High Yield investment advisory contracts (the “High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts”)
were sold to Brandywine Global Investment Management, LLC (“Brandywine Global”) effective July 30, 2021.
(c) Certain of the Funds own shares of the Diamond Hill Short Duration Securitized Bond Fund. The Company reduces the total AUM by the investments held in this affiliated Fund.
2021 Discussion of Net Cash Inflows
Both our equity and fixed income strategies experienced net inflows during the year ended December 31, 2021. Flows in our equity strategies were largely driven by our Large Cap strategy, which experienced net inflows of $2.1 billion. These net inflows were partially offset by net outflows from our other equity strategies totaling approximately $1.2 billion. The Company's fixed income strategies, including the High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts prior to their sale, had net positive flows of $1.2 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021.
2020 Discussion of Net Cash Inflows
Flows into equity strategies were mixed in 2020. Our Large Cap and Mid-Cap strategies had combined net inflows of $1.6 billion. However, these net inflows were more than offset by the net outflows in our Long-Short, Small Cap and Small-Mid Cap strategies, which collectively had outflows of $1.8 billion. Our fixed income strategies continued to see strong growth in 2020 as each of the strategies met long-term performance objectives compared to peers and benchmarks. Our focused marketing and branding efforts, along with strong performance, led to combined net inflows of $1.8 billion, with each of the strategies attracting at least $200 million in net inflows.
2019 Discussion of Cash Outflows
Our fixed income strategies experienced strong growth in 2019 with High Yield reaching its five-year anniversary and Core Bond and Short-Duration reaching three years. Each of our fixed income strategies met long-term performance objectives compared to peers and benchmarks. Additionally, we supplemented our distribution efforts with dedicated resources in marketing and branding specifically for our fixed income strategies.
Equity flows experienced a challenging 2019. The net equity outflows can primarily be attributed to underperformance in our closed strategies, as $1.4 billion of the net outflows in 2019 were from our Small Cap, Small-Mid Cap and Long-Short strategies. As a result, we reopened the Small Cap and Long-Short strategies during 2019.
Model Delivery Programs - Assets Under Advisement
DHCM provides strategy-specific model portfolios to sponsors of model delivery programs. DHCM does not have discretionary investment authority over individual client accounts in model delivery programs, and therefore, these assets are not included in
the Company’s AUM. Rather, we refer to these model delivery assets as AUA. DHCM is paid for its services by the program sponsor at a pre-determined rate based on assets in the program. Model delivery program AUA were $2.1 billion, $1.1 billion, and $0.9 billion as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following is a table and discussion of the Company’s consolidated results of operations.
(a) Net operating income, as adjusted, and operating profit margin, as adjusted, are non-GAAP (as defined below) performance measures. See Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measure section within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary Discussion of Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021, compared with
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $55.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a 38% increase in average AUM and $11.9 million in performance-based fees earned in 2021 compared to $0.5 million of performance-based fees in 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in the average advisory fee rate (excluding performance-based fees) from 0.54% to 0.52% year-over-year.
Operating profit margin was 42% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 36% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, was 46% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 38% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, excludes deferred compensation expense from operating income because it is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the income statement and thus has no effect on net income attributable to the Company. We believe this measure based on methodologies other than GAAP (“non-GAAP”) helps the reader to understand our core operating results and increases comparability period-to-period. See the "Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures" section below in Part II. Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company expects that its operating margin will fluctuate from period to period based on various factors, including revenues, investment results, employee performance, staffing levels, gains and losses on investments held in deferred compensation plans, and the development of investment strategies, products, or channels.
The Company recognized $16.4 million in investment income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with investment income of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in investment income year-over-year was due to a higher average investment balance throughout the year and higher returns on the investments.
The Company recorded a gain of $9.0 million related to the sale of our High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts on July 30, 2021. DHCM may receive two additional payments of up to $13.0 million in the aggregate based on the net revenue of the High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts on the one-year anniversary of the Closing Date, but there can be no assurance these additional payments will be earned.
Income tax expense increased $12.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax expense was primarily due to an increase in DHCM's income before taxes, which was partially offset by a decrease in our effective tax rate from 26.8% to 25.6% year-over-year. The decrease in the Company’s effective tax rate in 2021 was primarily due to the benefit attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interests, and a decrease in excess tax deficits from the vesting of restricted stock, which were partially offset by an increase in state and local taxes from the performance fees year-over-year.
The Company generated net income attributable to common shareholders of $74.2 million ($23.34 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with net income attributable to common shareholders of $38.7 million ($12.03 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased revenues, an increase in investment income, and the gain on the sale of the High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts.
See the “Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures” section below in Part II, Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Summary Discussion of Consolidated Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020, compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $10.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a decrease in the average advisory fee rate from 0.59% to 0.54% year-over-year, which was partially offset by a 1% increase in average AUM. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies.
Operating profit margin was 36% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 35% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, was 38% for the year ended December 31, 2020, and 39% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating profit margin, as adjusted, excludes deferred compensation expense (benefit) from operating income because it is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the income statement, and thus, has no effect on net income attributable to the Company. We believe this non-GAAP measure helps the reader to understand our core operating results and increases comparability period to period. See the "Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures" section below in Part II. Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company expects that its operating margin will fluctuate from period to period based on various factors, including revenues, investment results, employee performance, staffing levels, gains and losses on investments held in deferred compensation plans, and the development of investment strategies, products, or channels.
The Company recognized $6.6 million in investment income for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with investment income of $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in market appreciation year over year was due to a lower average investment balance throughout the year and lower returns on the investments.
Income tax expense decreased $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in income tax expense was primarily due to a decrease in DHCM's income before taxes, which was partially offset by an increase in the Company’s effective tax rate from 23.8% to 26.8% year-over-year. The increase in the effective tax rate in 2020 was primarily due to excess tax deficits on the vesting of restricted stock awards of $0.6 million in 2020 and the $1.0 million benefit attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interests in 2019.
The Company generated net income attributable to common shareholders of $38.7 million ($12.03 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with net income attributable to common shareholders of $55.0 million ($15.99 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreased revenues and a decrease in investment income.
See the "Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures" section below in Part II. Item 7, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue
Revenue for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Investment Advisory Fees. Investment advisory fees increased by $51.0 million, or 43%, from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021. Investment advisory fees are calculated as a percentage of the market value of client accounts at contractual fee rates, which vary by investment product. The increase in investment advisory fees was due to an increase of 38% in average AUM, and $11.9 million in performance-based fees recognized in 2021 as a significant performance-based agreement reached its first five-year measurement term. The Company recognized $0.5 million of performance-based fees in 2020.
These increases were partially offset by a decrease in the average advisory fee rate (excluding performance-based fees) from 0.54% to 0.52% year-over-year. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies, excluding performance-based fees, were 0.54% and 0.39%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.57% and 0.40%, respectively.
Mutual Fund Administration Fees. Mutual fund administration fees increased $4.8 million, or 66%, from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021. Mutual fund administration fees include administration fees received from the Funds, which are calculated as a percentage of the Funds' average AUM. The increase was primarily due to a 36% increase in the Funds' average AUM from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021, and a reduction in administration fees paid on behalf of the Funds as a percentage of average Fund AUM year-over-year.
Revenue for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Investment Advisory Fees. Investment advisory fees decreased by $8.9 million, or 7%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. Investment advisory fees are calculated as a percentage of the market value of client accounts at contractual fee rates, which vary by investment product. The decrease in investment advisory fees was driven by a reduction in the average advisory fee rate from 0.59% in 2019 to 0.54% in 2020, which was partially offset by an increase of 1% in average AUM year over year. The decrease in average advisory fee rate was driven by an increase in the mix of assets held in lower fee rate strategies during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.57% and 0.40%, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the average advisory fee rates for equity and fixed income strategies were 0.61% and 0.41%, respectively.
Mutual Fund Administration Fees. Mutual fund administration fees decreased $1.4 million, or 16%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. Mutual fund administration fees include administration fees received from the Funds, which are calculated as a percentage of the Funds' average AUM. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in sub-transfer agent and servicing fees paid by us on behalf of the Funds. In addition, there was a 1% decrease in the Funds' average AUM from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Expenses
Expenses for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Compensation and Related Costs, Excluding Deferred Compensation Expense. Employee compensation and benefits increased by $15.3 million from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase is due
to increases in incentive compensation of $9.7 million, salary and related benefits of $3.1 million, restricted stock expense of $1.8 million, and other compensation expense of $0.7 million. On average, we had 126 full-time equivalent employees for both 2021 and 2020. Incentive compensation expense can fluctuate significantly period over period as we evaluate investment performance, individual performance, the Company’s performance, and other factors.
Deferred Compensation Expense. Deferred compensation expense was $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to deferred compensation expense of $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in market appreciation on our deferred compensation investments period over period.
The gain on deferred compensation plan investments increases deferred compensation expense and is included in operating income. Deferred compensation expense is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the consolidated statements of income statement, and thus has no impact on net income attributable to us.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $3.0 million, or 27%, from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was partially due a non-recurring $1.1 million refund related to Ohio commercial activity tax, which was received in 2020 and reduced general and administrative expense. The Ohio commercial activity tax is a gross receipts tax, and therefore, is not included in income taxes. Other increases in 2021 include $0.7 million in consulting fees, $0.5 million of proxy solicitation fees related to the sale of the High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts, a $0.4 million increase in IT staffing, hardware, and software expense, and a $0.3 million increase in depreciation expense.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $1.7 million, or 28%, from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to increases of $0.7 million related to the Company’s distribution technology platform and the related external data costs, $0.5 million for payments made to third-party intermediaries related to the sale of our mutual funds on their platforms, and a $0.5 million increase in advertising expenses.
Mutual Fund Administration. Mutual fund administration expenses increased by 7% from the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2021. Mutual fund administration expense consists of both variable and fixed expenses. The variable expenses are based on Fund AUM levels and the number of shareholder accounts. The increase was due to an increase in variable expenses as a result of the increase in the average Fund AUM period-over-period.
Expenses for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2019
Compensation and Related Costs, Excluding Deferred Compensation Expense. Employee compensation and benefits decreased by $2.0 million from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily due to decreases in severance expense of $1.6 million and in restricted stock expense of $1.0 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in salary and related benefits of $0.2 million and in incentive compensation of $0.4 million. On average, we had 126 full-time equivalent employees for 2020, compared to 128 for 2019. Incentive compensation expense can fluctuate significantly period over period as we evaluate investment performance, individual performance, the Company’s performance, and other factors.
Deferred Compensation Expense. Deferred compensation expense was $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to deferred compensation expense of $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, mostly due to a decrease in market appreciation on our deferred compensation investments period over period. The gain on deferred compensation plan investments increases deferred compensation expense and is included in operating income. Deferred compensation expense is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the consolidated statements of income statement, and thus has no impact on net income attributable to us.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased by $2.3 million, or 17%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due a non-recurring $1.1 million refund received in 2020 related to our Ohio commercial activity tax, which is a gross receipts tax, and therefore, is not included in income taxes, as well as decreases in corporate recruiting fees of $0.8 million, and in travel and related expenses period over period.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $0.1 million, or 2%, from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in spending related to our customer relationship management system and related external data costs of $0.9 million. This increase was largely offset by a reduction in sales and marketing travel and related expense of $0.8 million.
Mutual Fund Administration. Mutual fund administration expenses increased by 1% from the year ended December 31, 2019, to the year ended December 31, 2020. Mutual fund administration expense consists of both variable and fixed expenses. The variable expenses are based on Fund AUM levels and the number of shareholder accounts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
The Company's current financial condition is liquid, with a significant amount of its assets comprised of cash and cash equivalents, investments, accounts receivable, and other current assets. The Company's main source of liquidity is cash flows from operating activities, which are generated from investment advisory and mutual fund administration fees. Cash and cash equivalents, investments held directly by DHCM, accounts receivable, and other current assets represented $214.7 million and $205.1 million of total assets as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. The Company believes that these sources of liquidity, as well as its continuing cash flows from operating activities, will be sufficient to meet its current and future operating needs for the next 12 months.
Uses of Liquidity
The Company anticipates that its main uses of cash will be for operating expenses and seed capital to fund new and existing investment strategies. The Board and management regularly review various factors to determine whether the Company has capital in excess of that required for its business, and the appropriate uses of any such excess capital.
Share Repurchases
On February 27, 2020, the Board approved a stock repurchase program (the “2020 Repurchase Program”) authorizing management to repurchase up to an additional $50 million of the Company’s common shares. Under the 2020 Repurchase Program, the Company repurchased 45,727 of its common shares during the year ended December 31, 2021, for a total of $7.8 million. As of December 31, 2021, $27.6 million remains available for repurchases under the 2020 Repurchase Program. The authority to repurchase shares: (1) may be exercised from time to time as market conditions warrant, (2) is subject to regulatory constraints, and (3) will expire two years from the date of Board approval or upon the earlier repurchase in full of the authorized amount of shares. The timing, amount, and other terms and conditions of any repurchases will be determined by Company management in its discretion based on a variety of factors, including the market price of such shares, corporate considerations, general market and economic conditions, and applicable legal requirements.
The following table summarizes the quarterly repurchase transactions made under the 2020 Repurchase Program since its inception:
The 2020 Repurchase Program expired on February 25, 2022, when our Board approved the 2022 Repurchase Program. The 2022 Repurchase Program authorizes management to repurchase up to $50.0 million of our common shares in the open market and in private transactions in accordance with applicable securities laws. The 2022 Repurchase Program will expire in February 2024, or upon the earlier completion of all authorized purchases under such program.
Dividends
Fiscal 2021 was the 14th consecutive year that the Company paid a dividend. The Company paid total dividends per share of $23.00, $12.00, and $9.00 during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The 2021, 2020, and 2019 dividends reduced shareholders’ equity by $73.0 million, $38.0 million, and $30.3 million, respectively.
A summary of cash dividends paid during the year ended December 31, 2021 is presented below:
On February 25, 2022, the Board approved a regular quarterly dividend for the first quarter of 2022 of $1.50 per share to be paid on March 18, 2022, to shareholders of record as of March 7, 2022. This dividend is expected to reduce shareholders' equity by approximately $4.8 million. Subject to Board approval and compliance with applicable law, the Company expects to pay a regular quarterly dividend of $1.50 per share going forward.
In addition to the regular quarterly dividends, the Board will decide whether to approve and pay an additional special dividend in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Although the Company currently expects to continue to pay regular quarterly dividends, depending on the circumstances and the Board’s judgment, the Company may not pay such dividends as described.
Working Capital
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had working capital of approximately $168.5 million, compared to $168.9 million as of December 31, 2020. Working capital includes cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, investments, and other current assets of DHCM, net of accounts payable and accrued expenses, accrued incentive compensation, deferred compensation, and other current liabilities of DHCM.
The Company had no debt and the Company believes its available working capital is sufficient to cover current expenses and presently anticipated capital expenditures.
Below is a summary of investments as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(a) The Diamond Hill Global Fund was liquidated effective December 17, 2021
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The Company’s cash flows from operating activities are calculated by adjusting net income to reflect other significant operating sources and uses of cash, certain significant non-cash items (such as share-based compensation), and timing differences in the cash settlement of operating assets and liabilities. The Company expects that cash flows provided by operating activities will continue to serve as its primary source of working capital in the near future.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $26.3 million. Cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net income of $75.6 million, the add back of share-based compensation of $7.4 million, depreciation of $1.3 million, and the cash impact of timing differences in the settlement of assets and liabilities of $12.3 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by net securities purchased by the Diamond Hill International Fund and the Diamond Hill Large Cap Concentrated Fund (together, the "Consolidated Funds") of $50.4 million, net gains on investments of $10.9 million, and the adjustment to net income of $9.0 million for the gain on sale of the High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts. Absent the cash used in operations by the Consolidated Funds, cash flows provided by operations were $78.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $59.8 million. Cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net income of $38.2 million, the add back of share-based compensation of $7.7 million, depreciation of $1.0 million, net securities redeemed by the Consolidated Funds of $3.2 million, and the cash impact of timing differences in the settlement of assets and liabilities of $12.7 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by net gains on investments of $3.0 million. Absent the operating cash flows of the Consolidated Funds, cash flows from operations would have been approximately $57.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities totaled $57.0 million. Cash provided by operating activities was primarily driven by net income of $59.8 million, the add back of share-based compensation of $9.1 million, depreciation of $1.2 million, net securities redeemed by the Consolidated Funds of $6.3 million, and the cash impact of timing differences in the settlement of assets and liabilities of $1.7 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by net gains on investments of $21.1 million. Absent the operating cash flows of the Consolidated Funds, cash flow from operations would have been approximately $53.5 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The Company’s cash flows from investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures and purchases and redemptions in
our investment portfolio.
Cash flows provided by investing activities totaled $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash provided was primarily due to proceeds from investment redemptions totaling $40.8 million and $9.0 million of proceeds received from the sale of the High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts. These proceeds were partially offset by corporate investment purchases of $21.4 million and property and equipment purchases (primarily capitalized software) of $1.1 million.
Cash flows provided by investing activities totaled $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash provided was primarily due to proceeds from investment redemptions totaling $25.7 million. These proceeds were partially offset by corporate investment purchases of $14.9 million and property and equipment purchases (primarily capitalized software) of $2.5 million.
Cash flows provided by investing activities totaled $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash provided was primarily due to proceeds from investment redemptions totaling $48.6 million. These proceeds were partially offset by corporate investment purchases of $14.4 million and property and equipment purchases of $0.7 million. The remaining change in reported cash flows from investing activities was attributable to $22.7 million in net cash that was removed from the Company’s balance sheet due to the de-consolidation of our investment in an ETF during the period.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The Company’s cash flows from financing activities consist primarily of repurchases of its common stock, shares withheld related to employee tax withholding, dividends paid on its common stock, proceeds received under the Diamond Hill Investment Group, Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”), and distributions to, or contributions from, redeemable noncontrolling interest holders.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities totaled $71.5 million, consisting of the payment of dividends of $73.0 million, repurchases of the Company’s common stock of $7.8 million, and $1.6 million of shares withheld related to employee tax withholding. These cash outflows were partially offset by net subscriptions received in the Consolidated Funds from redeemable non-controlling interest holders of $10.3 million and proceeds received under the ESPP of $0.6 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities totaled $62.9 million, consisting of the payment of special dividends of $38.0 million, repurchases of our common stock of $18.7 million, $1.9 million of shares withheld related to employee tax withholding, and net redemptions in the Consolidated Funds from redeemable non-controlling interest holders of $4.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities totaled $59.1 million, consisting of the payment of special dividends of $30.3 million, repurchases of our common stock of $38.7 million, and $1.4 million of shares withheld related to employee tax withholding. These financing outflows were partially offset by net subscriptions received in the Consolidated Funds from redeemable non-controlling interest holders of $11.3 million.
Supplemental Consolidated Cash Flow Statement
The following table summarizes the condensed cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 that are attributable to the Company and to the Consolidated Funds, and the related eliminations required in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents a summary of the Company’s future obligations under the terms of lease commitments, contractual purchase obligations, and deferred compensation obligations as of December 31, 2021. Other purchase obligations include contractual amounts that will be due for the purchase of services to be used in the Company’s operations, such as mutual fund sub-administration, sales data costs, and investment related research software. These obligations may be cancellable at earlier times than those indicated and, under certain circumstances, may involve termination fees. Because these obligations are primarily of a normal recurring nature, the Company expects to fund them from future cash flows from operations. Deferred compensation obligations include compensation that will be paid out in future years and which will be funded by the related deferred compensation investments currently held on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets (see Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements). The information presented does not include operating expenses or capital expenditures that will be committed in the normal course of operations in 2022 and future years:
Use of Supplemental Data as Non-GAAP Performance Measures
As supplemental information, the Company is providing performance measures that are based on non-GAAP methodologies. The Company believes that the non-GAAP measures below are useful measures of its core business activities, are important metrics in estimating the value of an asset management business, and may enable more appropriate comparisons to its peers. These non-GAAP measures should not be used as a substitute for financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and may be calculated differently by other companies. The following schedule reconciles GAAP measures to non-GAAP measures for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
(1) Gains on deferred compensation plan investments, net: The gain on deferred compensation plan investments, which increases deferred compensation expense included in operating income, is removed from operating income in the calculation because it is offset by an equal amount in investment income below net operating income on the income statement, and thus has no impact on net income attributable to the Company.
(2) Net operating income, as adjusted: This non-GAAP measure represents the Company’s net operating income adjusted to exclude the impact on compensation expense of gains and losses on investments in the deferred compensation plan.
(3) Tax provision on net operating income, as adjusted: This non-GAAP measure represents the tax provision, excluding the impact of investment related activity, and the gain on sale of High Yield-Focused Advisory Contracts, and is calculated by applying the unconsolidated effective tax rate to net operating income, as adjusted.
(4) Net operating income, as adjusted, after tax: This non-GAAP measure deducts from the net operating income, as adjusted, the tax provision on net operating income, as adjusted.
(5) Net operating income, as adjusted after tax per diluted share: This non-GAAP measure was calculated by dividing the net operating income, as adjusted after tax, by diluted weighted average shares outstanding.
(6) Operating profit margin, as adjusted: This non-GAAP measure was calculated by dividing the net operating income, as adjusted, by total revenue.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements. The Company does not have any obligation under a guarantee contract, a retained or contingent interest in assets, or any similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity, or market risk support for such assets, or any other obligation, including a contingent obligation, under a contract that would be accounted for as a derivative instrument or arising out of a variable interest.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Consolidation. The Company consolidates all subsidiaries and certain investments in which the Company has a controlling interest. The Company is generally deemed to have a controlling interest when it owns the majority of the voting interest of a voting rights entity (“VRE”) or are deemed to be the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity (“VIE”). A VIE is an entity that lacks sufficient equity to finance its activities, or any entity whose equity holders do not have defined power to direct the activities of the entity normally associated with an equity investment. The Company’s analysis to determine whether an entity is a VIE or a VRE involves judgment and considers several factors, including an entity’s legal organization, equity structure, the rights of the investment holders, our ownership interest in the entity, and our contractual involvement with the entity. The Company continually reviews and reconsiders its VIE or VRE conclusions upon the occurrence of certain events, such as changes to its ownership interest, or amendments to contract documents.
Provisions for Income Taxes. The objectives of accounting for income taxes are to recognize the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in an entity’s financial statements or tax returns. Judgment is required in assessing the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns.
Revenue Recognition on Performance-Based Advisory Contracts. The Company has certain investment advisory contracts in which a portion of the fees are based on investment performance achieved in the respective client portfolio in excess of a specified hurdle rate. These fees are calculated based on client investment results over rolling five-year periods. The Company record performance-based fees at the end of the contract measurement period because the performance-based fees earned are constrained based on movements in the financial markets.
Revenue Recognition when Acting as an Agent vs. Principal. The Funds have selected and contractually engaged certain vendors to fulfill various services to benefit the Funds’ shareholders or to satisfy regulatory requirements of the Funds. These services include, among others, required fund shareholder mailings, registration services, and legal and audit services. DHCM, in fulfilling a portion of its role under the administration agreement with the Funds, acts as agent to pay these obligations of the Funds. Each vendor is independently responsible for fulfillment of the services it has been engaged to provide and negotiates fees and terms with the management and board of trustees of the Funds. The fee that the Funds pay to DHCM is reviewed annually by the Funds’ board of trustees and specifically considers the contractual expenses that DHCM pays on behalf of the Funds. As a result, DHCM is not involved in the delivery or pricing of these services and bears no risk related to these services. Revenue has been recorded net of these Fund expenses, as appropriate for this agency relationship.