Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain statements we make under this Item 7 constitute “Forward-Looking Statements” under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See also “Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements.”
You should keep in mind that any forward-looking statement made by us herein, or elsewhere, speaks only as of the date on which it is made. New risks and uncertainties come up from time to time, and it is impossible to predict these events or how they may affect us. We have no obligation to update any forward-looking statements after the date hereof, except as required by federal securities law.
Overview
We are a provider of software products, online tools and services that deliver career marketplaces to candidates and employers in the United States. DHI’s brands, Dice and ClearanceJobs, enable recruiters and hiring managers to efficiently search, match and connect with highly skilled technologists in specialized fields, particularly technology and active government security clearance. Professionals find ideal employment opportunities, relevant job advice and personalized data that help manage their technologists' lives.
In online recruitment, we specialize in employment categories in which there has been a long-term scarcity of highly skilled, highly qualified professionals relative to market demand, specifically technologists who work in a variety of industries or have active government security clearances. Our websites serve as online two-sided marketplaces where employers and recruiters source and connect with prospective employees, and where technologists find relevant job opportunities, data and information to further their careers. Our websites offer job postings, news and content, career development and recruiting services tailored to the specific needs of the professional community that each website serves.
Majority ownership and control of DHI's eFinancialCareers ("eFC") business, which provides career websites to the financial services industry and has operations in the United Kingdom, Continental Europe, Asia, the Middle East and North America, was transferred to eFC management on June 30, 2021. The Company retained a 40% common share interest. As a result, all ongoing DHI operations, which include the Dice and ClearanceJobs brands, are in the United States subsequent to June 30, 2021.
We have been in the recruiting and career development business for over 30 years. Based on our operating structure, we have identified one reportable segment, Tech-focused, which includes the Dice and ClearanceJobs businesses and corporate related costs. The Dice and ClearanceJobs businesses and corporate related costs are aggregated into the Tech-focused reportable segment primarily because the Company does not have discrete financial information for those brands or costs. As a result of the eFC separation, the eFC business was deconsolidated from the Company's consolidated financial statements as of June 30, 2021 and is reflected as a discontinued operation.
Our Revenues and Expenses
We derive the majority of our revenues from customers who pay fees, either annually, quarterly or monthly, to post jobs on our websites and to access our searchable databases of resumes. Our fees vary by customer based on the number of individual users of our databases of resumes, the number and type of job postings and profile views purchased and the terms of the packages purchased. Our Company sells recruitment packages that can include access to our databases of resumes and job posting capabilities. We believe the key metrics that are material to an analysis of our businesses are our total number of Dice and ClearanceJobs recruitment package customers and the revenue, on average, that these customers generate. The tables below detail this customer data.
Dice had 6,004 recruitment package customers as of December 31, 2021, which was an increase of 854, or 17%, year over year and average revenue per recruitment package customer for Dice increased for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increases were driven by strong renewal rates and new business activity. ClearanceJobs had 1,878 recruitment package customers as of December 31, 2021 compared to 1,718 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 9%, and average revenue per recruitment package customer increased. The increases for ClearanceJobs were due to continued high demand for professionals with government clearance and consistent product releases and enhancements driving activity on the site.
Deferred revenue, as shown on the consolidated balance sheets, reflects customer billings made in advance of services being rendered. Backlog consists of deferred revenue plus customer contractual commitments not invoiced representing the value of future services to be rendered under committed contracts. We believe backlog to be an important measure of our business as it represents our ability to generate future revenue. A summary of our deferred revenue and backlog is as follows:
Backlog at December 31, 2021 increased $28.2 million from December 31, 2020 due to the strong technology recruitment market driving bookings growth for both Dice and ClearanceJobs, investments in product, sales and marketing and a focus on signing multi-year contracts.
To a lesser extent, we also generate revenue from advertising on our various websites or from lead generation and marketing solutions provided to our customers. Advertisements include various forms of rich media and banner advertising, text links, sponsorships, and custom content marketing solutions. Lead generation information utilizes advertising and other methods to deliver leads to a customer.
The Company continues to evolve and develop new software products and features to attract and engage qualified professionals and match them with employers. Our ability to grow our revenues will largely depend on our ability to grow our customer bases in the markets in which we operate by acquiring new customers while retaining a high proportion of the customers we currently serve, and to expand the breadth of services our customers purchase from us. We continue to make investments in our business and infrastructure to help us achieve our long-term growth objectives, such as the innovative products in the table below.
Product Releases
2021 2020
Dice Marketplace, Dice TalentSearch Social Data Refresh, Brand.io, TalentSearch Personalization, Unbiased Sourcing Mode
Dice IntelliSearch-Based Job Alerts, Dice Private Email, Dice Remote Jobs, Dice Recruiter Profile, Dice Instant Messaging
ClearanceJobs Meetings, ClearanceJobs Video, Team Recruiting, Shared Talent Pipelines, Quality of Use Improvements
ClearanceJobs Client Team Dashboard, ClearanceJobs Workflow, ClearanceJobs Favorites, ClearanceJobs Self-Serve BrandAmp, ClearanceJobs Candidate Search and ClearanceJobs Broadcast Message upgrades
Other material factors that may affect our results of operations include our ability to attract qualified professionals that become engaged with our websites and our ability to attract customers with relevant job opportunities. The more qualified professionals that use our websites, the more attractive our websites become to employers and advertisers, which in turn makes them more likely to become our customers, positively impacting our results of operations. If we are unable to continue to attract qualified professionals to engage with our websites, our customers may no longer find our services attractive, which could have a negative impact on our results of operations. Additionally, we need to ensure that our websites remain relevant in order to attract qualified professionals to our websites and to engage them in high-value tasks, such as posting resumes and applying to jobs.
The largest components of our expenses are personnel costs and marketing and sales expenditures. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits, and incentive compensation for our employees, including commissions for salespeople. Personnel costs are categorized in our statement of operations based on each employee’s principal function. Marketing expenditures primarily consist of online advertising, brand promotion and lead generation to employers and job seekers.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates, including our critical accounting estimates, on an ongoing basis. We based our estimates of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable. In many cases, we could reasonably have used different accounting policies and estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting estimates affect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
We record goodwill when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired.
We determine whether the carrying value of recorded goodwill is impaired on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist. In testing goodwill for impairment, a qualitative assessment can be performed and if it is determined that the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not less than the carrying amount, the impairment review process compares the fair value of the reporting unit in which the goodwill resides to the carrying value of that reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, an impairment charge is recorded for the amount the carrying value exceeds the fair value. Our annual impairment test for goodwill is performed on October 1 of each year.
The annual impairment test for the Tech-focused reporting unit performed as of October 1, 2021 resulted in the fair value of the reporting unit being substantially in excess of the carrying value with fair value exceeding the carrying value by 100%. During the third quarter of 2020, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continued and the Company's projected earnings and cash flows for the Tech-focused reporting unit declined as compared to the projections used in the March 31, 2020 analysis. As a result, the Company performed an interim impairment analysis as of September 30, 2020, which resulted in the Company recording an impairment charge of $23.6 million during the three month period ended September 30, 2020.
Results for the Tech-focused reporting unit for the fourth quarter of 2021 and estimated future results as of December 31, 2021 have exceeded the projections used in the October 1, 2021 analysis. As a result, the Company believes it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value as of December 31, 2021. Therefore, no quantitative impairment test was performed as of December 31, 2021. No impairment was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019.
The amount of goodwill as of December 31, 2021 allocated to the Tech-focused reporting unit was $128.1 million. The discount rate applied for the Tech-focused reporting unit in the October 1, 2021 analysis was 11.5%. An increase to the discount rate applied or reductions to future projected operating results could result in future impairment of the Tech-focused reporting unit’s goodwill. It is reasonably possible that changes in judgments, assumptions and estimates the Company made in assessing the fair value of goodwill could cause the Company to consider some portion or all of the goodwill of the Tech-focused reporting unit to become impaired. In addition, a future decline in the overall market conditions, uncertainty related to COVID-19, political instability, and/or changes in the Company’s market share could negatively impact the estimated future cash flows and discount rates used to determine the fair value of the reporting unit and could result in an impairment charge in the foreseeable future.
The determination of whether or not goodwill has become impaired is judgmental in nature and requires the use of estimates and key assumptions, particularly assumed discount rates and projections of future operating results, such as forecasted revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization margins and capital expenditure requirements. Fair values are determined by using a combination of a discounted cash flow methodology and a market comparable method. The discounted cash flow methodology is based on projections of the amounts and timing of future revenues and cash flows, assumed discount rates and other assumptions as deemed appropriate. We consider factors such as historical performance, anticipated market conditions, operating expense trends and capital expenditure requirements. Additionally, the discounted cash flows analysis takes into consideration cash expenditures for product development, other technological updates and advancements to our websites and investments to improve our candidate databases. The market comparable method indicates the fair value of a business by comparing it to publicly traded companies in similar lines of business or to comparable transactions or assets. Considerations for factors such as size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment are analyzed and compared to the comparable businesses and adjustments are made. A market value of invested capital of the publicly traded companies is calculated and then applied to the entity’s operating results to arrive at an estimate of value. Changes in our strategy and/or market conditions could significantly impact these judgments and require adjustments to recorded amounts of goodwill.
Indefinite-Lived Acquired Intangible Assets
The indefinite-lived acquired intangible assets include the Dice trademarks and brand name. The Dice trademark, trade name and domain name is one of the most recognized names of online technology recruiting and career development. Since Dice’s inception in 1991, the brand has been recognized as a leader in recruiting and career development services for technology and engineering professionals. Currently, the brand is synonymous with the most specialized online marketplace for industry-specific technologists. The brand has a significant online and offline presence in online recruiting and career development services. Considering the recognition and the awareness of the Dice brand in the talent acquisition and staffing services market, Dice’s long operating history and the intended use of the Dice brand, the remaining useful life of the Dice trademark, trade name and domain name was determined to be indefinite.
We determine whether the carrying value of recorded indefinite-lived acquired intangible asset is impaired on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment exist. The impairment review process is performed on October 1 of each year and compares the fair value of the indefinite-lived acquired intangible asset to its carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recorded. The impairment test performed as of October 1, 2021 resulted in the fair value of the Dice trademarks and brand name exceeding the carrying value by 32%. During the first quarter of 2020, because of the initial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on future earnings and cash flows that are attributable to the Dice trademarks and brand name, the Company performed an interim impairment analysis. As a result of the analysis, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $7.2 million during the first quarter of 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continued and the Company's projected earnings and cash flows that are attributable to the Dice trademarks and brand name declined as compared to the projections used in the March 31, 2020 analysis. As a result, the Company performed an interim impairment analysis as of September 30, 2020, which resulted in the Company recording an additional impairment charge of $8.0 million during the three month period ended September 30, 2020.
Revenues attributable to the Dice trademarks and brand name for the fourth quarter of 2021 and estimated future results as of December 31, 2021 have exceeded the projections used in the October 1, 2021 analysis. As a result, the Company believes it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the Dice trademarks and brand name is less than the carrying value as of December 31, 2021. Therefore, no quantitative impairment test was performed as of December 31, 2021. No impairment was recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019.
The projections utilized in the October 1, 2021 analysis included increasing revenues at rates approximating industry growth projections. The Company’s ability to achieve these revenue projections may be impacted by, among other things, uncertainty related to COVID-19, competition in the technology recruiting market, challenges in developing and introducing new products and product enhancements to the market and the Company’s ability to attribute value delivered to customers. The October 1, 2021 analysis included operating margins during the year ending December 31, 2021 that approximate operating margins for the year ended December 31, 2020 and then increasing modestly. If future cash flows that are attributable to the Dice trademarks and brand name are not achieved, the Company could realize an impairment in a future period. The Company's operating results attributable to the Dice trademarks and brand name through December 31, 2021 and projections of future results have met or exceeded those included in the projections utilized in the October 1, 2021 analysis. In the October 1, 2021 analysis, the Company utilized a relief from royalty rate method to value the Dice trademarks and brand name using a royalty rate of 4.0% based on comparable industry studies and a discount rate of 12.5%.
The determination of whether or not indefinite-lived acquired intangible assets have become impaired involves a significant level of judgment in the assumptions underlying the approach used to determine the value of the indefinite-lived acquired intangible assets. Fair values are determined using a profit allocation methodology which estimates the value of the trademark and brand name by capitalizing the profits saved because the company owns the asset. We consider factors such as historical performance, anticipated market conditions, operating expense trends and capital expenditure requirements. Changes in our strategy, uncertainty related to COVID-19, and/or changes in market conditions could significantly impact these judgments and require adjustments to recorded amounts of intangible assets. If projections are not achieved, the Company could realize an impairment in the foreseeable future.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities at enacted statutory tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in applying tax laws and regulations in numerous jurisdictions. Tax benefits from uncertain tax positions are recognized when it is more likely than not that the positions will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution could result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the accrual for unrecognized tax benefits.
Cyclicality
The labor market and certain of the industries that we serve have historically experienced short-term cyclicality. However, we believe that online career websites continue to provide economic and strategic value to the labor market and industries that we serve.
Any slowdown in recruitment activity that occurs could negatively impact our revenues and results of operations. Alternatively, a decrease in the unemployment rate or a labor shortage, including as a result of an increase in job turnover, generally means that employers (including our customers) are seeking to hire more individuals, which would generally lead to more job postings and increases in demand for access to our candidate profiles, which have a positive impact on our revenues and results of operations. Based on historical trends, improvements in labor markets and the need for our services generally lag behind overall economic improvements. Additionally, there has historically been a lag from the time customers begin to increase purchases of our recruitment services and the impact to our revenues due to the recognition of revenue occurring over the length of the contract, which can be several months to over a year.
From time to time, we see market slowdowns, which can lead to lower demand for recruiting technology and security cleared professionals. If recruitment activity slows in the industries in which we operate during 2022 and beyond, our revenues and results of operations could be negatively impacted.
Results of Operations
Our historical financial information discussed in this Annual Report has been derived from the Company’s financial statements and accounting records for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Consolidated operating results in dollars and as a percent of revenue follows:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
We experienced an increase in revenue of $8.7 million, or 7.9%. Revenue at Dice increased by $4.1 million, or 4.9%, compared to the same period of 2020 due to improvements in renewal rates and new business activity along with consistently increasing customer counts during 2021, which drives additional revenue in future periods. Revenues for ClearanceJobs increased by $4.7 million, or 16.1%, as compared to the same period of 2020, driven by continued high demand for professionals with government clearance and consistent product releases and enhancements driving activity on the site.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $0.8 million, or 5.6%, driven by an increase of $0.4 million associated with web hosting and cloud computing, consistent with the Company's investment in its products and tools to enhance sales processes. The Company also experienced $0.4 million increase in headcount related costs.
Product Development Expenses
Product development expenses increased $1.1 million, or 7.6%, Within product development, the Company experienced a decrease in capitalized labor of $0.7 million, which increased expense, along with an increase in consulting costs of $0.3 million.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $4.0 million, or 10.1%, from the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by $2.4 million increase in compensation related costs due to increased headcount and higher quota attainment versus sales plan, and a $1.5 million increase in discretionary marketing expenses as customer recruitment activity rebounded.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative costs increased $2.0 million or 7.4%, primarily due to an increase in compensation related costs of $2.9 million with business performance driving achievement for the bonus and stock-based compensation plans. This was partially offset by lower bad debt expense of $0.7 million.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense increased $6.1 million or 59.3% from the same period in 2020, in connection with increasing internal development costs during 2019 and 2020 that were then placed in service, primarily in late 2020, and depreciated. Internal development costs are reflected as purchases of fixed assets in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Impairment of Intangible Assets
The Company has an indefinite-lived acquired intangible asset related to the Dice trademarks and brand name. During the first and third quarters of 2020, because of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company performed an interim impairment analysis of the Dice trademarks and brand name. As a result of the analysis, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $15.2 million during the nine months ended September 30, 2020. See also Note 10 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Goodwill
During the third quarter of 2020, because of the impacts of COVID-19 pandemic, the Company performed an interim impairment analysis of goodwill. As a result of the analysis, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $22.6 million in the third quarter of 2020. See also Note 11 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of right-of-use asset
During the third quarter of 2021, due to the continuing impacts of COVID-19 on the real estate markets and its impact on the future cash flows attributable to its ROU assets, the Company performed an impairment analysis of a sublease within its ROU assets. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $1.9 million during the third quarter of 2021.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.8 million, a negative margin of 1.5%, compared to operating loss of $32.4 million, a negative margin of 29.1%, for the same period in 2020. The decrease in operating loss and improved percentage margin was primarily driven by non-cash impairments of goodwill and intangible assets of $37.8 million during the 2020 period, partially offset by increased investments in sales and marketing, higher depreciation, and the ROU asset impairment of $1.9 million in the third quarter of 2021.
Income from equity method investment
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recorded $0.2 million of income related to its proportionate share of eFinancialCareer's ("eFC") net income.
Interest Expense and Other
Interest expense and other decreased by $0.2 million, or 19.7%, from the same period in 2020. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower weighted average debt outstanding during the year. The 2020 period included a $0.2 million gain recognized in the second quarter of 2020 on the sale of the Company's 20% interest in BioSpace.
Impairment of investment
During the first quarter of 2020, due to the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company determined the value of its 7.6% interest in a leading tech skills assessment company to be zero. Accordingly, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $2.0 million during the first quarter of 2020.
Gain on investment
The gain on investment relates to a minority interest representing less than 1% of the common stock of a technology company that became publicly traded during the first quarter of 2021 after filing an initial public offering. The Company sold 100% of this investment during the third quarter of 2021. See also Note 8 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
A reconciliation between the income tax benefit at the federal statutory rate and the reported income tax benefit is summarized as follows:
Our effective income tax rate was 61.0% and 8.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The 2021 tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate primarily because of the utilization of a capital loss carryforward to offset a gain on an investment; deduction limitations on executive compensation; and tax credits for research and development. The 2020 tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate primarily because of tax deficiencies in stock-based compensation; nondeductible impairment charges; state tax benefits; and tax credits for research and development.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
During the second quarter of 2021, the Company transferred majority ownership of its eFC business to eFC management and has recorded it as a discontinued operation. As a result, the Company experienced a loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, of $29.3 million. The loss was comprised of $28.1 million related to the reclassification of currency translation adjustments
and $5.2 million from the removal of eFC's net assets. The loss was partially offset by the recording of an equity method investment of $3.6 million and eFC's earnings during the period. Income from discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents eFC's earnings during the period.
Earnings per Share
Diluted loss per share from continuing operations was $0.01 and $0.67 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in diluted loss per share was primarily driven by the non-cash impairment charges during 2020 and the gain on investment in the 2021 period, partially offset by the ROU asset impairment and higher depreciation expense in the 2021 period. Diluted loss per share was $0.64 and $0.62 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Current year to date loss per share is primarily driven by the loss on discontinued operations. The prior year loss per share is primarily driven by the impairment charges.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
We experienced a decrease in revenue of $6.1 million, or 5.2%. Revenue at Dice decreased by $10.3 million, or 11.2%, compared to the same period in 2019 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic driving lower renewal rates year over year. Revenues for ClearanceJobs increased by $4.2 million, or 17.1%, as compared to the same period of 2019, driven by continued high demand for professionals with government clearance and consistent product releases and enhancements driving activity on the site.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $0.8 million, or 5.6%, primarily driven by an increase in compensation related costs of $1.8 million, partially offset by higher capitalization of internal development costs of $1.0 million, which decreased operating expense. Together, this increased expense $0.8 million.
Product Development Expenses
Product development expenses increased $0.2 million or 1.3%, driven by increases in compensation related costs from higher wages. This was partially offset by higher capitalization of internal development costs, which decrease operating expense. Together, this increased expense $0.8 million. The higher capitalization of internal development costs resulted from the Company's continued focus on the design and development of product enhancements and features for the Company's sites. These increases were offset by a decrease in travel, software subscriptions, and other costs due to COVID-19 of $0.6 million.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $3.0 million, or 7.0%, from the same period in 2019. Sales and marketing had an increase in compensation related costs of $4.7 million. This increase was offset by $5.6 million in reduced discretionary marketing expenses realized from efficiencies in vendor selection and volumes and $2.1 million reduction in other operational costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including consulting and traveling costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative costs increased $0.8 million or 3.1%, primarily due to an increase in compensation costs of $1.0 million and non-cash stock based compensation costs of $0.6 million, partially offset by a decrease in other operational costs of $0.8 million, including recruiting, consulting, and travel costs.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense increased $1.8 million or 21.7%, from the same period in 2019, in connection with higher headcount driving higher capitalization of internal development costs, which are reflected as purchases of fixed assets in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Impairment of intangible assets
The Company has an indefinite-lived acquired intangible asset related to the Dice trademarks and brand name. During the first and third quarters of 2020, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company performed interim impairment analyses of the Dice trademarks and brand name. As a result of the analyses, the Company recorded impairment charges totaling $15.2 million during the three month periods ended March 31, 2020 and September 30, 2020. See also Note 10 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of goodwill
During the first and third quarters of 2020, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company performed interim impairment analyses of goodwill. As a result of the analyses, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $22.6 million during the three months ended September 30, 2020. See also Note 11 of the notes to consolidated financial statements.
Disposition Related and Other Costs
The disposition related and other costs of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as described in note 16 to consolidated financial statements, are primarily due to severance and related costs incurred in reorganizing the Tech-focused business.
Loss on sale of business
Loss on sale of business for the year ended December 31, 2019 included a loss of $0.5 million on the 2018 sale of Hcareers due to the finalization of the working capital terms and related contingencies. See also note 6 to consolidated financial statements.
Operating Income (Loss)
Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.4 million, a negative margin of 29.1%, as compared to operating income of $10.1 million, a positive margin of 8.6%, for the same period in 2019. The decrease in operating income and percentage margin was primarily driven by the non-cash impairments of goodwill and intangible assets of $37.8 million in the 2020 period, partially offset by the decrease in disposition and related costs of $1.4 million in the 2019 period.
Interest Expense and Other
Interest expense increased by $0.1 million, or 18.2%, from the same period in 2019. Interest expense increased $0.3 million, primarily due to the higher weighted-average debt outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020 as the Company borrowed on its revolving credit facility in the first quarter of 2020 for liquidity protection during the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in interest expense was partially offset by a $0.2 million gain recognized in the second quarter of 2020 on the sale of the Company's 20% interest in BioSpace.
Impairment of Investment
During the first quarter of 2020, due to the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company determined the value of its 7.6% interest in a leading tech skills assessment company to be zero. Accordingly, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $2.0 million during the first quarter of 2020.
Income Taxes
A reconciliation between tax expense (benefit) at the federal statutory rate and the reported income tax expense (benefit) is summarized as follows:
Our effective income tax rate was 8.0% and 29.6% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The 2020 tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate primarily because of tax deficiencies in stock-based compensation; nondeductible impairment charges; state tax benefits; and tax credits for research and development. The 2019 tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate primarily because of tax deficiencies in stock-based compensation; state tax expense; and tax credits for research and development.
Earnings (Loss) per Share
Diluted earnings (loss) per share from continuing operations was $(0.67) and $0.13 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively and diluted earnings (loss) per share was $(0.62) and $0.24 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The loss per share for the 2020 period was primarily driven by the non-cash impairment charges.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We have provided certain non-GAAP financial information as additional measures for our operating results. These measures are not in accordance with, or an alternative for, measures in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures reported by other companies. We believe the presentation of non-GAAP measures, such as Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin, provides useful information to management and investors regarding certain financial and business trends relating to our financial condition and results of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are non-GAAP metrics used by management to measure operating performance. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA as a performance measure for internal monitoring and planning, including preparation of annual budgets, analyzing investment decisions and evaluating profitability and performance comparisons between us and our competitors. The Company also uses this measure to calculate amounts of performance based compensation under the senior management incentive bonus program. Adjusted EBITDA represents net income plus (to the extent deducted in calculating such net income) interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, non-cash stock based compensation, losses resulting from certain dispositions outside the ordinary course of business, certain writeoffs in connection with indebtedness, impairment charges with respect to long-lived assets, expenses incurred in connection with an equity offering or any other offering of securities by the Company, extraordinary or non-recurring non-cash expenses or losses, losses from equity method investments, transaction costs in connection with the credit agreement, deferred revenues written off in connection with acquisition purchase accounting adjustments, severance and retention costs related to dispositions and reorganizations of the Company, and losses related to legal claims and fees that are unusual in nature or infrequent, minus (to the extent included in calculating such net income) non-cash income or gains, including income from equity method investments, interest income, business interruption insurance proceeds, and any income or gain resulting from certain dispositions outside the ordinary course of business, and gains related to legal claims that are unusual in nature or infrequent.
We also consider Adjusted EBITDA, as defined above, to be an important indicator to investors because it provides information related to our ability to provide cash flows to meet future debt service, capital expenditures and working capital requirements and to fund future growth. We present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental performance measure because we believe that this
measure provides our Board, management and investors with additional information to measure our performance, provide comparisons from period to period and company to company by excluding potential differences caused by variations in capital structures (affecting interest expense) and tax positions (such as the impact on periods or companies of changes in effective tax rates or net operating losses), and to estimate our value.
We understand that although Adjusted EBITDA is frequently used by securities analysts, lenders and others in their evaluation of companies, Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our liquidity or results as reported under GAAP. Some limitations are:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized often will have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
•Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
To compensate for these limitations, management evaluates our liquidity by considering the economic effect of excluded expense items independently, as well as in connection with its analysis of cash flows from operations and through the use of other financial measures, such as capital expenditure budget variances, investment spending levels and return on capital analysis.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is computed as Adjusted EBITDA divided by Revenues. Prior to 2019, Adjusted EBITDA was divided by Adjusted Revenues, which represented Revenues less revenues of divested businesses. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, revenues of divested businesses was zero. Accordingly, Adjusted Revenues is no longer used in the computation. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to revenue, net income, operating income, cash provided by operating activities, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as a measure of our profitability or liquidity.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 follows (in thousands):
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 follows (in thousands, except percentages):
Cash Flows
We have summarized our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 as follows (in thousands):
We have financed our operations primarily through cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1.5 million compared to $4.5 million at December 31, 2020.
Liquidity
Our principal internal sources of liquidity are cash on hand, as well as the cash flow that we generate from our operations. In addition, we had $67.0 million in borrowing capacity under our $90.0 million Credit Agreement at December 31, 2021, subject to certain availability limits including our consolidated leverage ratio, which generally limits borrowings to 2.5 times annual adjusted EBITDA levels, as defined in the Credit Agreement. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations and available borrowings under our Credit Agreement will be sufficient to satisfy our currently anticipated cash requirements through at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future thereafter. However, it is possible that one or more lenders under the revolving credit facility may refuse or be unable to satisfy their commitment to lend to us or we may need to refinance our debt and be unable to do so. In addition, our liquidity could be negatively affected by a decrease in demand for our products and services. We may also make acquisitions and may need to raise additional capital through future debt financings or equity offerings to the extent necessary to fund such acquisitions, which we may not be able to do on a timely basis or on terms satisfactory to us or at all.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash flows from operating activities primarily consists of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, stock based compensation, impairments, and the effect of changes in working capital. Net cash flows from operating activities were $28.6 million and $18.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $9.9 million. Cash inflow from operations is driven by earnings and is dependent on the amount and timing of billings and cash collection from our customers. Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased primarily due to strong billings to and collections from customers.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $19.3 million compared to $15.9 million of cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased from the comparable 2020 period due to cash transferred to the eFC business and cash paid for investment, partially offset by lower internal development costs, primarily driven by lower headcount and development activities dedicated to the transfer of the eFC business, partially offset by higher proceeds from sale of investments.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $15.4 million primarily due to $3.0 million of net borrowings on long-term debt and $18.4 million of repurchases of common stock. Cash used during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.5 million primarily due to $10.0 million of net borrowings on long-term debt and $10.5 million of repurchases of common stock.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
Net cash flows from operating activities primarily consist of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, stock based compensation, impairments, and the effect of changes in
working capital. Net cash flows from operating activities were $18.7 million and $22.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, a decrease of $4.2 million. Cash inflow from operations is driven by earnings and is dependent on the amount and timing of billings and cash collection from our customers. Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased primarily due to lower billings to customers resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by cost savings implemented by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $15.9 million compared to $11.5 million of cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 increased from the comparable 2019 period due to higher capitalization of internally developed software of $1.9 million and $2.5 million lower receipts from the sale of businesses and equity investments.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.5 million primarily due to $10.0 million of net borrowings on long-term debt and $10.5 million of repurchases of common stock. Cash used during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $12.4 million primarily due to $8.0 million of net repayments on long-term debt and $4.4 million of repurchases of common stock.
Financings and Capital Requirements
Credit Agreement
We have a $90 million revolving credit facility, which matures November 2023, with $23 million of borrowings on the facility at December 31, 2021, leaving $67 million available for future borrowings. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest, payable at least quarterly, at the Company’s option, at a London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") rate or a base rate, plus a margin. Assuming an interest rate of 1.88% (the rate in effect on December 31, 2021) on our current borrowings, interest payments are expected to be $0.4 million per year in 2022-2023. The Credit Agreement contains various customary affirmative and negative covenants and also contains certain financial covenants, including a consolidated leverage ratio and a consolidated interest coverage ratio. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all of the financial covenants under the Credit Agreement. Refer to Note 12 in the notes to consolidated financial statements and