Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A. Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to the “Company,” “DICE,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to DICE Therapeutics, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company leveraging our proprietary technology platform to build a pipeline of novel oral therapeutic candidates to treat chronic diseases in immunology and other therapeutic areas. We are initially focused on developing oral therapeutics against well-validated targets in immunology, with the goal of achieving comparable potency to their systemic biologic counterparts, which have demonstrated the greatest therapeutic benefit to date in these disease areas. Our platform, which we refer to as DELSCAPE, is designed to discover selective oral small molecules with the potential to modulate protein-protein interactions (PPIs) as effectively as systemic biologics. We believe there is a significant unmet medical need for convenient oral therapies in chronic immunological diseases that offer the therapeutic benefits of systemic biologics.
Our lead therapeutic candidate, DC-806, is an oral antagonist of the pro-inflammatory signaling molecule, interleukin-17 (IL-17), which is a validated drug target implicated in a variety of immunology indications. There are two approved antibody therapeutics, COSENTYX (secukinumab), marketed by Novartis, and TALTZ (ixekizumab), marketed by Eli Lilly, but no oral therapies targeting this pathway. COSENTYX and TALTZ both are approved for the treatment of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and nonradiographic axial spondyloarthritis, and collectively generated approximately $6.9 billion in worldwide sales in 2021. The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the United Kingdom approved our Clinical Trial Application (CTA) for DC-806 in September 2021 and we are currently conducting a Phase 1 clinical trial in healthy volunteers and psoriasis patients.
We also are developing oral therapeutic candidates targeting α4ß7 integrin and αVß1/αVß6 integrin for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), respectively. We plan to nominate therapeutic candidates for these programs by the end of 2022, in the case of α4ß7, and by the end of 2023, in the case of αVß1/αVß6. Additionally, we will regain worldwide rights by July 2022 to a previously partnered oral immuno-oncology program, small-molecule PD-L1 inhibitors discovered using our DELSCAPE platform. Leveraging DELSCAPE, we are also evaluating other novel and validated immunology targets, including interleukin-23 (IL-23), tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), and thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), among other potential targets, with a view toward advancing one or more programs into clinical development.
Currently, all of our preclinical and clinical drug manufacturing, storage, distribution or quality testing is outsourced to third-party manufacturers. As our development programs progress and we build new process efficiencies, we expect to continually evaluate this strategy with the objective of satisfying demand for registration trials and, if approved, the manufacture, sale and distribution of commercial products.
On September 17, 2021, we closed our initial public offering (the “IPO”) in which we sold an aggregate of 13,800,000 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $17.00 per share, which included 1,800,000 shares issued upon the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock. We received aggregate net proceeds from the IPO of approximately $214.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering costs.
Our revenue to date has been generated solely from research collaborations and activities. We have not had any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Further, we do not expect to generate revenue from product sales until such time, if ever, that we are able to successfully complete the development and obtain marketing approval for one of our therapeutic candidates. We have incurred net losses in each year since inception except for the year ended December 31, 2016 and expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our therapeutic candidates. Our net losses were $49.0 million and $23.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $103.7 million. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing and expenditures of our research and development activities.
Business Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve. As a result of this pandemic, we have experienced, and may further experience, disruptions, pauses and/or delays that have and could further adversely impact our business operations, and/or associated timelines. As we gradually return to work in accordance with state and local regulations, we maintain temporary work-from-home procedures for all employees other than for those personnel and contractors who perform essential activities that must be completed on-site. If negative developments relating to the pandemic continue or worsen, we may be required to restrict on-site staff at our offices and laboratories again. With respect to the development of our IL-17 franchise, other research programs in our pipeline and certain aspects of our supply chain, we may experience disruption if our third-party suppliers and manufacturers pause their operations again in response to such negative developments and/or as a result of national and local regulations. We will continue to monitor the situation closely and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. At this point, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect our business, operations and development timelines and plans, in particular as our therapeutic candidates enter the clinic, remains uncertain and is subject to change.
Collaboration Agreements
Sanofi
In December 2015, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Sanofi, which was amended and restated in August 2017 (as amended, the Sanofi Agreement), under which we agreed to grant Sanofi an exclusive option to license to develop and commercialize (as applicable), certain compounds into products.
Upon the signing of the Sanofi Agreement in December 2015, Sanofi paid us an initial fee of $8.0 million for target exclusivity rights and an additional $1.0 million annual technology access and development fees. In December 2016, Sanofi paid us an additional $9.0 million fee for the same services. In connection with the right to earn Sum of Evidence (SOE) points under the Sanofi Agreement, we recognized $2.0 million in revenue in 2018, when SOE points were earned.
In March 2022, Sanofi notified the Company that it no longer intended to develop therapeutic candidates under the Sanofi Agreement and terminated the agreement. As a result, we will regain worldwide rights to the program. We do not expect to recognize any further revenue from this arrangement.
Genentech
In November 2017, we entered into a collaboration agreement (Genentech Agreement) with Genentech, Inc. In June 2021, the collaboration research program was terminated.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to do so in the near future. Our revenue to date has been primarily related to fees received by us under our research and development drug discovery collaboration arrangements with Sanofi and Genentech. We recognize revenue related to our collaboration arrangements as the specified research services are performed and the results of the research and development services are provided to the customer. Revenue is recognized when the customer obtains control of promised goods or services. In addition to receiving the collaboration arrangement fees, we may also be entitled to development and regulatory milestone payments upon the continued development of therapeutic candidates, and other future payments from royalties after commercialization of therapeutic candidates from such programs.
In connection with the collaboration agreement with Sanofi, we earned Sum of the Evidence (SOE) points and recognized $2.0 million in revenue in 2018. In March 2022, the collaboration agreement with Sanofi was terminated.
In connection with the Genentech Agreement, we had a deferred revenue balance of $1.1 million as of December 31, 2020, which was recognized as revenue in 2021. In June 2021, the Genentech Agreement was terminated and we recognized the remaining $1.1 million of deferred revenue as collaboration revenue in the second quarter of 2021.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We record research and development expenses as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of direct and indirect costs incurred for the discovery and development of our therapeutic candidates.
Our direct costs include:
•
expenses incurred under agreements with third-party contract organizations, preclinical and clinical testing organizations, and consultants;
•
costs related to production of clinical materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•
laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
costs related to the preparation of regulatory submissions; and
•
third-party license fees.
Our indirect costs include:
•
personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation for personnel engaged in research and development functions; and
•
facilities and other expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense, and other supplies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators, and third-party service providers.
A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external costs, which we track by stage of development, preclinical or clinical. However, we do not track our indirect costs on a program specific basis because these costs are deployed across multiple projects and, as such, are not separately classified. Since our IL-17 program has completed IND-enabling studies and has entered into Phase 1 clinical trials, we have separately presented the external costs associated with that program.
We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in absolute dollars in future periods as we continue to invest in research and development activities related to developing our therapeutic candidates, as our therapeutic candidates advance into later stages of development, as we begin to conduct larger clinical trials, as we seek regulatory approvals for any therapeutic candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, and as we incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including share-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, legal, finance and accounting, human resources, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, consulting, and tax services, insurance costs, information technology costs, general corporate expenses, and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our programs. We also anticipate that we will incur increased expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of any national securities exchange on which our securities are traded, legal, auditing, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services. As a result, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially in absolute dollars in future periods.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities during the period.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
In connection with the issuance of our Series B Convertible Preferred Stock in 2018, we issued a warrant to purchase our Series B Convertible Preferred Stock. In April 2021, in connection with the SVB Loan and Security Agreement, we issued a warrant to purchase Common Stock. We classified these warrants as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets and we re-measured the warrants to fair value at each reporting date through the settlement date. The corresponding change in fair value of the warrant liability was recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. Upon the closing of the IPO, our Series B Convertible Preferred Stock warrant was automatically converted into warrants to purchase common stock. All of our outstanding warrants were net exercised in September 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
*Not meaningful
Revenue
Collaboration revenue of $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of deferred revenue under the Genentech Agreement, which was recognized upon termination of the agreement in June 2021. Collaboration revenue of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to research services performed under the Sanofi Agreement. The services provided by us under the Sanofi Agreement were completed in December 2020. We do not expect to recognize any further revenue related to the Sanofi Agreement.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods indicated:
Research and development expenses were $36.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $16.9 million was primarily due to an increase of $9.6 million related to the preclinical advancement of our IL-17 franchise and an increase in research and
development expenses of $2.5 million related to our other preclinical programs. Personnel-related expenses increased by $4.9 million due to an increase in headcount and stock-based compensation.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $7.2 million was primarily due to a $4.0 million increase in personnel costs related to increased headcount and stock-based compensation. Professional service fees and other costs increased by $3.2 million primarily due to the additional expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.3 million, compared to $0.1 million for year ended December 31, 2020. Upon the closing of the IPO, our Series B Convertible Preferred Stock warrant was automatically converted into warrants to purchase common stock. All of our outstanding common stock warrants were net exercised in September 2021. The warrants were remeasured as of the settlement date using the fair value of common stock issued in the net settlement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception through December 31, 2021, our operations have been financed primarily by sales of our convertible preferred stock and common stock, and issuance of debt. In September 2021, we completed our IPO for aggregate proceeds of approximately $214.7 million (inclusive of the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares), net of offering costs, underwriter discounts and commissions. As of December 31, 2021, we had $319.3 million of cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities and an accumulated deficit of $103.7 million.
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Debt
On April 13, 2021, we entered into a senior secured term loan facility (the SVB Loan and Security Agreement) with Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), which provides for a $10.0 million term loan of which we advanced $2.5 million, with an option to borrow up to $7.5 million in additional term loans, subject to our achieving certain development milestones related to our IL-17 program (the SVB Term Loan). The SVB Term Loan matures on February 1, 2025. Monthly payments of interest only are due through June 1, 2022, with 32 equal monthly payments of principal and interest due thereafter. The SVB Term Loan bears interest at a floating rate equal to the greater of (i) the Wall Street Journal Prime Rate plus 1.75% and (ii) 5.0% per annum.
The SVB Term Loan calls for a final payment equal to 5.75% of the original principal amount, due upon the earlier of maturity, prepayment or acceleration of the principal due to an event of default. We may, at our option, prepay the SVB Term Loan in full at any time prior to maturity, subject to a prepayment fee ranging between 1% and 2% of the outstanding principal amount of the SVB Term Loan. The prepayment fee would also be due and payable in the event of an acceleration of the principal amount of the loan due to an event of default. The SVB Term Loan is secured by substantially all of our assets, subject to certain exceptions. The SVB Loan and Security Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, and affirmative covenants and also contains certain restrictive covenants.
Leases
We currently lease office space in South San Francisco under a lease that expires in April 2022. As of December 31, 2021, future minimum rental payments of $0.5 million remain on the lease.
In June 2021, we signed an agreement to lease approximately 33,000 square feet in South San Francisco with an initial annual base rent of approximately $2.4 million over a 7-year term. The target commencement date for the new lease is March 2022. This new lease will serve as the location of our new headquarters when the lease for our current headquarters location expires. As of December 31, 2021, future minimum rental payments of $19.9 million remain on the lease.
Future Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $319.3 million, which are available to fund operations. Based on our current business plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, will be sufficient to fund our planned operations through mid-2024. However, we will require additional funding in order to complete development of our product candidates and commercialize our products, if approved. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other marketing and distribution arrangements. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our preclinical studies and clinical trials, research and development programs or commercialization efforts. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates and the extent to which we may enter into additional collaborations with third parties to participate in their development and commercialization, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated preclinical studies and clinical trials. To the extent that we raise additional capital through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity or convertible debt offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Please see the section entitled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements and the challenges we may face in raising capital.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $39.3 million. The net cash outflow from operations primarily resulted from our net loss of $49.0 million, partially offset by change in net operating assets and liabilities of $1.6 million and non-cash charges consisting primarily of $0.7 million for depreciation and amortization, $5.6 million in stock-based compensation, $1.3 million in the change in fair value of warrant liability and $0.4 million of net accretion and amortization of marketable securities. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $5.6 million increase in accrued liabilities, mainly due to timing of payments, partially offset by a $2.1 million increase in prepaid expenses, a $0.8 million decrease in accounts payable and a $1.1 million decrease in deferred revenue recognized in the period.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $20.7 million. The net cash outflow from operations primarily resulted from our net loss of $23.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $1.4 million and the change in net operating assets and liabilities of $1.7 million. The non-cash charges consisted primarily of $0.7 million for depreciation and amortization, $0.6 million in share-based compensation and $0.1 million in the change in fair value of warrant liability. The change in net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $1.4 million increase in accounts payable resulting from our business growth and from the issuance costs in connection with our December 2021 Series C financing, a $1.0 million increase in accrued liabilities primarily due to an increase in the research and development expenses for IL-17, and a $0.1 million decrease in prepaid and other current assets, partially offset by a $0.9 million decrease in deferred revenue due to revenue recognition.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31 2021, cash used in investing activities was $204.6 million due to the purchase of marketable securities and property and equipment of $218.5 million and $0.7 million, respectively, partially offset by the proceeds from the maturity of marketable securities of $14.6 million.
For the year ended December 31 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $18.0 million due to the maturity and sales of marketable securities of $17.4 million and $4.4 million, respectively, partially offset by the purchase of property and equipment and purchases of marketable securities of $3.6 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $300.3 million due to the net proceeds of $214.7 million from the issuance of our common stock in our IPO, net of issuance costs paid to date, the net proceeds of $83.3 million from the issuance of our Series C and Series C-1 convertible preferred units and the net proceeds of $2.4 million from debt financing.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $53.9 million due to gross proceeds of $54.3 million from the issuance of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock, partially offset by payments on tax distributions and capital lease obligations of $0.3 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We
believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Research and Development Expenses and Accrued Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and consist primarily of new product development. Research and development costs include salaries and benefits, consultants’ fees, process development costs, share-based compensation, laboratory supplies, preparation of regulatory submission expenses, and allocated facilities related expenses as well as fees paid to third parties that conduct certain preclinical research and development activities on our behalf.
A substantial portion of our ongoing research and development activities are conducted by third-party service providers. We estimate these expenses based on discussions with internal management personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced, and includes these costs in research and development expenses. These costs are accrued based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with its third-party service providers under the service agreements. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued liabilities. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods.
Share-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation is measured at the date of grant, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and recognized as an expense over the employee’s requisite service period (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. We estimate the grant date fair value of the PI Units and stock options, and the resulting share-based compensation, using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires several variables and assumptions in estimating the fair value of each profit interest unit that requires judgment, for which changes if they occur, can materially affect the resulting estimates of fair value. These assumptions include:
Fair Value of Common Units- Historically, for all periods prior to the IPO in September 2021, the grant-date fair market value of common units underlying unit options had historically been determined by our Board of Managers with assistance of third-party valuation specialists. Because there had been no public market for our common units, the Board of Managers exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair market value, which include important developments in our operations, the prices at which we sold units of our convertible preferred units, the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred units relative to those of our common units, actual operating results, financial performance, external market conditions in the life sciences industry, general U.S. market conditions, equity market conditions of comparable public companies, and the lack of marketability of our common units.
Fair Value of Common Stock- After the completion of the IPO, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant on the Nasdaq Global Market.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that share-based awards are expected to be outstanding. Prior to the IPO, our profit interest units did not have a contractual term. However, there was a constructive maturity of the profit interest units based on our expected exit or liquidity scenarios. After the completion of the IPO, our historical stock option exercise information was limited due to a lack of sufficient data points, and did not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term. The expected term for option grants is therefore determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term).
Expected Volatility-Prior to the IPO, we had limited information on the volatility of profit interest units as the units were not actively traded on any public markets. The expected volatility was derived from the historical unit volatilities of comparable peer public companies within our industry. After the completion of the IPO, because we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded life science companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on the similar size, stage in the life cycle, or area of specialty. We expect to continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available and to align with our expected term.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the measurement date with maturities approximately equal to the expected term.
Expected Dividend Rate-The expected dividend rate is zero.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to get comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We are also a ‘‘smaller reporting company,’’ meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during our most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company for so long as (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates as of the end of the second quarter is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during our most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million.
If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an EGC, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to EGCs, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.