Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on December 29, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Our sponsor is Disruptive Acquisition Sponsor I, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on March 23, 2021. On March 26, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 25,000,000 units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000 and incurring offering costs of approximately $14,750,000, inclusive of $8,750,000 in a deferred underwriting discount. Substantially concurrently with the closing of our initial public offering, we completed the private sale of 4,666,667 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,000,000. On May 5, 2021, the underwriters purchased an additional 2,500,000 units pursuant to the partial exercise of their overallotment option. The units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per unit, generating additional gross proceeds of $25,000,000. In connection with the partial exercise of the overallotment option, our sponsor purchased an additional 333,333 private placement warrants at $1.50, which generated an additional $500,000 in gross proceeds.
Following our initial public offering, the partial exercise of the overallotment option and the related sales of the private placement warrants described above, a total of $275,000,000 was placed in the trust account and was invested in permitted U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. In total, we incurred $15,712,871 in transaction costs, including $5,500,000 of an underwriting discount, $9,625,000 of a deferred underwriting discount and $587,871 of other offering costs.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds from our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
We will only have until March 26, 2023, i.e., 24 months from the closing of our initial public offering (as such period may be extended pursuant to a shareholder vote) to complete our initial business combination. If we have not completed our initial business combination within this time frame, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the public shares at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we do not complete our initial business combination within the allotted period.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the trust account of $213,495 available for working capital needs. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination. All remaining cash held in the trust account is generally unavailable for its use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem ordinary shares. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount in the trust account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Through December 31, 2021, our liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares and the remaining net proceeds from our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants.
On November 15, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note in the amount of up to $250,000 to an affiliate of our sponsor. The proceeds of the note, which may be drawn down from time to time until we consummate our initial business combination, will be used for general working capital purposes. The note bears no interest and is payable in full upon the earlier to occur of (i) twenty-four (24) months from the closing of our initial public offering (or such later date as may be extended in accordance with the terms of our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association) or (ii) the consummation of our initial business combination. A failure to pay the principal within five business days of the date specified above or the commencement of a voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy action shall be deemed an event of default, in which case the note may be accelerated. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding under the note. On April 12, 2022, we amended and restated the note in its entirety to increase the note’s principal amount to $500,000.
We anticipate that the $213,495 outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the financial statements, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account, funds available to us under the amended and restated promissory note issued on April 12, 2022 and any additional Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5 to the financial statements included herein) from our initial shareholders, officers and directors, or their respective affiliates (which is described in Note 5 to the financial statements included herein), for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating our business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to raise additional capital through additional loans from our sponsor, officers, directors or third parties. None of our sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance additional funds to, or to invest in, us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of our business plan and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Our management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
All of our activities since inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for our initial public offering and, since the closing of our initial public offering, the search for a prospective target of our initial business combination.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate nonoperating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the trust account. We expect to continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had $4,833,241 in net income. We incurred $2,011,214 of formation and operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses. We had income on the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities of $7,460,809 and investment income of $18,013 on our amounts held in the trust account, offset by offering expenses related to warrants of $634,367 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
For the three months ended December 31, 2021, we had $3,651,575 in net loss. We incurred $1,535,675 of formation and operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses. We had loss on the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities of $2,121,711 and investment income of $5,811 on our amounts held in the trust account.
For the period from December 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had $12,845 in net loss. We incurred $12,845 of formation and operating costs consisting of legal and professional expenses.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
We entered into an administrative services agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of up to $15,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to us and other expenses and obligations of our sponsor. We began incurring these fees on March 24, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination and our liquidation.
On November 15, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note in the amount of up to $250,000 to an affiliate of our sponsor. The proceeds of the note, which may be drawn down from time to time until we consummate our initial business combination, will be used for general working capital purposes. The note bears no interest and is payable in full upon the earlier to occur of (i) twenty-four (24) months from the closing of our initial public offering (or such later date as may be extended in accordance with the terms of our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association) or (ii) the consummation of our initial business combination. A failure to pay the principal within five business days of the date specified above or the commencement of a voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy action shall be deemed an event of default, in which case the note may be accelerated. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings outstanding under the note. On April 12, 2022, we amended and restated the note in its entirety to increase the note’s principal amount to $500,000.
The underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of $0.35 per unit, or $9,625,000 in the aggregate. The deferred underwriting discount will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with ASU 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have until March 26, 2023 (absent any extensions of such period with shareholder approval) to consummate our initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate our initial business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 26, 2023. We intend to complete our initial business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by March 26, 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including our warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued an aggregate of 13,000,000 warrants in connection with our initial public offering and the simultaneous private placement, which are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. In addition, we issued an aggregate of 1,166,667 warrants in connection with the partial exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option. Accordingly, we recognize the warrants as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering, the simultaneous private placement and the partial exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option has been estimated using Monte Carlo simulations at each measurement date.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 27,500,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The potential ordinary share for outstanding warrants to purchase our shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share because the warrants are contingently exercisable and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We have elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions, we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of the independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of our chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.