Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This management’s discussion and analysis is intended to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of our operations and contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Furthermore, such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and we expressly disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We currently operate two primary business segments, Pay-TV and Wireless. Our Wireless business segment consists of two business units, Retail Wireless and 5G Network Deployment.
Our Pay-TV business strategy is to be the best provider of video services in the United States by providing products with the best technology, outstanding customer service, and great value. We offer Pay-TV services under the DISH® brand and the SLING® brand. We promote our Pay-TV services as providing our subscribers with a better “price-to-value” relationship than those available from other subscription television service providers. We market our SLING TV services to consumers who do not subscribe to traditional satellite and cable pay-TV services, as well as to current and recent traditional pay-TV subscribers who desire a lower cost alternative.
Our Retail Wireless business unit offers prepaid and postpaid retail wireless services to subscribers under our Boost Mobile, Ting Mobile, Republic Wireless and Gen Mobile brands, as well as a competitive portfolio of wireless devices. We offer customers value by providing choice and flexibility in our wireless services. We offer competitive consumer plans with no annual service contracts. Our retail wireless business strategy is to expand our current target segments and profitably grow our subscriber base by acquiring and retaining high quality subscribers while we complete our 5G Network Deployment. We intend to acquire high quality subscribers by providing competitive offers with innovative new value-added services that better meet those subscribers’ needs and budget. We intend on retaining those subscribers through those compelling new value-added services and outstanding customer service. As we work to integrate our retail wireless brands, one of our focuses is to ensure that our Pay-TV subscribers are aware of the increased value available to them through our retail wireless brands.
Our 5G Network Deployment business unit strategy is to commercialize our wireless spectrum licenses through the completion of our 5G Network Deployment. We have committed to deploy a facilities-based 5G broadband network capable of serving increasingly larger portions of the U.S. population at different deadlines, including 20% of the U.S. population by June 2022 and 70% by June 2023. We currently have over 50 markets under construction and completed a friendly user trial, drive testing and user equipment testing in Las Vegas during the fourth quarter of 2021. Our current construction is primarily focused on markets we intend to launch by June 2022 in conjunction with the 20% population coverage requirement. However, we have also began construction of markets we intend to launch by June of 2023 that support the 70% population coverage requirement.
Recent Developments
COVID-19 Update
A novel strain of coronavirus which causes the disease COVID-19 has resulted in a worldwide pandemic. COVID-19 has surfaced in nearly all regions around the world and resulted in global travel restrictions and business slowdowns or shutdowns. The COVID-19 pandemic has also created unanticipated circumstances and uncertainty, disruption, and significant volatility in the economic environment generally, which have adversely affected, and may continue to adversely affect, our business operations and could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, many of our subscribers are impacted by recommendations and/or mandates from federal, state, and local authorities to, among other things, practice social distancing and to refrain from gathering in groups. While certain government regulations and/or mandates have eased, or are expected to ease in 2022 and COVID-19 vaccines have become broadly available, governmental authorities are continuing to monitor the situation and take various actions in an effort to slow or prevent an increase in the spread of COVID-19. COVID-19 continues to impact our business during 2022, in particular in the following areas:
● In response to the pandemic and business disruption, first and foremost, we have prioritized the health and safety of our employees. We have implemented increased health and safety practices including, among other things, increased use of personal protective equipment for employees to protect them and our subscribers.
● Our DISH TV and Retail Wireless businesses have been and may be further impacted by: (i) government recommendations and/or mandates for commercial establishments to operate at reduced capacity; and (ii) reduced in person selling opportunities due to subscriber preferences and actions as well as government restrictions.
● Our supply chain has been impacted by COVID-19, and there have been and could be additional significant and unanticipated interruptions and/or delays in the supply of materials and/or equipment across our supply chain, due to, among other things, surges in COVID-19. Moreover, the recent surges in COVID-19 cases in areas outside the United States and the stringent lockdowns implemented in response to such surges are causing interruptions and/or delays that are adversely impacting, among other things, the software, hardware and testing related to our 5G Network Deployment. In addition, there have been worldwide interruptions and delays in the supply of electronic components including, but not limited to, semi-conductors, which have negatively impacted our ability to obtain set-top boxes, wireless devices and wireless network equipment. Furthermore, we may not be able to diversify sources of supply in a timely manner to mitigate these interruptions and/or delays or find new suppliers on reasonable terms or at all. These interruptions and/or delays in our supply chain could have a material adverse effect on our business, including our Pay-TV and Retail Wireless operations, our ability to meet our build-out requirement deadlines for our wireless spectrum licenses and our 5G Network Deployment generally.
We continue to monitor the evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health agencies and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments beyond our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Acquisitions
Boost Mobile Acquisition
Asset Purchase Agreement. Effective on July 1, 2020, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the APA and in accordance with the Final Judgment, we completed the Boost Mobile Acquisition and DISH Network officially entered into the retail wireless market, serving more than 9 million subscribers under the Boost Mobile brand.
In connection with the Boost Mobile Acquisition and the consummation of the Sprint/T-Mobile merger, we, T-Mobile, Sprint, DT and SoftBank came to an agreement with the DOJ on key terms and approval of the Transaction Agreements and our wireless service business and spectrum. On July 26, 2019, the Defendants entered into the Stipulation and Order with the DOJ binding the Defendants to the Proposed Final Judgment, which memorialized the agreement between the DOJ and the Defendants. The Stipulation and Order and the Proposed Final Judgment were filed in the District Court on July 26, 2019 and on April 1, 2020, the Final Judgment was entered with the District Court.
Ting Mobile Acquisition
On August 1, 2020, we completed the Ting Mobile Acquisition. In addition, we entered into a services agreement pursuant to which Tucows will act as a mobile virtual network enabler for certain of our retail Wireless subscribers.
Republic Wireless Acquisition
On May 1, 2021, we completed the Republic Wireless Acquisition. The consideration for the Republic Wireless Acquisition consisted of an upfront cash payment and an earn-out provision.
We accounted for the Boost Mobile Acquisition, the Ting Mobile Acquisition and the Republic Wireless Acquisition as business combinations. The identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recorded at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date and are consolidated into our financial statements. See Note 6 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
EXPLANATION OF KEY METRICS AND OTHER ITEMS
Service revenue. “Service revenue” consists principally of Pay-TV and Wireless subscriber revenue. Certain of the amounts included in “Service revenue” are not recurring on a monthly basis.
Equipment sales and other revenue. “Equipment sales and other revenue” principally includes the sale of wireless devices and the non-subsidized sales of Pay-TV equipment.
Cost of services. “Cost of services” principally includes Pay-TV programming expenses and other operating costs related to our Pay-TV segment and costs of wireless services (including costs incurred under the MNSA and NSA).
Cost of sales - equipment and other. “Cost of sales - equipment and other” principally includes the cost of wireless devices and other related items as well as costs related to the non-subsidized sales of Pay-TV equipment. Costs are generally recognized as products are delivered to customers and the related revenue is recognized.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. “Selling, general and administrative expenses” consists primarily of direct sales costs, advertising, third-party commissions related to the acquisition of subscribers, costs related to the installation of equipment for our new Pay-TV subscribers, the cost of subsidized sales of Pay-TV equipment for new subscribers and employee-related costs associated with administrative services such as legal, information systems, and accounting and finance.
Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized. “Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized” primarily includes interest expense associated with our long-term debt (net of capitalized interest), prepayment premiums, amortization of debt discounts and debt issuance costs associated with our long-term debt, and interest expense associated with our finance lease obligations.
Other, net. The main components of “Other, net” are gains and losses realized on the sale and/or conversion of marketable and non-marketable investment securities and derivative instruments, impairment of marketable and non-marketable investment securities, unrealized gains and losses from changes in fair value of certain marketable investment securities and derivative instruments, and equity in earnings and losses of our affiliates.
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). EBITDA is defined as “Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network” plus “Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized” and net of “Interest income,” “Income tax (provision) benefit, net” and “Depreciation and amortization.” This “non-GAAP measure” is reconciled to “Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network” in our discussion of “Results of Operations” below.
Operating income before depreciation and amortization (“OIBDA”). OIBDA is defined as “Operating income (loss)” plus “Depreciation and amortization.” This “non-GAAP measure” is reconciled to “Operating income (loss)” in our discussion of “Results of Operations” below.
DISH TV subscribers. We include customers obtained through direct sales, independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distribution relationships in our DISH TV subscriber count. We also provide DISH TV services to hotels, motels and other commercial accounts. For certain of these commercial accounts, we divide our total revenue for these commercial accounts by $34.99, and include the resulting number, which is substantially smaller than the actual number of commercial units served, in our DISH TV subscriber count.
SLING TV subscribers. We include customers obtained through direct sales and third-party marketing agreements in our SLING TV subscriber count. SLING TV subscriber additions are recorded net of disconnects. SLING TV customers receiving service for no charge, under certain new subscriber promotions, are excluded from our SLING TV subscriber count. For customers who subscribe to multiple SLING TV packages, each customer is only counted as one SLING TV subscriber.
Pay-TV subscribers. Our Pay-TV subscriber count includes all DISH TV and SLING TV subscribers discussed above. For customers who subscribe to both our DISH TV services and our SLING TV services, each subscription is counted as a separate Pay-TV subscriber.
Pay-TV average monthly revenue per subscriber (“Pay-TV ARPU”). We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating ARPU and believe presentations of ARPU may not be calculated consistently by other companies in the same or similar businesses. We calculate Pay-TV average monthly revenue per Pay-TV subscriber, or Pay-TV ARPU, by dividing average monthly Pay-TV segment “Service revenue,” excluding revenue from broadband services, for the period by our average number of Pay-TV subscribers for the period. The average number of Pay-TV subscribers is calculated for the period by adding the average number of Pay-TV subscribers for each month and dividing by the number of months in the period.
The average number of Pay-TV subscribers for each month is calculated by adding the beginning and ending Pay-TV subscribers for the month and dividing by two. SLING TV subscribers on average purchase lower priced programming services than DISH TV subscribers, and therefore, as SLING TV subscribers increase as a percentage of total Pay-TV subscribers, it has had a negative impact on Pay-TV ARPU.
DISH TV average monthly subscriber churn rate (“DISH TV churn rate”). We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating subscriber churn rate and believe presentations of subscriber churn rates may not be calculated consistently by different companies in the same or similar businesses. We calculate DISH TV churn rate for any period by dividing the number of DISH TV subscribers who terminated service during the period by the average number of DISH TV subscribers for the same period, and further dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of DISH TV subscribers is calculated for the period by adding the average number of DISH TV subscribers for each month and dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of DISH TV subscribers for each month is calculated by adding the beginning and ending DISH TV subscribers for the month and dividing by two.
DISH TV SAC. Subscriber acquisition cost measures are commonly used by those evaluating traditional companies in the pay-TV industry. We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating the “average subscriber acquisition costs per new DISH TV subscriber activation,” or DISH TV SAC, and we believe presentations of pay-TV SAC may not be calculated consistently by different companies in the same or similar businesses. Our DISH TV SAC is calculated using all costs of acquiring DISH TV subscribers (e.g., subsidized equipment, advertising, installation, commissions and direct sales, etc.) which are included in “Selling, general and administrative expenses,” plus capitalized payments made under certain sales incentive programs and the value of equipment capitalized under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers, divided by gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. We include all new DISH TV subscribers in our calculation, including DISH TV subscribers added with little or no subscriber acquisition costs.
Wireless subscribers. We include prepaid and postpaid customers obtained through direct sales, independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distribution relationships in our Wireless subscriber count.
Wireless average monthly revenue per subscriber (“Wireless ARPU”). We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating ARPU and believe presentations of ARPU may not be calculated consistently by other companies in the same or similar businesses. We calculate average monthly revenue per Wireless subscriber, or Wireless ARPU, by dividing average monthly Retail Wireless business unit “Service revenue” for the period by our average number of Wireless subscribers for the period. The average number of Wireless subscribers is calculated for the period by adding the average number of Wireless subscribers for each month and dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of Wireless subscribers for each month is calculated by adding the beginning and ending Wireless subscribers for the month and dividing by two.
Wireless average monthly subscriber churn rate (“Wireless churn rate”). We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating subscriber churn rate and believe presentations of subscriber churn rates may not be calculated consistently by different companies in the same or similar businesses. We calculate our “Wireless churn rate” for any period by dividing the number of Wireless subscribers who terminated service during the period by the average number of Wireless subscribers for the same period, and further dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of Wireless subscribers is calculated for the period by adding the average number of Wireless subscribers for each month and dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of Wireless subscribers for each month is calculated by adding the beginning and ending Wireless subscribers for the month and dividing by two.
Free cash flow. We define free cash flow as “Net cash flows from operating activities” less “Purchases of property and equipment” and “Capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations,” as shown on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - Segments
Business Segments
We currently operate two primary business segments: (1) Pay-TV; and (2) Wireless. Our Wireless segment consists of two business units, the Retail Wireless business unit and 5G Network Deployment business unit. Revenue and operating income (loss) by segment are shown in the table below:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
* Percentage is not meaningful.
Total revenue. Our consolidated revenue totaled $17.881 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $2.388 billion or 15.4% compared to the same period in 2020. The increase primarily resulted from the completion of the Boost Mobile Acquisition on July 1, 2020.
Total operating income (loss). Our consolidated operating income totaled $3.203 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $620 million or 24.0% compared to the same period in 2020. The change primarily resulted from an increase in the operating income from our Pay-TV segment and the completion of the Boost Mobile Acquisition on July 1, 2020. The years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were negatively impacted by operating losses associated with our 5G Network Deployment business unit, including an “Impairment of long-lived assets” of $356 million in 2020. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Pay-TV Segment
We offer Pay-TV services under the DISH® brand and the SLING® brand. As of December 31, 2021, we had 10.707 million Pay-TV subscribers in the United States, including 8.221 million DISH TV subscribers and 2.486 million SLING TV subscribers.
We promote our Pay-TV services as providing our subscribers with better service, technology and value than those available from other subscription television service providers. We offer a wide selection of video services under the DISH TV brand, with access to hundreds of channels depending on the level of subscription. Our standard programming packages generally include programming provided by national and regional cable networks. We also offer programming packages that include local broadcast networks, specialty sports channels, premium movie channels and Latino and international programming. We market our SLING TV services to consumers who do not subscribe to traditional satellite and cable pay-TV services, as well as to current and recent traditional pay-TV subscribers who desire a lower cost alternative. Our SLING TV services require an Internet connection and are available on multiple streaming-capable devices including, among others, streaming media devices, TVs, tablets, computers, game consoles and phones. We offer SLING domestic, SLING International, and SLING Latino video programming services.
Trends in our Pay-TV Segment
Competition
Competition has intensified in recent years as the pay-TV industry has matured. We and our competitors increasingly must seek to attract a greater proportion of new subscribers from each other’s existing subscriber bases rather than from first-time purchasers of pay-TV services. We face substantial competition from established pay-TV providers and broadband service providers and increasing competition from companies providing/facilitating the delivery of video content via the Internet to computers, televisions, and other streaming and mobile devices, including wireless service providers. In recent years, industry consolidation and convergence has created competitors with greater scale and multiple product/service offerings. These developments, among others, have contributed to intense and increasing competition, and we expect such competition to continue.
We incur significant costs to retain our existing DISH TV subscribers, generally as a result of upgrading their equipment to next generation receivers, primarily including our Hopper® receivers, and by providing retention credits. Our DISH TV subscriber retention costs may vary significantly from period to period.
Many of our competitors have been especially aggressive by offering discounted programming and services for both new and existing subscribers, including bundled offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other promotional offers. Certain competitors have been able to subsidize the price of video services with the price of broadband and/or wireless services.
Our Pay-TV services also face increased competition from programmers and other companies who distribute video directly to consumers over the Internet, as well as traditional satellite television providers, cable companies and large telecommunications companies that are increasing their Internet-based video offerings. We also face competition from providers of video content, many of which are providers of our programming content, that distribute content over the Internet including services with live-linear television programming, as well as single programmer offerings and offerings of large libraries of on-demand content, including in certain cases original content. These product offerings include, among others, Netflix, Hulu, Apple+, Prime Video, YouTube TV, Disney+, ESPN+, ViacomCBS, HBO Max, STARZ, Peacock, Fubo and Philo.
Significant changes in consumer behavior regarding the means by which consumers obtain video entertainment and information in response to digital media competition could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition or otherwise disrupt our business.
In particular, consumers have shown increased interest in viewing certain video programming in any place, at any time and/or on any broadband or internet-connected device they choose. Online content providers may cause our subscribers to disconnect our DISH TV services (“cord cutting”), downgrade to smaller, less expensive programming packages (“cord shaving”) or elect to purchase through these online content providers a certain portion of the services that they would have historically purchased from us, such as pay per view movies.
Mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and alliances among cable television providers, telecommunications companies, programming providers and others may result in, among other things, greater scale and financial leverage and increase the availability of offerings from providers capable of bundling video, broadband and/or wireless services in competition with our services and may exacerbate the risks described under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in our public filings. These transactions may affect us adversely by, among other things, making it more difficult for us to obtain access to certain programming networks on nondiscriminatory and fair terms, or at all.
Our Pay-TV subscriber base has been declining due to, among other things, the factors described above. There can be no assurance that our Pay-TV subscriber base will not continue to decline and that the pace of such decline will not accelerate. As our Pay-TV subscriber base continues to decline, it could have a material adverse long-term effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flow.
Programming
Our ability to compete successfully will depend, among other things, on our ability to continue to obtain desirable programming and deliver it to our subscribers at competitive prices. Programming costs represent a large percentage of our “Cost of services” and the largest component of our total expense. We expect these costs to continue to increase due to contractual price increases and the renewal of long-term programming contracts on less favorable pricing terms and certain programming costs are rising at a much faster rate than wages or inflation. In particular, the rates we are charged for retransmitting local broadcast channels have been increasing substantially and may exceed our ability to increase our prices to our subscribers. Going forward, our margins may face pressure if we are unable to renew our long-term programming contracts on acceptable pricing and other economic terms or if we are unable to pass these increased programming costs on to our subscribers.
Increases in programming costs have caused us to increase the rates that we charge to our subscribers, which could in turn cause our existing Pay-TV subscribers to disconnect our service or cause potential new Pay-TV subscribers to choose not to subscribe to our service. Additionally, even if our subscribers do not disconnect our services, they may purchase through new and existing online content providers a certain portion of the services that they would have historically purchased from us, such as pay-per-view movies.
Furthermore, our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate may be negatively impacted if we are unable to renew our long-term programming carriage contracts before they expire. Our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate have been negatively impacted as a result of programming interruptions and threatened programming interruptions in connection with the scheduled expiration of programming carriage contracts with content providers. On October 6, 2021, Tegna Inc. (“Tegna”) removed its channels from our DISH TV programming lineup in 53 markets. On February 4, 2022, we and Tegna signed a new programming carriage contract which restored these channels to our DISH TV programming lineup. Although subscriber demand for local network stations has decreased in recent years as a result of, among other things, programming being available to subscribers through alternative methods, including over the air antennas, there can be no assurance that the removal of these or other channels will not have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition or otherwise disrupt our business. In addition, we cannot predict with any certainty the impact to our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate resulting from additional programming interruptions or threatened programming interruptions that may occur in the future. As a result, we may at times suffer from periods of lower net Pay-TV subscriber additions or higher net Pay-TV subscriber losses.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - PAY-TV Segment
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
* Percentage is not meaningful.
**During the first quarter of 2020, we removed approximately 250,000 subscribers representing commercial accounts impacted by COVID-19 from our ending DISH TV subscriber count. During the year ended December, 31, 2020, 80,000 of these subscribers came off pause or had temporary rate relief end and were added to our DISH TV subscriber count during the periods they returned in 2020, and 69,000 of these subscribers disconnected. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, the remaining commercial accounts representing 101,000 subscribers disconnected. The effect of the removal of the 250,000 subscribers, the addition of these 80,000 subscribers and disconnect of 170,000 subscribers was excluded from the calculation of our gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, net DISH TV subscriber additions/losses and DISH TV churn rate. See “Results of Operations - Pay-TV subscribers” for further information.
Pay-TV Subscribers
DISH TV subscribers. We lost approximately 595,000 net DISH TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the loss of approximately 408,000 net DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2020. This increase in net DISH TV subscriber losses primarily resulted from lower gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and a slightly higher DISH TV churn rate.
SLING TV subscribers. We added approximately 12,000 net SLING TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the loss of approximately 118,000 net SLING TV subscribers during the same period in 2020. The increase in net SLING TV subscribers was primarily related to higher SLING TV subscriber activations. We continue to experience increased competition, including competition from other subscription video on-demand and live-linear OTT service providers. The year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by delays and cancellations of sporting events as a result of COVID-19.
DISH TV subscribers, gross. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we activated approximately 835,000 gross new DISH TV subscribers compared to approximately 1.094 million gross new DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2020, a decrease of 23.7%. This decrease in our gross new DISH TV subscriber activations was primarily related to the lack of demand and channel removals, including Tegna, as well as increased competitive pressures, including aggressive short term introductory pricing and bundled offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers, live-linear OTT service providers, and direct-to-consumer offerings by certain of our programmers. Our gross new DISH TV subscriber activations continue to be negatively impacted by stricter customer acquisition policies for our DISH TV subscribers, including an emphasis on acquiring higher quality subscribers. Furthermore, we continue to assess the impact of COVID-19 and cannot predict with certainty the impact to our gross new DISH TV subscribers as a result of, among other things, lower discretionary spending and reduced ability to perform our in-home service operations due to the impact of social distancing.
DISH TV churn rate. Our DISH TV churn rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 1.40% compared to 1.38% for the same period in 2020. Our DISH TV churn rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was negatively impacted by programming interruptions in connection with the scheduled expiration of certain programming carriage contracts, including Tegna. In addition, our DISH TV churn rate was positively impacted by COVID-19 beginning in the second quarter of 2020, including, among other things, the recommendations and/or mandates from federal, state, and local authorities that customers refrain from non-essential movements outside of their homes and the resulting increased consumption of our Pay-TV services. Furthermore, COVID-19 had an impact on competitive pressures due to, among other things, a reduction in customers’ willingness to allow competitors’ technicians into their homes. We continue to assess the impact of COVID-19 and while certain government regulations and/or mandates have eased, or are expected to ease in 2022, we cannot predict with certainty the impact to our DISH TV churn rate as a result of, among other things, lower discretionary spending and reduced ability to perform our in-home service operations due to the impact of social distancing. Our DISH TV churn rate continues to be adversely impacted by external factors, such as, among other things, increased competitive pressures, including aggressive marketing, bundled discount offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers, as well as cord cutting. Our DISH TV churn rate continues to be positively impacted by our emphasis on acquiring and retaining higher quality subscribers. Our DISH TV churn rate is also impacted by internal factors, such as, among other things, our ability to consistently provide outstanding customer service, price increases, our ability to control piracy and other forms of fraud, and the level of our retention efforts.
Our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate have been negatively impacted as a result of programming interruptions and threatened programming interruptions in connection with the scheduled expiration of programming carriage contracts with content providers. On October 6, 2021, Tegna removed its channels from our DISH TV programming lineup in 53 markets. On February 4, 2022, we and Tegna signed a new programming carriage contract which restored these channels to our DISH TV programming lineup. Although subscriber demand for local network stations has decreased in recent years as a result of, among other things, programming being available to subscribers through alternative methods, including over the air antennas, there can be no assurance that the removal of these or other channels will not have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition or otherwise disrupt our business.
Beginning in March 2020, several federal, state, and local government agencies implemented recommendations, guidelines, and orders regarding “social distancing” in an attempt to slow or stop the spread of COVID-19. As a result of these actions, many bars, restaurants, and other commercial establishments were ordered to and in certain cases continue to be recommended and/or ordered to suspend all non-essential “in-person” business operations and/or operate at reduced capacity. In addition, airlines and hotels significantly reduced operations as a result of government actions and/or related lower consumer demand. In an effort to avoid charging commercial customers for services in their establishments which were no longer open to the public, we paused service or provided temporary rate relief for certain of those commercial accounts. For certain commercial accounts, each subscription is counted as one DISH TV subscriber. For other commercial accounts, as discussed above, we divide our total revenue for these commercial accounts by $34.99, and include the resulting number, which is substantially smaller than the actual number of commercial units served, in our DISH TV subscriber count. During the first quarter of 2020, we removed 250,000 subscribers from our ending DISH TV subscriber count for commercial accounts we placed on pause, or received reduced revenue, or for which we anticipate the account to disconnect due to COVID-19. During the year ended December 31, 2020, 80,000 of these subscribers came off pause or had temporary rate relief end and 69,000 of these subscribers disconnected. We did not incur any significant expenses in connection with the return of the 80,000 commercial accounts and accordingly, those commercial accounts were added to our ending subscriber count during the periods they returned in 2020 and were not recorded as gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. During the first quarter of 2021, the remaining commercial accounts representing 101,000 subscribers disconnected.
We have not always met our own standards for performing high-quality installations, effectively resolving subscriber issues when they arise, answering subscriber calls in an acceptable timeframe, effectively communicating with our subscriber base, reducing calls driven by the complexity of our business, improving the reliability of certain systems and subscriber equipment and aligning the interests of certain independent third-party retailers and installers to provide high-quality service. Most of these factors have affected both gross new DISH TV subscriber activations as well as DISH TV subscriber churn rate. Our future gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and our DISH TV subscriber churn rate may be negatively impacted by these factors, which could in turn adversely affect our revenue.
Service revenue. “Service revenue” totaled $12.748 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $46 million or 0.4% compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in “Service revenue” compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily related to an increase in Pay-TV ARPU, discussed below, partially offset by a lower average Pay-TV subscriber base.
Pay-TV ARPU. Pay-TV ARPU was $95.94 during the year ended December 31, 2021 versus $91.77 during the same period in 2020. The $4.17 or 4.5% increase in Pay-TV ARPU was primarily attributable to the DISH TV programming package price increases effective in the first and fourth quarters of 2021 and first quarter of 2020, the SLING TV programming package price increases effective in the first quarter of 2021 and the first quarter of 2020 and higher ad sales revenue, partially offset by an increase in SLING TV subscribers as a percentage of our total Pay-TV subscriber base. SLING TV subscribers on average purchase lower priced programming services than DISH TV subscribers, and therefore, the increase in SLING TV subscribers as a percentage of our total Pay-TV subscriber base had a negative impact on Pay-TV ARPU.
Cost of services. “Cost of services” totaled $7.735 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $77 million or 1.0% compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in “Cost of services” was primarily attributable to a lower average Pay-TV subscriber base and a decrease in variable and retention costs per subscriber, partially offset by higher programming costs per subscriber. Variable and retention costs per subscriber decreased due to, among other things, increased operational efficiencies, including a focused set of staffing reductions in 2020. Programming costs per subscriber increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 due to rate increases in certain of our programming contracts, including the renewal of certain contracts at higher rates, particularly for local broadcast channels. “Cost of services” represented 60.7% and 61.5% of “Service revenue” during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts to purchase programming content in which our payment obligations are generally contingent on the number of Pay-TV subscribers to whom we provide the respective content. Our “Cost of services” have and will continue to face further upward pressure from price increases and the renewal of long-term programming contracts on less favorable pricing terms. In addition, our programming expenses will increase to the extent we are successful in growing our Pay-TV subscriber base.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. “Selling, general and administrative expenses” totaled $1.474 billion during the year ended December 31, 2021, a $20 million or 1.4% increase compared to the same period in 2020. This change was primarily driven by a $70 million reduction to litigation expense as a result of the Telemarketing Litigation settlement during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a decrease in subscriber acquisition costs resulting from fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, reduced marketing expenditures and by cost cutting initiatives in the Pay-TV segment, including a focused set of staffing reductions in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization. “Depreciation and amortization” expense totaled $539 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, a $75 million or 12.2% decrease compared to the same period in 2020. This change was primarily driven by a decrease in depreciation expense from equipment leased to new and existing DISH TV subscribers.
DISH TV SAC. DISH TV SAC was $823 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $851 during the same period in 2020, a decrease of $28 or 3.3%. This change was primarily attributable to a decrease in hardware costs per activation and higher commercial additions compared to the same period in 2020, partially offset by an increase in advertising costs per subscriber. The decrease in hardware costs per activation primarily resulted from lower average costs per receiver due to receiver mix and a higher percentage of remanufactured receivers being activated on new subscriber accounts. Commercial activations historically have lower DISH TV SAC than residential activations, and therefore the increase in commercial activations have a positive impact on DISH TV SAC.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amount of equipment capitalized under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers totaled $72 million and $151 million, respectively. This decrease in capital expenditures primarily resulted from a decrease in gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and a higher percentage of remanufactured receivers being activated on new subscriber accounts.
To remain competitive, we upgrade or replace subscriber equipment periodically as technology changes, and the costs associated with these upgrades may be substantial. To the extent technological changes render a portion of our existing equipment obsolete, we would be unable to redeploy all returned equipment and consequently would realize less benefit from the DISH TV SAC reduction associated with redeployment of that returned lease equipment.
Our “DISH TV SAC” may materially increase in the future to the extent that we, among other things, transition to newer technologies, introduce more aggressive promotions, or provide greater equipment subsidies. See further information under “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Subscriber Acquisition and Retention Costs.”
For discussion of the Pay-TV results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see “Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019” in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Wireless Segment
Our Wireless business segment operates in two business units, Retail Wireless and 5G Network Deployment. Revenue and operating income (loss) by business unit are shown in the table below:
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, total purchases of property and equipment for our wireless segment were $1.012 billion and $96 million, respectively. This increase primarily resulted from capital expenditures related to our 5G Network Deployment. We anticipate expenditures for our 5G Network Deployment to increase substantially in 2022.
Wireless - Retail Wireless
We entered the retail wireless business in 2020 as a result of the Boost Mobile Acquisition and the Ting Mobile Acquisition and we expanded the business in 2021 through the Republic Wireless Acquisition. See Note 6 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. We offer nationwide prepaid and postpaid retail wireless services to subscribers under our Boost Mobile, Ting Mobile, Republic Wireless and Gen Mobile brands, as well as a competitive portfolio of wireless devices. In 2021, LG Electronics Inc., a large provider of wireless devices, announced they were closing their mobile business unit. We continue to work to procure wireless devices from alternative suppliers, however, there can be no assurances we will be able to procure the supply needed to meet subscriber demand and any inability to do so could negatively impact our Wireless subscriber activations, retail wireless base and our results of operations. Prepaid wireless subscribers generally pay in advance for monthly access to wireless talk, text, and data services. Postpaid wireless subscribers are qualified to pay after receiving wireless talk, text, and data services. We are currently operating our Retail Wireless business unit as an MVNO while we complete our 5G Network Deployment. On July 14, 2021, we entered into a ten-year NSA with AT&T to provide us with network services. Under the NSA, we expect AT&T will become our primary network services provider. As an MVNO, today we primarily depend on T-Mobile as well as AT&T to provide us with network services under the MNSA and NSA, respectively. A substantial portion of our retail Wireless subscribers currently receive services through T-Mobile’s CDMA Network. However, T-Mobile provided notice that it intends to shutdown the CDMA Network on March 31, 2022. A forced migration of this scale on this time frame will potentially leave approximately a million low-income Boost subscribers without service. Our Retail Wireless operations have been and continue to be disrupted by, among other things, having our subscribers potentially lose service and/or face increased costs, which could result in a significant increase in our Wireless churn rate. While we are working to mitigate the harms of this shutdown, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs to upgrade subscriber wireless devices on this accelerated timeline. We have implemented targeted efforts and promotions directed at impacted customers; however, there can be no assurance these attempts will be successful. Wireless device shortages, among other things, have limited our ability to mitigate the effects of the CDMA shutdown and negatively impact our Wireless churn rate, Wireless subscriber activations, retail Wireless base and our results of operations.
In November 2020, DISH Network sought intervention from the Antitrust Division of the United States Department of Justice (“Division”) under the Final Judgment (“FJ”) entered by Judge Kelly of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia. On July 9, 2021, the Division issued a letter to DISH Network and T-Mobile in response to DISH Network’s request, a copy of which was attached as Exhibit 99.1 to the Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2021.
We acquired over 9 million subscribers as a result of the Boost Mobile Acquisition, acquired over 200,000 subscribers as a result of the Ting Mobile Acquisition and acquired over 200,000 subscribers as a result of the Republic Wireless Acquisition. Our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include the results of the Boost Mobile Acquisition from July 1, 2020, the Ting Mobile Acquisition from August 1, 2020 and the Republic Wireless Acquisition from May 1, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had 8.546 million retail Wireless subscribers.
Currently, we offer Wireless subscribers competitive consumer plans with no annual service contracts and monthly service plans including high-speed data and unlimited talk and text.
Competition
Retail Wireless is a mature market with moderate year-over-year organic growth. Competitors include providers who offer similar communication services, such as talk, text and data. Competitive factors within the wireless communications services industry include, but are not limited to, pricing, market saturation, service and product offerings, customer experience and service quality. We compete with a number of national wireless carriers, including Verizon, AT&T and T-Mobile, all of which are significantly larger than us, serve a significant percentage of all wireless subscribers and enjoy scale advantages compared to us. Verizon, AT&T, and T-Mobile are currently the only nationwide MNOs in the United States.
Primary competitors to our Retail Wireless business unit include, but are not limited to, Metro PCS (owned by T-Mobile), Cricket Wireless (owned by AT&T), Visible (owned by Verizon), Tracfone Wireless (owned by Verizon), and other MVNOs such as Consumer Cellular and Mint Mobile.
Wireless - 5G Network Deployment
We have directly invested approximately $20 billion to acquire certain wireless spectrum licenses (including the 3.45-3.55 GHz band licenses purchased in the first quarter of 2022) and made over $10 billion in non-controlling investments in certain entities, for a total of approximately $30 billion. The $30 billion of investments related to wireless spectrum licenses does not include $6 billion of capitalized interest related to the carrying value of such licenses. See Note 2 and Note 16 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
DISH Network Spectrum
We have directly invested approximately $20 billion to acquire certain wireless spectrum licenses (including the 3.45-3.55 GHz band licenses purchased in the first quarter of 2022). These wireless spectrum licenses are subject to certain interim and final build-out requirements, as well as certain renewal requirements. We plan to commercialize our wireless spectrum licenses through the completion of our 5G Network Deployment. We have committed to deploy a facilities-based 5G broadband network capable of serving increasingly larger portions of the U.S. population at different deadlines, including 20% of the U.S. population by June 2022 and 70% by June 2023. We currently have over 50 markets under construction and completed a friendly user trial, drive testing and user equipment testing in Las Vegas during the fourth quarter of 2021. Our current construction is primarily focused on markets we intend to launch by June 2022 in conjunction with the 20% population coverage requirement. However, we have also began construction of markets we intend to launch by June of 2023 that support the 70% population coverage requirement.
We will need to make significant additional investments or partner with others to, among other things, complete our 5G Network Deployment and further commercialize, build-out and integrate these licenses and related assets and any additional acquired licenses and related assets, as well as to comply with regulations applicable to such licenses. Depending on the nature and scope of such activities, any such investments or partnerships could vary significantly. In addition, as we complete our 5G Network Deployment we will incur significant additional expenses related to, among other things, research and development, wireless testing and ongoing upgrades to the wireless network infrastructure. We may also determine that additional wireless spectrum licenses may be required to complete our 5G Network Deployment and to compete with other wireless service providers. See Note 2 and Note 16 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
DISH Network Non-Controlling Investments in the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities Related to AWS-3 Wireless Spectrum Licenses
During 2015, through our wholly-owned subsidiaries American AWS-3 Wireless II L.L.C. (“American II”) and American AWS-3 Wireless III L.L.C. (“American III”), we initially made over $10 billion in certain non-controlling investments in Northstar Spectrum, LLC (“Northstar Spectrum”), the parent company of Northstar Wireless, L.L.C. (“Northstar Wireless,” and collectively with Northstar Spectrum, the “Northstar Entities”), and in SNR Wireless HoldCo, LLC (“SNR HoldCo”), the parent company of SNR Wireless LicenseCo, LLC (“SNR Wireless,” and collectively with SNR HoldCo, the “SNR Entities”), respectively. On October 27, 2015, the FCC granted certain AWS-3 wireless spectrum licenses (the “AWS-3 Licenses”) to Northstar Wireless and to SNR Wireless, respectively, which are recorded in “FCC authorizations” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Under the applicable accounting guidance in Accounting Standards Codification 810, Consolidation (“ASC 810”), Northstar Spectrum and SNR HoldCo are considered variable interest entities and, based on the characteristics of the structure of these entities and in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance, we consolidate these entities into our financial statements. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
The AWS-3 Licenses are subject to certain interim and final build-out requirements, as well as certain renewal requirements. The Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities may need to raise significant additional capital in the future, which may be obtained from third party sources or from us, so that the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities may commercialize, build-out and integrate these AWS-3 Licenses, comply with regulations applicable to such AWS-3 Licenses, and make any potential Northstar Re-Auction Payment and SNR Re-Auction Payment for the AWS-3 licenses retained by the FCC. Depending upon the nature and scope of such commercialization, build-out and integration efforts, regulatory compliance, and potential Northstar Re-Auction Payment and SNR Re-Auction Payment, any loans, equity contributions or partnerships could vary significantly. See Note 16 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
We may need to raise significant additional capital in the future to fund the efforts described above, which may not be available on acceptable terms or at all. There can be no assurance that we, the Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities will be able to develop and implement business models that will realize a return on these wireless spectrum licenses or that we, the Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities will be able to profitably deploy the assets represented by these wireless spectrum licenses, which may affect the carrying amount of these assets and our future financial condition or results of operations. See Note 16 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - Wireless Segment - Retail Wireless Business Unit
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
* Percentage is not meaningful.
The results of the Boost Mobile Acquisition from July 1, 2020, the Ting Mobile Acquisition from August 1, 2020 and the Republic Wireless Acquisition from May 1, 2021 are included in our Retail Wireless business unit. During the third quarter of 2020, we added over 9 million Wireless subscribers as a result of the Boost Mobile Acquisition and the Ting Mobile Acquisition. During the second quarter of 2021, we acquired over 200,000 subscribers as a result of the Republic Wireless Acquisition. We are currently in the process of integrating our Retail Wireless operations and have made and continue to make targeted changes to our marketing, sales, and operations to further enhance our profitability. We lost 728,000 net Wireless subscribers for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of these operational changes, competitive pressures, ongoing optimizations to the existing business, wireless device shortages and the impact of the shutdown of the CDMA Network. While we took aggressive efforts to mitigate the impact of shutdown of the CDMA Network on our Retail Wireless operations, wireless devices shortages impaired our ability to both upgrade subscriber wireless devices and also activate gross new Wireless subscribers. As of December 31, 2021, we have incurred approximately $250 million in wireless device upgrade expense primarily as a result of the CDMA shutdown. During the first six months of 2022, we expect to continue to incur substantial costs as a result of the CDMA shutdown, including without limitation, elevated Wireless churn. Consequently, the circumstances surrounding T-Mobile’s shutdown of its CDMA Network and our efforts in responding to such shutdown could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Our current results of operations are not necessarily indicative of future results, in part based on the ongoing integration and operational changes we are currently implementing. Furthermore, we have and continue to face increased competitive pressures, including aggressive competitor marketing, service promotions and deeper wireless device subsidies. We expect wireless devices shortages to continue in 2022, which could have a negative impact on our gross new Wireless subscriber activations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - Wireless Segment - 5G Network Deployment Business Unit
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
* Percentage is not meaningful.
Equipment sales and other revenue. “Equipment sales and other revenue” totaled $83 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $62 million compared to the same period in 2020. This increase primarily resulted from leasing a portion of our 600 MHz spectrum licenses to T-Mobile, which began on September 11, 2020. The spectrum lease with T-Mobile had an original annual value of $56 million during its 42 month term, however we expect this amount to decrease as we exercise our right to terminate individual licenses prior to the end of their term. The specific termination rights vary by license and we exercised our ability to terminate certain licenses in the first quarter of 2021 in accordance with our buildout schedule.
Cost of sales - equipment and other. “Cost of sales - equipment and other” totaled $100 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $81 million compared to the same period in 2020. The increase primarily resulted from an increase in lease expense on communication towers and costs related to our 5G Network Deployment.
Selling, general and administrative expenses “Selling, general and administrative expenses” totaled $167 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a $50 million increase compared to the same period in 2020. This change was primarily driven by an increase in costs to support our 5G Network Deployment.
Impairment of long-lived assets. “Impairment of long-lived assets” of $356 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from impairments of the T1 satellite and D1 satellites, as well as certain wireless equipment and operating lease assets related to our narrowband IoT deployment which we no longer intend to complete. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
OTHER CONSOLIDATED RESULTS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
* Percentage is not meaningful.
Interest income. “Interest income” totaled $11 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $11 million or 50.1% compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease primarily resulted from lower percentage returns earned on our cash and marketable investment securities, partially offset by higher average cash and marketable investment securities balances during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other, net. “Other, net” income totaled $21 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $41 million compared to the same period in 2020. This change primarily resulted from a favorable determination pursuant to the arbitration procedures under our APA with T-Mobile with respect to the disputed net working capital items, resulting in a gain of $39 million in 2021 and a $9 million decrease in the unrealized loss recognized in 2021 compared to 2020 in the fair value of our option to purchase certain of T-Mobile’s 800 MHz spectrum licenses under the Spectrum Purchase Agreement. See Note 7 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Income tax (provision) benefit, net. Our income tax provision was $763 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $65 million compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in the provision was primarily related to an increase in “Income (loss) before income taxes,” partially offset by a decrease in our effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher due to non-recurring state tax rate changes applied to our deferred taxes as a result of the Boost Mobile Acquisition, partially offset by a benefit recognized for the carryback of net operating losses under the CARES Act.
Non-GAAP Performance Measures and Reconciliation
It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to enhance the understanding of our GAAP financial information, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Each non-GAAP financial measure is presented along with the corresponding GAAP measure so as not to imply that more emphasis should be placed on the non-GAAP measure. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures in addition to the GAAP measures allows management, investors and other users of our financial information to more fully and accurately assess both consolidated and segment performance. The non-GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to that of other companies.
Consolidated EBITDA
Consolidated EBITDA is not a measure determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered a substitute for operating income, net income or any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. Consolidated EBITDA is used as a measurement of operating efficiency and overall financial performance and we believe it is a helpful measure for those evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors. Conceptually, EBITDA measures the amount of income generated each period that could be used to service debt, pay taxes and fund capital expenditures. EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.
The changes in Consolidated EBITDA during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses, including the negative impact of “Impairment of long-lived assets” of $356 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Segment OIBDA
Segment OIBDA, which is presented below, is a non-GAAP measure and does not purport to be an alternative to operating income (loss) as a measure of operating performance. We believe this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability of our business units on a more variable cost basis as it excludes the depreciation and amortization expenses related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions for those business units, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors. Segment OIBDA is calculated by adding back depreciation and amortization expense to business unit operating income (loss). See Note 17 to the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
The changes in OIBDA during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses, including the negative impact of “Impairment of long-lived assets” of $356 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Current Marketable Investment Securities
We consider all liquid investments purchased within 90 days of their maturity to be cash equivalents. See Note 7 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our marketable investment securities. As of December 31, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities totaled $5.404 billion compared to $3.733 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.671 billion. This increase in cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities primarily resulted from cash generated from operating activities of $4.031 billion, $1.490 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 5 1/8% Senior Notes due 2029 and a $337 million deposit refund from our participation in Auction 107. These increases were partially offset by the repurchases and redemption of our 6 3/4% Senior Notes due 2021 with an aggregate principal balance of $2.0 billion and capital expenditures of $1.964 billion (including capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations).
Restricted Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Investment Securities
As of December 31, 2021, our restricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities totaled $5.335 billion compared to $108 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $5.227 billion. This increase in restricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities primarily resulted from $2.737 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 5 1/4% Senior Secured Notes due 2026 and $2.488 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 5 3/4% Senior Secured Notes due 2028, which include restrictions which may vary in nature depending on the ultimate use of proceeds.
Debt Issuances and Maturity
On July 1, 2020, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of our 7 3/8% Senior Notes due July 1, 2028. Interest accrues at an annual rate of 7 3/8% and is payable semi-annually in cash, in arrears on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
On December 21, 2020, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the 0% Convertible Notes due December 15, 2025.
On May 24, 2021, we issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of our 5 1/8% Senior Notes due June 1, 2029. Interest accrues at an annual rate of 5 1/8% and is payable semi-annually in cash, in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year.
On November 26, 2021, we issued $2.750 billion aggregate principal amount of our 5 1/4% Senior Secured Notes due December 1, 2026. Interest accrues at an annual rate of 5 1/4% and is payable semi-annually in cash, in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on June 1, 2022.
On November 26, 2021, we issued $2.5 billion aggregate principal amount of our 5 3/4% Senior Secured Notes due December 1, 2028. Interest accrues at an annual rate of 5 3/4% and is payable semi-annually in cash, in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on June 1, 2022.
Our 5 1/8% Senior Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $1.1 billion were redeemed on May 1, 2020.
Our 6 3/4% Senior Notes due 2021 with an aggregate principal balance of $2.0 billion were repurchased or redeemed as of June 1, 2021.
Our 5 7/8% Senior Notes due 2022 with an aggregate principal balance of $2.0 billion mature on July 15, 2022. We expect to fund this obligation from cash and marketable investment securities balances at that time. But, depending on market conditions, we may refinance this obligation in whole or in part.
Cash Flow
The following discussion highlights our cash flow activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cash flows from operating activities. We typically reinvest the cash flow from operating activities in our business primarily to grow our subscriber base, expand our infrastructure, make strategic investments, such as significant investments in our Wireless business, including our 5G Network Deployment, and repay debt obligations. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported “Net cash flows from operating activities” of $4.031 billion and $3.312 billion, respectively.
Net cash flows from operating activities from 2020 to 2021 increased $719 million, primarily attributable to increases in cash flows resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities principally attributable to timing differences between book expense and cash payments, including taxes. In 2020, changes in operating assets and liabilities were negatively impacted by the $210 million litigation settlement payment related to the Telemarketing Litigation. These increases were partially offset by an $78 million decrease in income adjusted to exclude non-cash charges for “Impairment of long-lived assets,” “Depreciation and amortization” expense, “Realized and unrealized losses (gains) on investments and derivatives,” “Non-cash, stock-based compensation” expense, and “Deferred tax expense (benefit).”
Cash flows from investing activities. Our investing activities generally include purchases and sales of marketable investment securities, acquisitions, strategic investments, including purchases and settlements of derivative financial instruments, and purchases of wireless spectrum licenses, capital expenditures and capitalized interest. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported outflows from “Net cash flows from investing activities” of $4.410 billion and $3.862 billion, respectively.
The year ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by cash outflows primarily related to $2.618 billion in net purchases of marketable investment securities and capital expenditures of $1.964 billion (including capitalized interest primarily related to FCC authorizations), partially offset by a $337 million deposit refund from our participation in Auction 107.
The year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by cash outflows primarily related to the closing of the Boost Mobile Acquisition for a net aggregate purchase price of $1.313 billion, capital expenditures of $1.193 billion (including capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations), a $1.388 billion payment to the FCC for the 3550-3650 MHz Licenses, the 37 GHz, 39 GHZ and 47 GHz Licenses, and the 3.7-3.98 GHz Licenses.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, capital expenditures for wireless equipment totaled $1.012 billion and $96 million, respectively. The increase in 2021 for wireless equipment primarily resulted from the build-out of our 5G Network Deployment. In addition, capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for new and existing DISH TV customer equipment totaled $104 million and $211 million, respectively. The decrease in 2021 for new and existing DISH TV customer equipment primarily resulted from lower gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and a higher percentage of remanufactured receivers being activated on new subscriber accounts.
Cash flows from financing activities. Our financing activities generally include net proceeds related to the issuance of equity and long-term and convertible debt, cash used for the repurchase, redemption or payment of long-term debt and finance lease obligations, and repurchases of our Class A common stock. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported “Net cash flows from financing activities” inflows of $4.659 billion and $1.499 billion, respectively.
The net cash inflows in 2021 primarily related to $2.737 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 5 1/4% Senior Secured Notes due 2026, $2.488 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 5 3/4% Senior Secured Notes due 2028, $1.490 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 5 1/8% Senior Notes due 2029, partially offset by the repurchases and redemption of our 6 3/4% Senior Notes due 2021 with an aggregate principal balance of $2.0 billion.
The net cash inflows in 2020 primarily related to $1.986 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 0% Convertible Notes due 2025 and $998 million in net proceeds from the issuance of our 7 3/8% Senior Notes due 2028, partially offset by the redemption of our 5 1/8% Senior Notes due 2020 with an aggregate principal balance of $1.1 billion, a $312 million payment for the Northstar Purchase Agreement and repayment of long-term debt and finance lease obligations of $101 million.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as “Net cash flows from operating activities” less “Purchases of property and equipment,” and “Capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations,” as shown on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We believe free cash flow is an important liquidity metric because it measures, during a given period, the amount of cash generated that is available to repay debt obligations, make investments (including strategic wireless investments), fund acquisitions and for certain other activities. Free cash flow is not a measure determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered a substitute for “Operating income,” “Net income,” “Net cash flows from operating activities” or any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. Since free cash flow includes investments in operating assets, we believe this non-GAAP liquidity measure is useful in addition to the most directly comparable GAAP measure “Net cash flows from operating activities.”
Free cash flow can be significantly impacted from period to period by changes in “Net income (loss)” adjusted to exclude certain non-cash charges, operating assets and liabilities, “Purchases of property and equipment,” and “Capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations.” These items are shown in the “Net cash flows from operating activities” and “Net cash flows from investing activities” sections on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included herein. Operating asset and liability balances can fluctuate significantly from period to period and there can be no assurance that free cash flow will not be negatively impacted by material changes in operating assets and liabilities in future periods, since these changes depend upon, among other things, management’s timing of payments and control of inventory levels, and cash receipts.
In addition to fluctuations resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, free cash flow can vary significantly from period to period depending upon, among other things, subscriber additions (losses), service revenue, subscriber churn, subscriber acquisition and retention costs including amounts capitalized under our equipment lease programs for DISH TV subscribers, operating efficiencies, increases or decreases in purchases of property and equipment, expenditures related to our 5G Network Deployment and other factors.
The following table reconciles free cash flow to “Net cash flows from operating activities.”
Operational Liquidity
We make general investments in property such as satellites, wireless devices, set-top boxes, information technology and facilities that support our Pay-TV segment and Retail Wireless business unit. We are also making significant additional investments and will need to continue making these investments and/or partner with others to, among other things, complete our 5G Network Deployment and further commercialize, build-out, and integrate our wireless spectrum licenses and related assets. Moreover, since we are primarily a subscriber-based company, we also make subscriber-specific investments to acquire new subscribers and retain existing subscribers. While the general investments may be deferred without impacting the business in the short-term, the subscriber-specific investments are less discretionary. Our overall objective is to generate sufficient cash flow over the life of each subscriber to provide an adequate return against the upfront investment. Once the upfront investment has been made for each subscriber, the subsequent cash flow is generally positive, but there can be no assurances that over time we will recoup or earn a return on the upfront investment.
There are a number of factors that impact our future cash flow compared to the cash flow we generate at a given point in time. The first factor is our churn rate and how successful we are at retaining our current subscribers. To the extent we lose subscribers from our existing base, the positive cash flow from that base is correspondingly reduced. The second factor is how successful we are at maintaining our service margins. To the extent our “Cost of services” grow faster than our “Service revenue,” the amount of cash flow that is generated per existing subscriber is reduced. Our Pay-TV service margins have been reduced by, among other things, a shift to lower priced Pay-TV programming packages and higher programming costs. Our Retail Wireless service margins are impacted by our MNSA agreement with T-Mobile and our NSA agreement with AT&T and the speed with which we are able to convert retail Wireless subscribers onto our 5G Network once operational. The third factor is the rate at which we acquire new subscribers. The faster we acquire new subscribers, the more our positive ongoing cash flow from existing subscribers is offset by the negative upfront cash flow associated with acquiring new subscribers. Conversely, the slower we acquire subscribers, the more our operating cash flow is enhanced in that period. Finally, our future cash flow is impacted by the rate at which we complete our 5G Network Deployment, incur litigation expense, and any cash flow from financing activities. We anticipate expenditures for our 5G Network Deployment to increase substantially during 2022 and in future periods. As a result, our current cash flow is not necessarily indicative of our future cash flows. In addition, declines in our Pay-TV and retail Wireless subscriber base and any decrease in subscriber related-margins negatively impact our cash flow, and there can be no assurances that our subscriber declines will not continue.
Subscriber Base - Pay TV Segment and Retail Wireless Business Unit
See “Results of Operations” above for further information.
Subscriber Acquisition and Retention Costs
We incur significant upfront costs to acquire Pay-TV and retail Wireless subscribers, including advertising, independent third-party retailer incentives, payments made to third-parties, equipment and wireless device subsidies, installation services, and/or new customer promotions. While we attempt to recoup these upfront costs over the lives of their subscription, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in achieving that objective. With respect to our DISH TV services, we employ business rules such as minimum credit requirements for prospective customers and contractual commitments to receive service for a minimum term. We strive to provide outstanding customer service to increase the likelihood of customers keeping their Pay-TV services over longer periods of time. Subscriber acquisition costs for SLING TV subscribers are significantly lower than those for DISH TV subscribers. Our subscriber acquisition costs may vary significantly from period to period.
We incur significant costs to retain our existing DISH TV subscribers, generally as a result of upgrading their equipment to next generation receivers, primarily including our Hopper® receivers, and by providing retention credits. As with our subscriber acquisition costs, our retention upgrade spending includes the cost of equipment and installation services. In certain circumstances, we also offer programming at no additional charge and/or promotional pricing for limited periods to existing customers in exchange for a contractual commitment to receive service for a minimum term. A component of our retention efforts includes the installation of equipment for customers who move. Retention costs for retail Wireless subscribers are primarily related to promotional pricing on upgraded wireless devices for qualified existing subscribers. Our DISH TV subscriber retention costs may vary significantly from period to period.
Seasonality
Historically, the first half of the year generally produces fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations than the second half of the year, as is typical in the pay-TV industry. In addition, the first and fourth quarters generally produce a lower DISH TV churn rate than the second and third quarters. However, in recent years, as the pay-TV industry has matured, we and our competitors increasingly must seek to attract a greater proportion of new subscribers from each other’s existing subscriber bases rather than from first-time purchasers of pay-TV services. As a result, historical trends in seasonality described above may not be indicative of future trends.
Our net SLING TV subscriber additions are impacted by, among other things, certain major sporting events and other major television events. The first and third quarters generally produce higher gross new retail Wireless subscriber activations. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic the historical trends discussed above, for net DISH TV subscriber additions, net SLING TV subscriber additions and gross new retail Wireless subscriber activations, may not be indicative of future trends.
Satellites
Operation of our DISH TV services requires that we have adequate satellite transmission capacity for the programming that we offer. Moreover, competitive conditions may require that we expand our offering of new programming. While we generally have had in-orbit satellite capacity sufficient to transmit our existing channels and some backup capacity to recover the transmission of certain critical programming, our backup capacity is limited. In the event of a failure or loss of any of our owned or leased satellites, we may need to acquire or lease additional satellite capacity or relocate one of our other satellites and use it as a replacement for the failed or lost satellite. Such a failure could result in a prolonged loss of critical programming or a significant delay in our plans to expand programming as necessary to remain competitive and cause us to expend a significant portion of our cash to acquire or lease additional satellite capacity.
Stock Repurchases
Our Board of Directors previously authorized stock repurchases of up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding Class A common stock. On November 1, 2021, our Board of Directors extended this authorization such that we are currently authorized to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding Class A common stock through and including December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we may repurchase up to $1.0 billion under this program. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, there were no repurchases of our Class A common stock.
Covenants and Restrictions Related to our Long-Term Debt
We are subject to the covenants and restrictions set forth in the indentures related to our long-term debt. In particular, the indentures related to our outstanding senior notes issued by DISH DBS Corporation (“DISH DBS”) contain restrictive covenants that, among other things, impose limitations on the ability of DISH DBS and its restricted subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional indebtedness; (ii) enter into sale and leaseback transactions; (iii) pay dividends or make distributions on DISH DBS’ capital stock or repurchase DISH DBS’ capital stock; (iv) make certain investments; (v) create liens; (vi) enter into certain transactions with affiliates; (vii) merge or consolidate with another company; and (viii) transfer or sell assets. Should we fail to comply with these covenants, all or a portion of the debt under the senior notes and our other long-term debt could become immediately payable. The senior notes also provide that the debt may be required to be prepaid if certain change-in-control events occur. In addition, the Convertible Notes provide that, if a “fundamental change” (as defined in the related indenture) occurs, holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or part of their Convertible Notes. As of the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we and DISH DBS were in compliance with the covenants and restrictions related to our respective long-term debt.
Other
We are also vulnerable to fraud, particularly in the acquisition of new subscribers. While we are addressing the impact of subscriber fraud through a number of actions, there can be no assurance that we will not continue to experience fraud, which could impact our subscriber growth and churn. Economic weakness may create greater incentive for signal theft, piracy and subscriber fraud, which could lead to higher subscriber churn and reduced revenue.
Obligations and Future Capital Requirements
Contractual Obligations
See Note 16 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Future Capital Requirements
We expect to fund our future working capital, capital expenditures, other investments, and debt service requirements from cash generated from operations, existing cash, restricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities balances, and cash generated through raising additional capital. We will need to make significant additional investments to, among other things, complete our 5G Network Deployment and further commercialize, build-out and integrate our wireless spectrum licenses and related assets. The amount of capital required to fund our future working capital, capital expenditure and other investment needs varies, depending on, among other things, the rate at which we deploy our 5G network, the purchase of additional wireless spectrum licenses and the rate at which we acquire new subscribers and the cost of subscriber acquisition and retention, including capitalized costs associated with our new and existing subscriber equipment lease programs.
Certain of our capital expenditures for 2022 are expected to be driven by the rate at which we deploy our 5G network as well as costs associated with subscriber premises equipment. These expenditures are necessary for the deployment of our 5G network as well as to operate and maintain our DISH TV services. Consequently, we consider them to be non-discretionary. Our capital expenditures vary depending on the number of satellites leased or under construction at any point in time and could increase materially as a result of increased competition, significant satellite failures, or economic weakness and uncertainty. Our DISH TV subscriber base has been declining and there can be no assurance that our DISH TV subscriber base will not continue to decline and that the pace of such decline will not accelerate. In the event that our DISH TV subscriber base continues to decline, it will have a material adverse long-term effect on our cash flow. In addition, the Northstar and SNR Operative Agreements, as amended, provide for, among other things, the SNR Put Right and the Northstar Put Right for a purchase price that equals the equity contribution to Northstar Spectrum and SNR HoldCo, respectively, plus a fixed annual rate of return. During the fourth quarter of 2021 the SNR Put Right was exercised. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate value of Northstar Manager’s ownership interest in Northstar Spectrum and SNR Management’s ownership interest in SNR HoldCo was $395 million, recorded as “Redeemable noncontrolling interests” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We expect to incur significant capital expenditures in 2022 related to our 5G Network Deployment, including capital expenditures associated with our 5G Network Deployment, and the potential purchase of additional wireless spectrum licenses. The amount of capital required will also depend on the levels of investment necessary to support potential strategic initiatives that may arise from time to time. These factors, including a reduction in our available future cash flows, could require that we raise additional capital in the future.
Volatility in the financial markets has made it more difficult at times for issuers of high-yield indebtedness, such as us, to access capital markets at acceptable terms. These developments may have a significant effect on our cost of financing and our liquidity position.
Boost Mobile Acquisition
See Note 6 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information
Wireless - 5G Network Deployment
See Note 16 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Availability of Credit and Effect on Liquidity
The ability to raise capital has generally existed for us despite economic weakness and uncertainty. While modest fluctuations in the cost of capital will not likely impact our current operational plans, significant fluctuations could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect amounts reported therein. Management bases its estimates, judgments and assumptions on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from previously estimated amounts, and such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected prospectively in the period they occur. The following represent what we believe are the critical accounting policies that may involve a high degree of estimation, judgment and complexity. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, including those discussed below, see Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Valuation of intangible assets with indefinite lives. We evaluate the carrying amount of intangible assets with indefinite lives annually, and also when events and circumstances warrant.
Wireless Spectrum Licenses. During 2021, we acquired the 3550-3650 MHz (CBRS) and 3.7-3.98 GHz wireless licenses, together (the “C-Band Licenses”). During 2020, we acquired the 37 GHz, 39 GHz, and 47 GHz wireless licenses and during 2019, we acquired the 24 GHz and 28 GHz wireless licenses, together (the “High-Band Licenses”). In 2021, we combined our 600 MHz, 700 MHz, AWS-4, H Block, High-Band Licenses, C-Band Licenses and the Northstar Licenses and SNR Licenses into a single unit of accounting. In 2020 and 2019, we combined our 600 MHz, 700 MHz, AWS-4, H Block, and the Northstar Licenses and SNR Licenses into a single unit of accounting, excluding the High-Band Licenses. In 2021, 2020 and 2019, management performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceed the carrying amount. In our assessment, we considered several factors, including, among other things, the projected financial performance of our Wireless segment, the business enterprise value of our Wireless segment, and market transactions for wireless spectrum licenses including auction results. In assessing these factors, we considered both macroeconomic conditions and industry and market conditions. In contemplating all factors in their totality, we concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeds their carrying amount.
During 2020, our 37 GHz, 39 GHz, and 47 GHz wireless spectrum licenses were assessed as a single unit of accounting. These licenses were purchased during 2020 through our participation in Auction 103. For 2020, management’s assessment of the fair value of these licenses was determined based on the auction results.
During 2019, our 24 GHz and 28 GHz wireless spectrum licenses were assessed as a single unit of accounting. These licenses were purchased during the fourth quarter 2019 through our participation in Auction 101 and Auction 102. For 2019, management’s assessment of the fair value of these licenses was determined based on the auction results.
During 2021, 2020, and 2019, our multichannel video distribution and data service (“MVDDS”) wireless spectrum licenses were assessed as a single unit of accounting. For 2021, 2020 and 2019, management assessed these licenses qualitatively. Our qualitative assessment focused on recent auction results and historical market activity. We concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeded their carrying amount.
Changes in circumstances or market conditions could result in a write-down of any of the above wireless spectrum licenses in the future.
Income Taxes
Our income tax policy is to record the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Determining necessary valuation allowances requires us to make assessments about the timing of future events, including the probability of expected future taxable income and available tax planning opportunities. We periodically evaluate our need for a valuation allowance based on both historical evidence, including trends, and future expectations in each reporting period. Any such valuation allowance is recorded in either “Income tax (provision) benefit, net” on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) or “Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)” within “Stockholders’ equity (deficit)” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Future performance could have a significant effect on the realization of tax benefits, or reversals of valuation allowances, as reported in our consolidated results of operations.
Management evaluates the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions based on applicable tax law, regulations, case law, administrative rulings and pronouncements and the facts and circumstances surrounding the tax position. Changes in our estimates related to the recognition and measurement of the amount recorded for uncertain tax positions could result in significant changes in our “Income tax provision (benefit), net,” which could be material to our consolidated results of operations.
Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of any tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements.
Contingent Liabilities
A significant amount of management judgment is required in determining when, or if, an accrual should be recorded for a contingency and the amount of such accrual. Estimates generally are developed in consultation with counsel and are based on an analysis of potential outcomes. Due to the uncertainty of determining the likelihood of a future event occurring and the potential financial statement impact of such an event, it is possible that upon further development or resolution of a contingent matter, a charge could be recorded in a future period to “Selling, general and administrative expenses” or “Litigation expense” on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) that would be material to our consolidated results of operations and financial condition.
Business Combinations
When we acquire a business, we allocate the purchase price to the various components of the acquisition based upon the fair value of each component using various valuation techniques, including the market approach, income approach and/or cost approach. The accounting standard for business combinations requires identifiable assets, liabilities, noncontrolling interests and goodwill acquired to be recorded at acquisition date fair values. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows and the discount rate utilized.
Backlog
We do not have any material backlog of our products.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.