ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 and other information in this report, including Critical Accounting Estimates and Cautionary Information included at the end of this Item 7. The following discussion and analysis includes the results of operations for the twelve month periods ended September 2022 and September 2021. For more information regarding our business segments, see Item 1 “Business” of this Annual Report.
Business Update
While the Company experienced strong fiscal 2022 results, it remains cautious moving into fiscal 2023 and beyond based on a range of considerations including, but not limited to, those described below.
Our businesses continue to be impacted by a number of macro-economic factors including ongoing disruptions to global supply chains and product availability. These factors, combined with a highly inflationary operating environment have resulted in cost pressures across both of our business segments as product, labor, fuel, interest and other costs have all increased significantly.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, both of our businesses have experienced an increase in demand and sales across a broad range of product categories. It remains unclear, however, if these demand trends will remain intact or if they will eventually revert back to more historical levels over time, particularly as rapid inflation continues to impact consumer discretionary spending.
Finally, we continue to closely monitor proposals from governmental and regulatory bodies including the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) which are evaluating the prohibition and/or limitations on the sale of certain cigarette (menthol flavored) tobacco and e-cigarette/vaping products. If such regulations were to be implemented, they would have a negative impact on the Company’s financial results.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth an analysis of various components of the Company’s Statement of Operations as a percentage of sales for fiscal years 2022 and 2021:
The following table presents selected statement of operations data for fiscal years 2022 and 2021:
(1) Sales are reported net of costs associated with incentives provided to retailers. These incentives totaled $34.4 million and $30.1 million in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
(2) Calculated based on rounded numbers as presented in the table.
SALES
Changes in sales are driven by two primary components:
(i) changes to selling prices, which are largely controlled by our product suppliers, and excise taxes imposed on cigarettes and tobacco products by various states; and
(ii) changes in the volume and mix of products sold to our customers, either due to a change in purchasing patterns resulting from consumer preferences or the fluctuation in the comparable number of business days in our reporting period.
SALES-Fiscal 2022 vs. Fiscal 2021
Sales in our Wholesale Segment increased $339.5 million during fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. Significant items impacting sales during fiscal 2022 included a $298.4 million increase in sales related to the acquisition of Team Sledd, LLC (“Team Sledd”), a $79.1 million increase in sales related to price increases implemented by cigarette manufacturers, and a $49.9 million increase in sales related to higher sales volumes in our tobacco, confectionary, foodservice, and other categories (“Other Products”), partially offset by a $87.9 million decrease in sales related to the volume and mix of cigarette cartons sold.
Sales in our Retail Segment decreased $1.1 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. Significant items impacting sales during fiscal 2022 included a $1.5 million decrease in sales volume related to store closures across the comparative periods, partially offset by a $0.4 million increase in sales related to higher sales volumes in our existing stores.
GROSS PROFIT-Fiscal 2022 vs. Fiscal 2021
Our gross profit does not include fulfillment costs and costs related to the distribution network which are included in selling, general and administrative costs, and may not be comparable to those of other entities. Some entities may classify such costs as a component of cost of sales. Cost of sales, a component used in determining gross profit, for the wholesale and retail segments includes the cost of products purchased from manufacturers, less incentives we receive which are netted against such costs.
Gross profit in our Wholesale Segment increased $28.2 million during fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. Significant items impacting gross profit during fiscal 2022 included a $15.6 million increase in gross profit related to the acquisition of Team Sledd, a $11.7 million increase in gross profit related to higher sales volumes and promotions in our Other Products category, a $0.8 million increase in gross profit due to the timing and related benefits of cigarette manufacturer price increases between the comparative periods, and a $0.1 million increase in gross profit related to the net impact of cigarette manufacturer promotions and gross margin enhancement, and the volume and mix of cigarette cartons sold. Gross profit in our Retail Segment decreased $1.0 million in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021. This change was primarily related to $0.5 million in inventory losses related to Hurricane Ian, and a $0.5 million decrease related to store closures across the comparative periods.
OPERATING EXPENSE-Fiscal 2022 vs. Fiscal 2021
Operating expense includes selling, general and administrative expenses and depreciation and amortization. Selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily consist of costs related to our sales, warehouse, delivery and administrative departments, including purchasing and receiving costs, warehousing costs and costs of picking and loading customer orders. Our most significant expenses relate to costs associated with employees, facility and equipment leases, transportation, fuel, and insurance.
Our fiscal 2022 consolidated operating expenses increased $22.4 million as compared to fiscal 2021. Significant items impacting operating expenses during fiscal 2022 included a $11.6 million increase in operating expenses related to the acquisition of Team Sledd, and a $7.3 million increase in employee compensation and benefit costs largely due to a highly competitive labor market which has increased wage levels across all functional areas of the Company. In addition, the
Company experienced a $2.0 million increase in fuel costs primarily related to higher diesel fuel prices, and a $1.5 million increase in operating expenses, including health and other insurance costs and other operating expenses in our Wholesale and Retail Segments. Significant items impacting operating expenses in our Retail Segment during fiscal 2022 included a $0.3 million increase in other operating expenses and $0.2 million in operating costs related to Hurricane Ian, partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in operating expenses related to store closures across the comparative periods.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE - Fiscal 2022 vs. Fiscal 2021
The Company’s effective income tax rate increased during fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher non-deductible compensation during fiscal 2022, resulting in effective tax rates in excess of statutory rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s variability in cash flows from operating activities is dependent on the timing of inventory purchases and seasonal fluctuations. For example, periodically we have inventory “buy-in” opportunities which offer more favorable pricing terms. As a result, we may have to hold inventory for a period longer than the payment terms. This generates a cash outflow from operating activities which we expect to reverse in later periods. Additionally, during our peak time of operations in the warm weather months, we generally carry higher amounts of inventory to ensure high fill rates and customer satisfaction.
The Company primarily finances its operations through two credit facility agreements (the “AMCON Facility” and the “Team Sledd Facility”, and together “the Facilities”) and long-term debt agreements with banks. In Q3 2022, the Company amended the AMCON Facility, increasing its aggregate borrowing capacity from $110.0 million to $150.0 million, extending the maturity date from March 2025 to June 2027, and adding certain real estate properties as eligible borrowing collateral under the credit agreement.
At September 2022, the Facilities have a total combined borrowing capacity of $250.0 million, which includes provisions for up to $30.0 million in credit advances for certain inventory purchases. The Team Sledd Facility matures in March 2027 and the AMCON Facility matures in June 2027, each without a penalty for prepayment. Obligations under the Facilities are collateralized by substantially all of the Company’s respective equipment, intangibles, inventories, accounts receivable, and in the case of the AMCON Facility, certain of the Company’s real estate. The Facilities each feature an unused commitment fee and financial covenants including fixed charge coverage ratios. Borrowings under the Facilities bear interest at either the bank’s prime rate, the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) or the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), plus any applicable spreads.
The amount available for use from the Facilities at any given time is subject to a number of factors, including eligible accounts receivable and inventory balances that fluctuate day-to-day, as well as the value of certain real estate collateral. Based on the collateral and loan limits as defined in the Facility agreements, the credit limit of the combined Facilities at September 2022 was $184.8 million, of which $91.3 million was outstanding, leaving $93.5 million available.
The average interest rate of the Facilities was 5.11% at September 2022. During fiscal 2022, the peak borrowings under the Facilities was $123.5 million, and the average borrowings and average availability under the Facilities was $60.7 million and $69.4 million, respectively.
Cross Default and Co-Terminus Provisions
The Company owns real estate in Bismarck, ND, Quincy, IL, and Rapid City, SD, which was financed through a single term loan (the “Real Estate Loan”) with BMO Harris Bank N.A. (“BMO”) which is also a participant lender on the AMCON Facility. During Q4 2022, in connection with the amendment to the AMCON Facility during Q3 2022, the Company’s Real Estate Loan with BMO was terminated and the $4.2 million remaining principal was paid in full. The Company’s real properties that were subject to the terminated agreement are now collateral under the AMCON Facility. The Real Estate Loan contained cross default provisions which would have caused it to be considered in default if the loans where BMO is a lender, including the AMCON Facility, were in default. There were no such cross defaults at September 2021. In addition, the Real Estate Loan contained co-terminus provisions which would have required all loans
with BMO to be paid in full if any of the loans were paid in full prior to the end of their specified terms. Team Sledd’s three notes payable and the Team Sledd Facility contain cross default provisions. There were no such cross defaults at September 2022. The Company was in compliance with all of its financial covenants under the Facilities at September 2022.
Dividend Payments
The Company paid cash dividends of $3.4 million, or $5.72 per common share during each of fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Other
The Company has issued a letter of credit for $0.6 million to its workers’ compensation insurance carrier as part of its self-insured loss control program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Liquidity Risk
The Company’s liquidity position is significantly influenced by its ability to maintain sufficient levels of working capital. For our Company and our industry in general, customer credit risk and ongoing access to bank credit heavily influence liquidity positions.
The Company does not currently hedge its exposure to interest rate risk or fuel costs. Accordingly, significant price movements in these areas can and do impact the Company’s profitability.
While the Company believes its liquidity position going forward will be adequate to sustain operations in both the short- and long-term, a precipitous change in operating environment could materially impact the Company’s future revenue streams as well as its ability to collect on customer accounts receivable or secure bank credit.
OTHER MATTERS-Critical Accounting Estimates
GENERAL
The Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require the Company to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The Company believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our critical accounting estimates are set forth below.
ALLOWANCE FOR DOUBTFUL ACCOUNTS
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. The allowance for doubtful accounts represents our estimate of uncollectible accounts receivable at the balance sheet date. We monitor our credit exposure on a daily basis and regularly assess the adequacy of our allowance for doubtful accounts. Because credit losses can vary significantly over time, estimating the required allowance requires a number of assumptions that are uncertain.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. We estimate our required allowance for doubtful accounts using the following key assumptions:
● Historical collections-Represented as the amount of historical uncollectible accounts as a percent of total accounts receivable.
● Specific credit exposure on certain accounts-Identified based on management’s review of the accounts receivable portfolio and taking into account the financial wherewithal of particular customers that management deems to have a higher risk of collection.
● Market conditions-We consider a broad range of industry trends and macro-economic issues which may impact the creditworthiness of our customers.
INVENTORIES
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. In our businesses, we carry large quantities and dollar amounts of inventory. Inventories primarily consist of finished products purchased in bulk quantities to be sold to our customers. Given the large quantities and broad range of products we carry, there is a risk that inventory may become impaired because it has become unsaleable or unrefundable, slow moving, obsolete, or because it has been discontinued. The use of estimates is required in determining either the net realizable value (for our wholesale business) or the lower of cost or market (“LCM”) under the retail method (for our retail business) of this inventory.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. We estimate our inventory obsolescence reserve at each balance sheet date based on the following criteria:
● Slow moving products-Items identified as slow moving are evaluated on a case-by-case basis for impairment.
● Obsolete/discontinued inventory-Products identified that are near or beyond their expiration dates. We may also discontinue carrying certain product lines for our customers. As a result, we estimate either the net realizable value or the LCM of this inventory as if it were to be liquidated.
● Estimated net realizable value-For our wholesale business, the net realizable value of the inventory is estimated using management’s evaluation of the congestion in the distribution channels and experience with brokers and inventory liquidators to determine the net realizable value of the inventory.
DEPRECIATION, AMORTIZATION AND IMPAIRMENT OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS, INCLUDING GOODWILL AND LEASED RIGHT-OF-USE ASSETS
Long-lived assets consist primarily of property and equipment, leased right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, intangible assets, and goodwill acquired in business combinations. Property and equipment, ROU assets and amortizable identified intangible assets are assigned useful lives ranging from 1 to 40 years. Indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill are not amortized. Impairment of the Company’s long-lived assets is assessed during the Company’s fourth fiscal quarter using both qualitative and quantitative analysis, or whenever events or circumstances change that indicate the carrying value of such long-lived assets may not be recoverable.
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. Management has to estimate the useful lives of the Company’s long-lived assets. In regard to the Company’s impairment analysis, the most significant assumptions include management’s estimate of the annual growth rate used to project future sales and expenses.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. For property and equipment, depreciable lives are based on our accounting policy which is intended to mirror the expected useful life of the asset. In determining the estimated useful life of ROU assets and amortizable intangible assets such as customer lists, we rely on our historical experience in addition to estimates of how long certain assets will generate cash flows. If impairment indicators arise, we then evaluate the potential
impairment of property and equipment, ROU assets and amortizable identifiable intangible assets using an undiscounted future cash flow approach.
When evaluating the potential impairment of non-amortizable indefinite-lived assets and goodwill, the Company first assesses a range of qualitative factors, including but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for the Company’s products and services, market prices, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, and the overall financial performance for each of the Company’s reporting units. If after completing this assessment, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative evaluation is performed using the income approach (discounted cash flow method).
A discounted cash flow methodology requires the estimation of a wide range of factors including but not limited to: (i) forecasting future earnings and cash flows (ii) determining the discount rate applicable to the earnings stream being discounted, and (iii) computing a terminal value at some point in the future. These estimations require significant judgment and include making assumptions such as sales growth rates including the addition of new retail stores, future store profitability, planned capital expenditures, our ability to control costs, the successful implementation of initiatives designed to enhance sales and improve inventory management, gross profit estimates, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for the Company’s products and services, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, working capital requirements, weighted average cost of capital, and current and anticipated operating conditions. The use of different assumptions or estimates for future cash flows could produce different results.
Goodwill recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet represents amounts allocated to its wholesale reporting unit which totaled $5.3 million and $4.4 million at September 2022 and September 2021, respectively. The Company determined that the estimated fair value of its wholesale reporting unit exceeded its carrying value at both September 2022 and September 2021.
INSURANCE
The Company’s insurance for workers’ compensation, general liability and employee-related health care benefits are provided through high-deductible or self-insured programs. As a result, the Company accrues for its workers’ compensation liability based upon claim reserves established with the assistance of a third-party administrator, which are then trended and developed. The reserves are evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Due to the uncertainty involved with the realization of claims incurred but unreported, management is required to make estimates of these claims.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. In order to estimate our reserve for incurred but unreported claims we consider the following key factors:
Employee Health Insurance Claims
● Historical claims experience-We review loss runs for each month to calculate the average monthly claims experience.
● Lag period for reporting claims-Based on our analysis, our experience is such that we have a minimum of a one month lag period in which claims are reported.
Workers’ Compensation Insurance Claims
● Historical claims experience-We review prior years’ loss runs to estimate the average annual expected claims and review monthly loss runs to compare our estimates to actual claims.
● Lag period for reporting claims-We review claims trends and use standard insurance industry loss models to develop reserves on reported claims in order to estimate the amount of incurred but unreported claims.
INCOME TAXES
The Company accounts for its income taxes by recording taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. These expected future tax consequences are measured based on provisions of tax law as currently enacted; the effects of future changes in tax laws are not anticipated. Future tax law changes, such as a change in the corporate tax rate, could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
On a periodic basis, we assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and establish a related valuation allowance as appropriate. In performing our evaluation, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of the evidence, a valuation allowance is needed. Evidence used includes information about our current financial position and our results of operations for the current and preceding years, as well as all currently available information about future years, including our anticipated future performance, the reversal of deferred tax liabilities and tax planning strategies. When appropriate, we record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets to offset future tax benefits that may not be realized.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. In determining whether a valuation allowance is appropriate, we consider whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized, based in part upon management’s judgments regarding future events.
In making that estimate we consider the following key factors:
● our current financial position;
● historical financial information;
● future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences;
● future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards;
● taxable income in prior carryback years; and
● tax planning strategies.
REVENUE RECOGNITION
We recognize revenue in both our Wholesale Segment and our Retail Segment when the performance obligation is satisfied, which is the point at which control of the promised goods or services are transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods and services. For the majority of our customer arrangements, control transfers to customers at a point-in-time when goods have been delivered, as that is generally when legal title, physical possession and risks and rewards of goods and services transfers to the customer. Sales are shown net of returns, discounts, and sales incentives to customers.
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. We estimate and reserve for anticipated sales discounts. We also estimate and provide a reserve for anticipated sales incentives to customers when earned under established program requirements.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. We estimate the sales reserves using the following criteria:
● Sales discounts-We use historical experience to estimate the amount of accounts receivable that will not be collected due to customers taking advantage of authorized term discounts.
● Volume sales incentives-We use historical experience in combination with quarterly reviews of customers’ sales progress in order to estimate the amount of volume incentives due to the customers on a periodic basis.
Our estimates and assumptions for each of the aforementioned critical accounting estimates have not changed materially during the periods presented, nor are we aware of any reasons that they would be reasonably likely to change in the future.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS
Assets acquired and liabilities assumed as part of a business acquisition are generally recorded at their fair value at the date of acquisition. Determining fair value of identifiable assets acquired, particularly intangibles, and liabilities assumed also requires management to make estimates, which are based on all available information and in some cases assumptions with respect to the timing and amount of future revenues and expenses associated with an asset.
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired, based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over these fair values is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to the projected growth factors, future expected cash flows, discount rates, potential competitive and regulatory environment developments, and changes in the market for the Company's products and services. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Additionally, estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as new information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
MANDATORILY REDEEMABLE NON-CONTROLLING INTEREST
Mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest represents the non-controlling interest in the Company’s strategic investment in Team Sledd, LLC.
NATURE OF ESTIMATES REQUIRED. We record the mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest at fair value. This valuation requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to the timing of future redemptions and discount rates.
ASSUMPTIONS AND APPROACH USED. Critical estimates in valuing the mandatorily redeemable non-controlling interest include but are not limited to the projected growth factors, future expected cash flows, discount rates, potential competitive and regulatory environment developments, and changes in the market for the Company's products and services. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates.
ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”, which introduces a forward-looking approach, based on expected losses, to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments, including trade receivables. The estimate of expected credit losses will require entities to incorporate considerations of historical information, current information and reasonable and supportable forecasts. This ASU also expands the disclosure requirements to enable users of financial statements to understand the entity’s assumptions, models and methods for estimating expected credit losses. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 (fiscal 2024 for the Company) with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently reviewing this ASU and its potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and other sections, contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks and uncertainties and which reflect management’s current beliefs and estimates of future economic circumstances, industry conditions, Company performance and financial results. Forward-looking statements include information concerning the possible or assumed
future results of operations of the Company and those statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words “future,” “position,” “anticipate(s),” “expect(s),” “believe(s),” “see,” “plan,” “further improve,” “outlook,” “should” or similar expressions. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance or results. They involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions.
It should be understood that the following important factors, in addition to those discussed elsewhere in this document, could affect the future results of the Company and could cause those results to differ materially from those expressed in our forward-looking statements:
● risks associated with an inflationary operating environment, particularly as it relates to wages, fuel, interest and commodity prices which impact our operating cost structure and could impact food ingredient costs and demand for many of the products we sell,
● regulations, potential bans and/or litigation related to the manufacturing, distribution, and sale of certain cigarette, tobacco, and e-cigarette/vaping products by the FDA, state or local governmental agencies, or other parties, including proposed forthcoming regulations around the manufacture and distribution of certain menthol and flavored tobacco products,
● risks associated with the threat or occurrence of epidemics or pandemics (such as COVID-19 or its variants) or other public health issues, including the continued health of our employees and management, the reduced demand for our goods and services or increased credit risk from customer credit defaults resulting from an economic downturn,
● risks associated with the imposition of governmental orders restricting our operations and the operations of our suppliers and customers, in particular, disruptions to our supply chain or our ability to procure products or fulfill orders due to labor shortages in our warehouse operations,
● risks associated with the Company’s business model which since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic has experienced both higher sales volumes and labor costs, and the related risk of sales returning to more historical levels without the Company being able to offset increases in its cost structure,
● risks associated with the acquisition of assets or new businesses or investments in equity investees by either of our business segments including, but not limited to, risks associated with purchase price and business valuation and recording risks, vendor and customer retention risks, employee and technology integration risks, and risks related to the assumption of certain liabilities or obligations,
● increasing competition and market conditions in our wholesale and retail health food businesses and any associated impact on the carrying value and any potential impairment of assets (including intangible assets) within those businesses,
● that our repositioning strategy for our retail business will not be successful,
● risks associated with opening new retail stores,
● if online shopping formats such as Amazon™ continue to grow in popularity and further disrupt traditional sales channels, it may present a significant direct risk to our brick and mortar retail business and potentially to our wholesale distribution business,
● the potential impact that ongoing, decreasing, or changing trade tariffs and trade policies may have on our product costs or on consumer disposable income and demand,
● increasing product and operational costs resulting from ongoing supply chain disruptions, an intensely competitive labor market with a limited pool of qualified workers, and higher incremental costs associated with the handling and transportation of certain product categories such as foodservice,
● increases in state and federal excise taxes on cigarette and tobacco products and the potential impact on demand, particularly as it relates to current legislation under consideration which could significantly increase such taxes,
● risks associated with disruptions to our technology systems or those of third parties upon which we rely, including security breaches, cyber-attacks, malware, or other methods by which such information systems could be compromised,
● increases in inventory carrying costs and customer credit risks,
● changes in pricing strategies and/or promotional/incentive programs offered by cigarette and tobacco manufacturers,
● changing demand for the Company’s products, particularly cigarette, tobacco and e-cigarette/vaping products,
● risks that product manufacturers may begin selling directly to convenience stores and bypass wholesale distributors,
● changes in laws and regulations and ongoing compliance related to health care and associated insurance,
● increasing health care costs for both the Company and consumers and its potential impact on discretionary consumer spending,
● decreased availability of capital resources,
● domestic regulatory and legislative risks,
● poor weather conditions, and the adverse effects of climate change,
● consolidation trends within the convenience store, wholesale distribution, and retail health food industries,
● natural disasters and domestic or political unrest, or any restrictions, regulations, or security measures implemented by governmental bodies in response to these items, and
● other risks over which the Company has little or no control, and any other factors not identified herein.
Changes in these factors could result in significantly different results. Consequently, future results may differ from management’s expectations. Moreover, past financial performance should not be considered a reliable indicator of future performance. Any forward-looking statement contained herein is made as of the date of this document. Except as required by law, the Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or correct any of these forward-looking statements in the future to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of material events or changes in future operating results, financial conditions or business over time.