Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Financial measures included herein have been presented on a generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") basis.
Business Outlook
Fiscal year 2022 marked another year of strong organic growth for Delta Apparel and highlighted the collective reach of our multiple go-to-market strategies. The combination of our vertically integrated manufacturing and service platforms with our diversified distribution allowed us to successfully navigate what was a dynamic business and economic environment throughout the year. All five of our market channels - Delta Direct, Global Brands, Retail Direct, DTG2Go, and Salt Life - delivered year-over-year sales increases and drove overall sales growth of 11%. For the year, we achieved a 6.6% operating margin on $484.7 million in net sales, and earnings of $2.80 per diluted share.
Our Delta Group segment’s fully integrated Activewear and DTG2Go businesses continue to offer solutions to a broadening spectrum of customers across the apparel industry. Our Activewear business is organized around three key customer channels - Delta Direct, Global Brands, and Retail Direct - that are distinct in their market approaches and customer bases. Our Delta Direct channel offers the screen print, promotional, eRetailer and retail licensing markets a broad portfolio of apparel and accessories under the Delta, Delta Platinum, and Soffe brands, including basic, performance, fashion basic and other elevated product offerings, as well as sourced items from select third party brands.
Our Global Brands channel serves as a key supply chain partner to large multi-national brands, providing services ranging from custom product development to value-added “retail-ready” enhancements, and our Retail Direct channel provides our portfolio of Delta, Delta Platinum, and Soffe products with value-added “retail-ready” enhancements directly to the brick and mortar retail locations and ecommerce fulfillment centers of a customer base ranging from sporting goods and outdoor retailers, specialty and resort shops, and farm and fleet stores to department stores and mid-tier retailers. Our onshore and nearshore manufacturing and fulfillment platforms, coupled with a distribution network spanning the United States, continue to become more integral to brand and retailer sourcing strategies and generate new interest from customers looking to reach the United States market more efficiently and manage supply chain risks associated with international trade policy, ESG priorities, inflationary pressures, and supply chain disruptions.
Our DTG2Go business and its leadership position in digital print and fulfillment give us the unique ability to offer customers across all of our channels a seamless make-on-demand solution. DTG2Go continues to grow through its “digital first” strategy, achieving strong double-digit sales growth in fiscal year 2022, including increased units and revenue. More and more customers across the apparel industry see the compelling economics of DTG2Go’s digital make-on-demand model as a desirable alternative to traditional make-to-forecast models, particularly when integrated with our Delta Direct channel’s vertical supply of blank garments.
Profitability at DTG2Go was impacted during the year by additional costs for equipment to further its “digital first” model and the tight domestic labor market, but we expect operating margins to improve materially over time. We see more exciting growth potential at DTG2Go going forward as the apparel industry migrates more towards the DTG2Go model, selling prices continue to grow, and we increase our output to meet elevating demand.
Our Delta Group segment achieved significant overall growth for the year even as demand between its various market channels shifted, with strong order flow in our Global Brands and DTG2Go channels helping to offset slowness in our Delta Direct channel to end the year. Our Delta Direct channel was heavily impacted by strong inflationary pressures on both input and labor costs that resulted in some downward pressure on gross margins in the second half of year. We expect this market fluidity and inflationary cost environment to continue in fiscal year 2023, and we will continue to leverage the flexibility of our vertical platform and adjust production levels to manage inventory, mitigate higher input costs, and stay aligned with customer demand.
Our Salt Life Group segment continued to excel in fiscal year 2022, producing record revenues of $60.3 million and a strong double-digit sales increase of 21% percent over the prior year. Growing consumer awareness and engagement with the Salt Life lifestyle brand, together with the Salt Life team’s ability to manage supply chain issues and shipping delays, culminated in organic growth across all three Salt Life omnichannel markets - wholesale, retail, and ecommerce - in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022. We look for that growth trend to continue in fiscal year 2023.
With the milestone achievement of eight new store openings in fiscal year 2022, there are now 21 Salt Life branded retail doors open for business across the United States coastline from Southern California to Key West and up the eastern seaboard to Rehoboth Beach, Delaware. We expect to continue to expand Salt Life’s retail footprint with six to eight planned store openings in 2023, including a new location in Long Branch, New Jersey in the coming months to further Salt Life’s geographic reach in the northeast.
We continue to invest in marketing initiatives designed to elevate the Salt Life brand and drive increased engagement. Salt Life’s YouTube channel reached 7.1 million views in fiscal 2022, a 36% increase over the prior year. Beyond YouTube, Salt Life’s social media channel net audience spanning Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn and Pinterest grew nearly 85% on the year. Salt Life also continues to interact with consumers through its online content portal, The Daily Salt, and its Salt Life-branded podcast, Above and Below.
Overall fiscal 2022 was another excellent year for Delta Apparel. Our performance highlights the strong foundation across our business segments and the benefits of our broad channels of distribution, the demand for our unique product and service offerings, the efficiencies of our vertically integrated operations, and the emotional connection our lifestyle brand, Salt Life, has with a broad range of consumers. Although we move into fiscal year 2023 with some unsettled economic conditions, we believe that we continue to be well-positioned to take advantage of opportunities as they arise and win additional market share.
Results of Operations
Net sales for 2022 were $484.9 million, up 11.0% from $436.8 million in the prior year. Our growth was broad-based with sales increasing year-over year in both the Delta Group and Salt Life Group segments.
Delta Group segment net sales increased 10% to $424.8 million in 2022 compared to prior year net sales of $387.0 million. Within the Activewear business, our Global Brand and Retail Direct channels both achieved double-digit year over year growth, and our Delta Direct channel achieved single-digit year over year growth. Our DTG2Go business achieved both unit and sales dollar growth, resulting in sales growth of 17% over the prior year.
Salt Life Group segment net sales were $60.1 million in 2022, increasing 21% from $49.7 million in the prior year. During fiscal 2022, the segment saw both wholesale and direct-to-consumer retail channel growth over the prior year. Salt Life also opened eight new branded retail doors, bringing our total retail store locations to 21.
Overall gross profit increased by 7% to $108.8 million from $101.9 million in the prior year. Gross margins were 22.4% of sales, a decline of 90 basis points from prior year gross margins of 23.3% of sales. The decline from the prior year is a result of increased input costs in the Delta Group, offset by favorable sales mix in the Salt Life group.
Delta Group segment gross margins were 18.3% compared to 20.2% in the prior year. Margins were negatively impacted by increasing input costs and labor costs.
Salt Life Group segment gross margins improved by 370 basis points to 51.6% compared to 47.9% in 2021. Margins were favorably impacted by a stronger mix of direct-to-consumer sales and favorable mix of higher profit products.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses in 2022 were $79.5 million, or 16.4% of sales, compared to $70.7 million, or 16.2% of sales, in 2021. Expenses increased in 2022 due to higher selling costs associated with the expansion of Salt Life’s retail footprint and higher distribution labor costs.
Other income of $2.4 million in 2022 included $0.9 million in profits related to our equity investment in Green Valley Industrial Park, S.A. de C.V., the Honduran entity that owns and operates the industrial park in Naco, Quimistan, Santa Barbara Honduras, where our Ceiba Textiles facility is located ("Honduran Equity Method Investment"), as well as $1.9 million in income from the net reduction in contingent consideration liabilities, offset by a loss on the disposal of fixed assets of $0.4 million. In the prior year, other income of $1.6 million included $0.5 million of profits related to our Honduran Equity Method investment as well as $2.4 million income from the net reduction in contingent consideration liabilities, partially offset by $1.3 million of expenses related to the impact of the two hurricanes that disrupted our Honduran manufacturing facilities in the December quarter.
Operating income for 2022 was $31.8 million. This compares to an operating income of $32.7 million in the prior year.
Delta Group segment operating income for 2022 was $38.0 million, or 9.0% of sales, compared to $40.0 million, or 10.3% of sales, in 2021. The decline in operating income is attributable to gross margin decline from increasing input costs.
Salt Life Group segment operating income was $8.2 million for 2022 compared to prior year operating income of $5.8 million. Operating income improved due to higher sales volume coupled with favorable product mix.
Interest expense for 2022 was $7.7 million compared to $6.8 million in 2021. The increase is primarily due to higher average debt levels.
Our 2022 effective income tax rate is 17.9% compared to 21.9% in the prior year. See Note 9-Income Taxes for more information.
Net income attributable to shareholders in 2022 was $19.7 million, or $2.80 per diluted share. Our prior year net income was $20.3 million, or $2.86 per diluted share.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Cash Flows
Cash used by operating activities in 2022 was $20.1 million, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $25.5 million in 2021. The lower operating cash flows in 2022 primarily relate to increasing input costs and higher ending inventory levels at year-end.
Investing Cash Flows
Cash used in investing activities in 2022 and 2021 was $13.0 million. Capital expenditures during 2022 and 2021 were $19.9 and $15.8 million, respectively. Capital expenditures in both periods primarily related to investments in our distribution expansion, digital print equipment, information technology, and retail stores. There were $10.4 million in expenditures financed under capital lease arrangements and $1.0 million in unpaid expenditures as of September 2022.
We currently expect to spend less on capital expenditures in 2023 as compared to 2022. These projects would be focused on digital print equipment, information technology, manufacturing efficiency, and direct-to-consumer investments, including new Salt Life retail store openings.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $24.1 million in 2022 compared to cash used of $19.5 million in 2021. In 2022, we increased the amount outstanding on our U.S credit facility and utilized cash proceeds to fund operating activities and certain capital investments, as well as the required payments on our capital lease financing. Additionally, in the current year we entered into a new Honduran term loan with a principal of $3.7 million and a new term loan related to our El Salvador facility for $3.0 million, both with five-year terms. We repurchased $4.0 million shares of our common stock during 2022 compared to no share repurchases in 2021.
Future Liquidity and Capital Resources
See Note 8 - Long-Term Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of our various financing arrangements, including the terms of our revolving U.S. credit facility.
Our asset-based U.S. revolving credit facility, as amended on June 2, 2022, as well as cash flows from operations, are intended to fund our day-to-day working capital needs, along with capital lease financing arrangements, to fund our planned capital expenditures. However, any material deterioration in our results of operations may result in the loss of our ability to borrow under our U.S. revolving credit facility and to issue letters of credit to suppliers, or may cause the borrowing availability under that facility to be insufficient for our needs. Availability under our credit facility is primarily a function of the levels of our accounts receivable and inventory. A significant deterioration in our accounts receivable or inventory levels could restrict our ability to borrow additional funds or service our indebtedness.
Our credit facility includes a financial covenant that if the availability under our credit facility falls below the amounts specified in our credit agreement, our Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (“FCCR”) (as defined in our credit agreement) for the preceding 12-month period must not be less than 1.0. Our availability at September 2022, was above the minimum thresholds specified in our credit agreement, and we were above the 1.0 FCCR for the preceding 12-month period. A significant deterioration in our business could cause our availability to fall below minimum thresholds, thereby requiring us to maintain the minimum FCCR specified in our credit agreement, which we may not be able to maintain.
Derivative Instruments
From time to time, we may purchase cotton option contracts to economically hedge the risk related to market fluctuations in the cost of cotton used in our operations. We do not receive hedge accounting treatment for these derivatives. As such, the realized gains and losses associated with them were recorded within cost of goods sold on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. There were no material option agreements that were outstanding at September 2022.
From time to time, we may use interest rate swaps or other instruments to manage our interest rate exposure and reduce the impact of future interest rate changes. These financial instruments are not used for trading or speculative purposes. We have designated our interest rate swap contracts as cash flow hedges of our future interest payments. As a result, the gains and losses on the swap contracts are reported as a component of other comprehensive income and are reclassified into interest expense as the related interest payments are made. As of September 2022, all of other comprehensive income was attributable to shareholders and; none related to the non-controlling interest. The changes in fair value of the interest rate swap agreements resulted in other comprehensive gain, net of taxes, of $0.9 million for the year ended September 2022, and other comprehensive gain, net of taxes, of $0.5 million for the year ended September 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of September 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that were material to our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows as defined by Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC other than letters of credit, and purchase obligations. We have disclosed letters of credit and purchase obligations in Note 15-Commitments and Contingencies.
Dividends and Purchases of our Own Shares
Pursuant to the terms of our credit facility, we are allowed to make cash dividends and stock repurchases if (i) as of the date of the payment or repurchase and after giving effect to the payment or repurchase, we have availability on that date of not less than 15% of the lesser of the borrowing base or the commitment, and average availability for the 30-day period immediately preceding that date of not less than 15% of the lesser of the borrowing base or the commitment; and (ii) the aggregate amount of dividends and stock repurchases after May 10, 2016, does not exceed $10 million plus 50% of our cumulative net income (as defined in the Amended Credit Agreement) from the first day of the third quarter of 2016 to the date of determination. At September 2022, and September 2021, there was $24.9 million and $19.0 million, respectively, of retained earnings free of restrictions to make cash dividends or stock repurchases.
Our Board of Directors did not declare, nor were any dividends paid, during 2022 and 2021. Any future cash dividend payments will depend upon our earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, compliance with loan covenants and other relevant factors.
As of September 2022, our Board of Directors had authorized management to use up to $60.0 million to repurchase stock in open market transactions under our Stock Repurchase Program. During 2022, we purchased 136,181 shares of our common stock for a total cost of $4.0 million. There were no repurchases of our common stock in 2021. As of September 2022, we had purchased 3,735,114 shares of common stock for an aggregate of $56.4 million since the inception of the Stock Repurchase Program. All purchases were made at the discretion of management and pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of SEC Rule 10b-18. As of September 2022, $3.6 million remained authorized by our Board of Directors for future purchases under our Stock Repurchase Program, which does not have an expiration date.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have no reason to believe that our past estimates have not been appropriate. Our most critical accounting estimates, discussed below, pertain to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, inventories and related reserves, the carrying value of goodwill, and the accounting for income taxes.
Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements includes a summary of the significant accounting policies or methods used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when performance obligations under the terms of the contracts are satisfied. Our performance obligations primarily consist of delivering products to our customers. Control is transferred upon providing the products to customers in our retail stores, upon shipment of our products to the consumers from our ecommerce sites, and upon shipment from our distribution centers to our customers in our wholesale operations. Once control is transferred to the customer, we have completed our performance obligation.
In certain areas of our wholesale business, we offer discounts and allowances to support our customers. Some of these arrangements are written agreements, while others may be implied by customary practices in the industry. Wholesale sales are recorded net of discounts, allowances, and operational chargebacks. As certain allowances and other deductions are not finalized until the end of a season, program or other event which may not have occurred, we estimate such discounts, allowances, and returns that we expect to provide.
We record reductions to revenue for estimated customer returns, allowances, markdowns and discounts. We estimate these reductions based on historical rates of customer returns and allowances as well as the specific identification of outstanding returns, markdowns and allowances that have not yet been received by us. The actual amount of customer returns and allowances, which is inherently uncertain, may differ from our estimates. If we determine that actual or expected returns or allowances are significantly higher or lower than the reserves we established, we would record a reduction or increase, as appropriate, to net sales in the period in which we make such a determination. Reserves for returns, allowances, markdowns and discounts are included within accrued expenses as refund liabilities, and the value of inventory associated with reserves for sales returns are included within prepaid expenses and other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of September 2022, and September 2021, there was $1.1 million and $1.0 million, respectively, in refund liabilities for customer returns, allowances, markdowns and discounts included within accrued expenses.
Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves
Accounts receivable consists primarily of receivables from our customers arising from the sale of our products, and we generally do not require collateral from our customers. We actively monitor our exposure to credit risk through the use of credit approvals and credit limits. Accounts receivable is presented net of reserves for doubtful accounts.
We estimate the net collectability of our accounts receivable and establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based upon this assessment. In situations where we are aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligation, such as in the case of a bankruptcy filing, we assess the need for a specific reserve for bad debts. Reserves are determined through analysis of the aging of accounts receivable balances, historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit-worthiness, current economic trends and changes in customer payment terms. Although our historical allowances have been materially accurate, if market conditions change, additional reserves may be required. Bad debt expense was less than 1% of net sales in each of 2022 and 2021.
Inventories and Related Reserves
We state inventories at the lower of cost and net realizable value using the first-in, first-out method. Inventory cost includes materials, labor and manufacturing overhead on manufactured inventory and all direct and associated costs, including inbound freight, to acquire sourced products. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record reserves for obsolescence, excess quantities, irregulars and slow-moving inventory based on historical selling prices, current market conditions, and forecasted product demand to reduce inventory to its net realizable value. Although our historical reserves have been materially accurate, if actual selling prices are less favorable than those projected or if sell-through of the inventory is more difficult than anticipated, additional inventory reserves may be required.
Goodwill
Goodwill and definite-lived intangibles were recorded in conjunction with our acquisitions of Salt Life, DTG2Go, and Silk Screen Ink, Ltd. d/b/a SSI Digital Print Services, (“SSI”). We did not record any separately identifiable indefinite-lived intangibles associated with any of these acquisitions. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price and related costs over the value assigned to net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill must be tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired, and goodwill is required to be written down when impaired. The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually on the first day of our third fiscal quarter, or more often if events occur or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. We assess the value of our goodwill under either a qualitative or quantitative approach. Under a qualitative approach, the Company evaluates various market and other factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the Company’s goodwill has been impaired. In performing the qualitative assessment, the Company considers the carrying value of its reporting units compared to its fair value as well as events and changes in circumstances that could include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, and significant adverse changes in the price of the Company’s common stock. If such qualitative assessment indicates that impairment may have occurred, an additional quantitative assessment is performed by comparing the carrying value of the assets to their respective estimated fair values. If the recorded carrying value of goodwill exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recorded to write the asset down to its estimated fair value.
The Company’s goodwill impairment loss calculations contain uncertainties because they require management to make significant judgments in estimating the fair value of the Company’s reporting units, including the projection of future cash flows and the selection of discount rates. These calculations contain uncertainties because they require management to make assumptions such as estimating economic factors, including the profitability of future business operations and, if necessary, the fair value of the reporting unit’s assets and liabilities. Further, the Company’s ability to realize the future cash flows used in its fair value calculations is affected by factors such as changes in economic conditions, changes in the Company’s operating performance, and changes in the Company’s business strategies. Significant changes in any of the assumptions involved in calculating these estimates could affect the estimated fair value of the Company’s reporting units and could result in impairment charges in a future period.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as operating loss, interest deductions, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. A valuation allowance is required to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets to the amount that is more-likely-than-not to be realized. In making this final determination, we follow the Accounting Standards Codification 740, Income Taxes ("ASC 740"), and look to taxable income in prior carryback years, reversals of existing temporary book/tax differences, tax planning strategies and future taxable income exclusive of reversals of existing temporary differences. By its very nature, future taxable income requires estimates and judgments about future events that may be predictable, but are far less certain than past events that can be objectively measured.
We established a valuation allowance related to certain of our state operating loss carryforward amounts in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. We continually review the adequacy of the valuation allowance and recognize the benefits of deferred tax assets if reassessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized based on earnings forecasts in the respective state tax jurisdictions. As of September 2022, we had state NOLs of approximately $41.6 million, with deferred tax assets of $2.0 million related to these state NOLs, and related valuation allowances against them of approximately $0.6 million. These state net loss carryforwards expire at various intervals from 2027 through 2040.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information regarding recently issued accounting standards, refer to Note 2(ad) and Note 2(ae) to our Consolidated Financial Statements.