ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “Deep Lake Capital Acquisition Corp.,” “Deep Lake,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Deep Lake Capital Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on November 6, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “business combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Deep Lake Capital Sponsor LP, a Cayman Islands exempted limited partnership (the “sponsor”). The registration statement for our public offering was declared effective on January 12, 2021. On January 15, 2021, we consummated our public offering of 20,700,000 units (the “units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the units being offered, the “public shares”), including 2,700,000 additional units to cover the underwriters’ over-allotment, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $207.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $12.2 million, of which approximately $7.2 million was for deferred underwriting commissions (Note 6).
Simultaneously with the closing of our public offering, we consummated the private placement (“private placement”) of 6,140,000 warrants (each, a “private placement warrant” and collectively, the “private placement warrants”), at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant with the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $6.1 million (Note 5).
Upon the closing of our public offering and the private placement, $207.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of our public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in a trust account (“trust account”), located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee. Except with respect to the payment of taxes, unless and until we complete an initial business combination, no proceeds held in the trust account will be available for our use. The proceeds held in the trust account may not be invested or bear interest until January 1, 2022, after which the proceeds will be held in an interest-bearing trust account. After January 2022, the proceeds held in the trust account will be invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our public offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a business combination successfully. We must complete one or more initial business combination(s) having an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the assets held in the trust account (excluding any deferred underwriters’ fees and taxes payable on the interest income earned on the trust account at the time of the Company’s signing of a definitive agreement in connection with the initial business combination) at the time of the agreement to enter into the initial business combination. However, we will only complete a business combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our tax obligations, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.8 million in our operating bank account and working capital deficit of approximately $210,000.
Our liquidity needs through December 31, 2021 were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the sponsor to purchase for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, the loan of approximately $94,000 from the sponsor under the Note (see Note 5), and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the trust account. We repaid approximately $43,000 under the Note on January 15, 2021 and repaid the remaining Note balance of approximately $51,000 on January 21, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans (see Note 5). As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the liquidity needs, the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after January 15, 2023. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. Management plans to complete a business combination prior to the mandatory liquidation date.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and our public offering, and, subsequent to our public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $4.0 million, which is largely due to a non-cash gain resulting from changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of approximately $5.9 million, offset by a non-operating expense of approximately $0.6 million related to offering costs allocated to warrant liabilities and operating expenses of approximately $1.3 million. Operating expenses consisted of approximately $1.1 million in general and administrative expenses, and approximately $180,000 in general and administrative expenses with related parties.
For the period from November 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $118,000, which was related to general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date that the Company’s securities were first listed on Nasdaq through the earlier of our consummation of a business combination and its liquidation, we agreed to pay the sponsor, or an affiliate of the sponsor, $15,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to the Company. Upon completion of the initial business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees. The Company incurred $180,000 and $0 in general and administrative expenses related to the agreement, which is recognized in the accompanying statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from November 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $45,000 in outstanding balance under this agreement.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Units (including securities contained therein) and the units that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants or the warrants issued as part of the units upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of our public offering requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to Class A ordinary shares). The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, the holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include such securities in other registration statements filed by the Company and rights to require the Company to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. However, the registration rights agreement provides that the Company would not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering the Company’s securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $4.1 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of our public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $7.2 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including issued share purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with our public offering (the “public warrants”) and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the public warrants has been measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation. At issuance, the initial fair value of the private placement warrants has been measured using a modified Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of the public warrants has subsequently been determined using listed prices in an active market for such warrants. The fair value of the private placement warrants as of December 31, 2021 is the same as the public warrants, which are based on observable listed prices. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares is classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of our Initial Public Offering, 207,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet. There were no Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Effective with the closing of our public offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. This presentation assumes a business combination as the most likely outcome. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in our public offering (including the consummation of the over-allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 16,490,000 Class A ordinary shares, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same (except for the number of shares) as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The Company has considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from weighted average number as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, the Company included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the interim period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective approach. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates if currently adopted would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.