ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The objectives of our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are to provide users of our consolidated financial statements with a narrative explanation from the perspective of management of our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional factors relating to such statements and see “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our past operating results are not necessarily indicative of operating results in any future periods.
Overview
We are a leading independent entertainment marketing and premium content development company. We were first incorporated in the State of Nevada on March 7, 1995 and domesticated in the State of Florida on December 4, 2014. Our common stock trades on The Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “DLPN.”
On January 8, 2021, we acquired all of the issued and outstanding shares of B/HI Communications, Inc, a California corporation, referred to as B/HI, from Dean G Bender and Janice L Bender as co-trustees of the Bender Family Trust dated May 6, 2013, the Seller. The acquisition was effective January 1, 2021. B/HI is an entertainment public relations agency that specializes in corporate and product communications programs for interactive gaming, esports, entertainment content and consumer product organizations. As consideration for the acquisition of the shares of B/HI, we agreed with the Seller to pay, $0.8 million of shares of our common stock based on a 30-day trailing trading average closing price immediately prior to, but not including, the applicable payment date adjusted for working capital, cash targets and the B/HI indebtedness of approximately $0.5 million, net of minimum operating cash as defined in the purchase agreement. B/HI achieved certain specified financial performance targets during the year ended December 31, 2021 and we will pay an additional $1.2 million of which 50% will be paid in cash and 50% will be paid in shares of our common stock to the Seller.
Through our subsidiaries 42West, Shore Fire and The Door, we provide expert strategic marketing and publicity services to many of the top brands, both individual and corporate, in the entertainment and hospitality industries. 42West, Shore Fire and The Door are each recognized global leaders in PR services for the respective industries they serve. Viewpoint adds full-service creative branding and production capabilities to our marketing group and Be Social provides influencer marketing capabilities through its roster of highly engaged social media influencers. Dolphin’s legacy content production business, founded by Emmy-nominated Chief Executive Officer, Bill O’Dowd, has produced multiple feature films and award-winning digital series, primarily aimed at family and young adult markets.
We have established an acquisition strategy based on identifying and acquiring companies that complement our existing entertainment publicity and marketing services and content production businesses. We believe that complementary businesses, such as live event production, can create synergistic opportunities and bolster profits and cash flow. We have identified potential acquisition targets and are in various stages of discussion with such targets. We intend to complete at least one acquisition during 2022, but there is no assurance that we will be successful in doing so, whether in 2022 or at all.
We have also established an investment strategy, “Dolphin 2.0,” based upon identifying opportunities to develop internally owned assets, or acquire ownership stakes in others’ assets, in the categories of entertainment content, live events and consumer products. We believe these categories represent the types of assets wherein our expertise and relationships in entertainment marketing most influences the likelihood of success. We are in various stages of internal development and outside conversations on a wide range of opportunities within Dolphin 2.0. We intend to enter into additional investments during 2022, but there is no assurance that we will be successful in doing so, whether in 2022 or at all.
COVID Update
During March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic, and it has spread throughout the United States. The pandemic has had and continues to have a significant effect on economic conditions in the United States, and continues to cause significant uncertainties in the U.S. and global economies.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic affects our business, operations and financial results depends, and will continue to depend, on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. Since the outbreak of COVID-19 began and public and private sector measures to reduce its transmission were implemented, such as the imposition of social distancing and orders to work-from-home, stay-at-home and shelter-in-place, the demand for certain of the services the Company offers was adversely affected resulting in decreased revenues and cash flows.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are revenues, direct costs, payroll and benefits, selling, general and administrative expenses, legal and professional expenses, other income/expense and net income. Other income/expense consists mainly of interest expense, non-cash changes in fair value of liabilities, costs directly relating to our acquisitions, and gains or losses on extinguishment of debt and disposal of fixed assets.
We operate in two reportable segments: our entertainment publicity and marketing segment and our content production segment. The entertainment publicity and marketing segment is composed of 42West, The Door, Shore Fire, Viewpoint, Be Social and B/HI and provides clients with diversified services, including public relations, entertainment content marketing, strategic communications, social media marketing, creative branding, and the production of promotional video content. The content production segment is composed of Dolphin Films, Inc. (“Dolphin Films”) and Dolphin Digital Studios, which produce and distribute feature films and digital content.
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we derived substantially all of our revenues from our entertainment publicity and marketing segment. The entertainment publicity and marketing segment derives its revenues from providing public relations services for celebrities and musicians, entertainment and targeted content marketing for film and television series, strategic communications services for corporations and public relations, marketing services and brand strategies for hotels and restaurants. Additionally, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we derived revenues from the content production segment from the domestic distribution of our feature film Believe.
The table below sets forth the percentage of total revenue derived from our two segments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Entertainment Publicity and Marketing (“EPM”)
Our revenue is directly impacted by the retention and spending levels of existing clients and by our ability to win new clients. We believe that we have a stable client base, and we have continued to grow organically through referrals and actively soliciting new business, as well as through acquisition of new businesses within the same industry. We earn revenues primarily from the following sources: (i) celebrity talent services; (ii) content marketing services under multiyear master service agreements in exchange for fixed project-based fees; (iii) individual engagements for entertainment content marketing services for durations of generally between three and six months; (iv) strategic communications services; (v) engagements for marketing of special events such as food and wine festivals; (vi) engagement for marketing of brands; (vii) arranging strategic marketing agreements between brands and social media influencers and (viii) content productions of marketing materials on a project contract basis. For these revenue streams, we collect fees through either fixed fee monthly retainer agreements, fees based on a percentage of contracts or project-based fees.
We earn entertainment publicity and marketing revenues primarily through the following:
· Talent - We earn fees from creating and implementing strategic communication campaigns for performers and entertainers, including Oscar, Tony and Emmy winning film, theater and television stars, directors, producers, celebrity chefs and Grammy winning recording artists. Our services in this area include ongoing strategic counsel, media relations, studio and/or network liaison work, and event and tour support.
· Entertainment Marketing and Brand Strategy - We earn fees from providing marketing direction, public relations counsel and media strategy for entertainment content (including theatrical films, television programs, DVD and VOD releases, and online series) from all the major studios, as well as content producers ranging from individual filmmakers and creative artists to production companies, film financiers, DVD distributors, and other entities. In addition, we provide entertainment marketing services in connection with film festivals, food and wine festivals, awards campaigns, event publicity and red-carpet management. As part of our services, we offer marketing and publicity services tailored to reach diverse audiences. We also provide marketing direction targeted to the ideal consumer through a creative public relations and creative brand strategy for hotel and restaurant groups. Our clients for this type of service include major studios, streaming services, independent producers and leading hotel and restaurant groups. We expect that increased digital streaming marketing budgets at several large key clients will drive growth of revenue and profit in 42West’s Entertainment Marketing division over the next several years.
· Strategic Communications - We earn fees by advising companies looking to create, raise or reposition their public profiles, primarily in the entertainment industry. We believe that growth in Strategic Communications division will be driven by increasing demand for these services by traditional and non-traditional media clients who are expanding their activities in the content production, branding, and consumer products PR sectors. We expect that this growth trend will continue for the next three to five years. We also help studios and filmmakers deal with controversial movies, as well as high-profile individuals address sensitive situations.
· Creative Branding and Production - We offer clients creative branding and production services from concept creation to final delivery. Our services include brand strategy, concept and creative development, design and art direction, script and copyrighting, live action production and photography, digital development, video editing and composite, animation, audio mixing and engineering, project management and technical support. We expect that our ability to offer these services to our existing clients in the entertainment and consumer products industries, will be accretive to our revenue.
· Digital Media Influencer Marketing Campaigns - We arrange strategic marketing agreements between brands and social media influencers, for both organic and paid campaigns. We also offer services for social media activations at events, as well as editorial work on behalf of brand clients. Our services extend beyond our own captive influencer network, and we manage custom campaigns targeting specific demographics and locations, from ideation to delivery of results reports. We expect that our relationship with social media influencers will provide us the ability to offer these services to our existing clients in the entertainment and consumer products industries and will be accretive to our revenue.
Content Production (“CPD”)
Project Development and Related Services
We have a team that dedicates a portion of its time to identifying scripts, story treatments and novels for acquisition, development and production. The scripts can be for either digital or motion picture productions. We have acquired the rights to certain scripts that we intend to produce and release in the future, subject to obtaining financing. We have not yet determined if these projects would be produced for digital, television or theatrical distribution.
We have completed development of some of these projects, which means that we have completed the script and can begin pre-production once financing is obtained. We are planning to fund these projects through third-party financing arrangements, domestic distribution advances, pre-sales, and location-based tax credits, and if necessary, sales of our common stock, securities convertible into our common stock, debt securities or a combination of such financing alternatives; however, there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain the financing necessary to produce any of these feature films.
Expenses
Our expenses consist primarily of:
(1) Direct costs - include certain cost of services, as well as certain production costs, related to our entertainment publicity and marketing business. Included within direct costs are immaterial impairments for any of our content production projects that are abandoned.
(2) Selling, general and administrative expenses - include all overhead costs except for payroll, depreciation and amortization and legal and professional fees that are reported as a separate expense item.
(3) Depreciation and amortization - include the depreciation of our property and equipment and amortization of intangible assets and leasehold improvements
(4) Change in fair value of contingent consideration - includes the changes to the fair value of contingent consideration liabilities related to our acquisitions of The Door, Be Social and B/HI subsequent to their initial measurement.
(5) Legal and professional fees - include fees paid to our attorneys, fees for investor relations consultants, audit and accounting fees and fees for general business consultants.
(6) Payroll expenses include wages, payroll taxes and employee benefits.
Other Income and Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, other income and expenses consisted primarily of: (1) gain on extinguishment of debt; (2) changes in the fair values of (i) put rights, (ii) warrants, (iii) convertible notes and derivative liabilities; (3) acquisition costs; and (4) interest expense and debt amortization. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also had a loss on the deconsolidation of our Max Steel variable interest entity.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our revenues were as follows:
Revenues from entertainment publicity and marketing increased by approximately $11.8 million, or 49.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The majority of the revenue increase relates to the fact that the industries we serve were resuming normal operations during the 2021 year. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s revenues were adversely affected by government-imposed orders to either reduce or completely shut down the in-restaurant service and shut down of movie content production due to COVID-19 that caused our clients to reduce or suspend the services we provided to them. Throughout the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenues saw a recovery with the government-imposed orders alleviated or completely removed by year end 2021. In addition, our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, includes $3.5 million of revenue from B/HI, which was acquired on January 1, 2021 and therefore not present in 2020, as well as a full year of revenue for Be Social that was acquired on August 17, 2020.
We derived immaterial revenues from the content production segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 from the domestic distribution of Believe, a feature film that was released in 2013, as we have not produced and distributed any of the projects discussed above.
Expenses
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our operating expenses were as follows:
Direct costs are mainly attributable to the EPM segment and increased by approximately $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in direct costs is correlated to an increase in Viewpoint’s revenue and costs associated with the production and marketing of NFTs, as Viewpoint incurs third party costs related to the production of marketing materials, which are included in direct costs. In addition, the year ended December 31, 2021 included $0.5 million of NFT production and marketing costs that were not present in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Payroll and benefit expenses increased by approximately $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to including payroll costs of Be Social acquired in August 2020 and B/HI acquired in January 2021. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company made salary and staff reductions related to decreases in revenues due to COVID-19. All employees’ salaries were restored by the beginning of the 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase are primarily related to the year ended December 31, 2021 including selling, general and administrative costs of Be Social, which was acquired on August 17, 2020 and B/HI which was acquired on January 1, 2021:
· $0.4 million increases in rent expense;
· $0.2 million of additional computer expenses;
· $0.2 million increase in insurance and tax expenses;
· $0.1 million increase in travel expenses, as the COVID-19 pandemic had reduced amount of travel for the year ended 2020; and
· $0.5 million of additional administrative and office expenses.
These increases were partially offset by:
· $0.4 million reduction in bad debt expense, as the bad debt expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was higher resulting from the impact of COVID-19.
Contingent consideration related to our acquisitions of The Door, Be Social and B/HI was recorded at fair value on our consolidated balance sheet as of the respective acquisition dates. The fair value of the related contingent consideration is measured at every balance sheet date and any changes recorded on our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the contingent consideration increased by approximately $3.8 million and $55 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in year ended December 31, 2021 related to a change in the likelihood of achieving the established targets in the B/HI acquisition.
Depreciation and amortization had a small decrease of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is related to $79.5 thousand of less amortization of intangible assets and $45.4 thousand less depreciation of fixed assets.
Legal and professional fees increased by approximately $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to consulting and audit fees incurred in the first quarter of 2021 related to our revision of quarterly and annual 2019 financial statements and restatement of the September 30, 2020 quarterly financial statements, both included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on April 15, 2021. In addition, the Company’s statements of operations now includes the legal and professional fees incurred for Be Social and B/HI in the normal course of business.
Other Income and Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of approximately $3.0 million, which primarily related to forgiveness of the PPP Loans of the Company and our subsidiaries. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $3.3 million primarily related to the Max Steel VIE. On February 20, 2020, the lender of the production service agreement confirmed that the Max Steel VIE did not owe them any debt. We reassessed our status as the primary beneficiary of the Max Steel VIE and concluded that we were no longer the primary beneficiary of the Max Steel VIE. As a result, we deconsolidated the Max Steel VIE and recorded a loss on deconsolidation of approximately $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We elected the fair value option for certain convertible notes issued in 2020. The embedded conversion feature of a convertible note issued in 2019 met the criteria for a derivative. The fair value of these convertible notes and embedded conversion feature are remeasured at every balance sheet date and any changes are recorded on our condensed consolidated statements of operations. For the year ended December 30, 2021 we recorded a change in the fair value of the convertible notes issued in 2020 in the amount of a loss of $0.6 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a change in fair value of the convertible notes issued in 2020 and the embedded conversion feature of the convertible note issued in 2019 in the amount of a loss of $0.5 million. None of the decrease in the value of the convertible notes was attributable to instrument specific credit risk.
Warrants issued with convertible notes payable issued in 2020, were initially measured at fair value at the time of issuance and subsequently remeasured at estimated fair value on a recurring basis at each reporting period date, with changes in estimated fair value of each respective warrant liability recognized as other income or expense. In March 2021, one of the warrant holders exercised 146,027 warrants via a cashless exercise formula. The price of our common stock on the exercise date was $19.16 per share and we recorded a change in fair value of the exercised warrants of approximately $2.5 million on our condensed consolidated statement of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the fair value of the 2020 warrants increased by approximately $0.3 million and we recorded a change in the fair value of the warrants for that amount on our consolidated statement of operations.
The fair value of put rights related to the 42West acquisition were recorded on our consolidated balance sheet on the date of the acquisition. The fair value of the put rights are measured at every balance sheet date and any changes are recorded on our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the put rights increased by approximately $71.1 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 and decreased by approximately $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The final put rights were settled in March of 2021; as a result, we did not have a liability related to the put rights as of December 31, 2021.
Acquisition costs consisted primarily of legal, consulting and auditing costs related to our acquisitions. Acquisition costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were related solely to the acquisition of B/HI in January 1, 2021, while acquisition costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of costs associated with our acquisitions of Be Social on August 2020 and B/HI acquired on January 1, 2021.
Interest expense and debt amortization expense decreased by $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, respectively, as compared to the same periods in prior year primarily due to $1.3 million of debt amortization recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, related to beneficial conversion features of certain convertible notes payable converted during that period.
Income Tax Benefit
We had an income tax expense of $37.4 thousand for year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a benefit of $137.0 thousand for year ended December 31, 2020. The income tax expense for year ended December 31, 2021 reflects the accrual of a valuation allowance in connection with the limitations of our indefinite lived tax assets to offset our indefinite lived tax liabilities. To the extent the tax assets are unable to offset the tax liabilities, we have recorded a deferred expense for the tax liability (a “naked credit”). The primary component of the income tax benefit for year ended December 31, 2020 is due to a release of the valuation allowance against the deferred tax liabilities of the companies acquired.
As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $46.7 million of pre-tax net operating loss carryforwards for U.S. federal income tax purposes that begin to expire in 2028; federal net operating losses generated after December 31, 2017 have an indefinite life and do not expire. Additionally, we have state net operating loss carryforwards amounting to $50.0 million that begin to expire in 2029. A portion of the carryforwards may expire before being applied to reduce future income tax liabilities.
In assessing the ability to realize the deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of the deferred tax asset is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which these temporary differences become deductible. We believe it is more likely than not that the deferred tax asset will not be realized and we have accordingly recorded a full valuation allowance as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss was approximately $6.5 million or $0.85 per share based on 7,614,774 weighted average shares outstanding on a basic and on a fully diluted basis for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net loss was approximately $1.9 million or $(0.35) per share based on 5,619,969 weighted average shares outstanding and approximately $(0.58) per share based on 6,382,937 weighted average shares outstanding on a fully diluted basis for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were related to the factors discussed above.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $0.2 million from cash used in operating activities of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our net loss of $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was adjusted for the following items to arrive at cash provided by operating activities:
· $6.9 million of non-cash changes in the fair value of liabilities;
· $0.5 million of non-cash items such as impairments, bad debt expense and other non-cash losses;
· $2.0 million of non-cash lease expense; and
· $2.2 million of depreciation and amortization and other items such as impairments of fixed assets and capitalized production costs.
The above were offset by:
· $3.1 million of a gain on extinguishment of debt, primarily related to the forgiveness of PPP Loans; and
· $3.3 million of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Our net loss of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was adjusted for the following items to arrive at cash provided by operating activities:
· $1.5 million of the loss on deconsolidation of Max Steel VIE
· $1.3 million of the recognition of the beneficial conversion feature of convertible notes payable
· $0.8 million of non-cash items such as impairments, bad debt expense and other non-cash losses;
· $1.8 million of non-cash lease expense; and
· $2.1 million of depreciation and amortization and other items such as impairments of fixed assets and capitalized production costs.
The above were offset by:
· $3.3 million of a gain on extinguishment of debt, primarily related to the Max Steel VIE;
· $2.9 million of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
· $0.9 million of non-cash changes in the fair value of liabilities;
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $3.0 million, which related to (i) $1.5 million issuance of convertible notes receivables, (ii) $1.0 million investment in Midnight Theatre and (iii) a payment of approximately $0.5 million, net of cash acquired, related to the acquisition of B/HI, net of cash acquired.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1.4 million, which related to (i) a payment of approximately $1.0 million, net of cash acquired, for the Be Social acquisition, (ii) a payment of approximately $0.3 million of deferred cash consideration for the Shore Fire acquisition (acquired in 2019) and (iii) $0.1 million of purchases of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $4.7 million from net cash provided by financing activities of $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 mainly related to:
Inflows:
· $6.0 million of proceeds from convertible notes payable
Outflows:
· $1.0 million from the exercise of put rights;
· $0.9 million of repayment of the term loan; and
· $0.1 million of repayment of notes payable
Cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 mainly related to:
Inflows:
· $7.6 million of proceeds from the sale of Common Stock through registered direct offering;
· $3.7 million proceeds from convertible notes payable; and
· $2.8 million of proceeds from PPP Loans.
Outflows:
· $1.6 million from the exercise of put rights;
· $1.9 million of repayment of convertible notes;
· $1.0 million of installment payments to sellers on Shore Fire and Viewpoint acquisitions;
·
· $0.5 million of repayment of the line of credit;
· $0.3 million of repayment of the term loan; and
· $0.1 million of repayment of notes payable.
Going Concern Update
In previous years, we had determined there were factors that raised substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Throughout the past years, we have taken measures to strengthen our financial position, which is evidenced by a positive working capital for three straight quarters, as of June 30, 2021 September 30, 2021, and December 31, 2021. Several of our subsidiaries operate in industries that have been adversely affected by the government mandated work-from-home, stay-at-home and shelter-in-place orders as a result of COVID-19. During 2020 and 2021, we took measures to align our workforce to the reduced demand in some of our services. As these industries continue to gradually reopen, we have seen signs of improvement and have noted an increase in demand for our services and noted signs of improvement in the results of our operations.
Further, on December 29, 2021, we entered into the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement (See “2021 Lincoln Park Transaction” section below) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”). Pursuant to the terms of the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park has agreed to purchase from us up to $25.0 million of our common stock from time to time during the term of the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement. The sale of common stock pursuant to the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement provides the Company with additional cash flow availability for operational purposes.
Management believes that our cash position, together with the forecasted cash flows and the availability of funds through the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement, is sufficient to meet capital and liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. As a result, there is no longer substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Debt and Financing Arrangements
As described below in further detail, throughout the year ended December 31, 2021 we have taken measures to position the Company with a stronger balance sheet position, extending current loans to longer term maturities and reducing our overall debt position. Total debt amounted to $6.2 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $9.3 million as of as of December 31, 2020, a reduction of 3.1 million or 33.9%.
Our debt obligations in the next twelve months from December 31, 2021 have decreased significantly from the obligations in the same period in 2020. The current portion of the long-term debt decreased to $0.3 million from $4.0 million. We expect our current cash position, cash expected to be generated from our operations and other availability of funds, as detailed below, are sufficient to meet our debt requirements.
Term Loan
Two of our subsidiaries, as co-borrowers, entered in into a three-year term loan in March of 2020, which required monthly repayment of principal and interest and was to mature on March 15, 2023. During the year ended December 2021, the Company paid off the remaining balance of the term loan, as such there is no outstanding balance as of December 31, 2021, related to term loan.
2021 Lincoln Park Transaction
On December 29, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “LP 2021 Purchase Agreement”) and a registration rights agreement (the “LP 2021 Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”). Pursuant to the terms of the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park has agreed to purchase from us up to $25.0 million of the Company’s common stock (subject to certain limitations) from time to time during the term of the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement.
On December 29, 2021, the Company issued 51,827 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park as consideration for its commitment. Excluding these commitment shares, the Company did not sell any shares of common stock under the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we sold 1,035,000 shares of common stock at prices ranging between $3.47 and $5.15 pursuant to the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement and received proceeds of $4,367,640. Pursuant to the LP 2021 Purchase Agreement, we issued the remaining 37,019 commitment shares on March 7, 2022.
Convertible Notes Payable
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued ten convertible promissory notes to four noteholders in the aggregate amount of $5.95 million. The convertible promissory notes bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum and mature on the second anniversary of their respective issuances. The balance of each convertible promissory note and any accrued interest may be converted at the noteholder’s option at any time at a purchase price based on a 90-day average closing market price per share of the Common Stock but not at a price less than $2.50 per share.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the holders of twelve convertible notes issued during 2021 and 2020 converted the principal balance of $4.5 million plus accrued interest of $11.9 thousand into 682,431 shares of Common Stock at conversion prices ranging between $3.69 and $10.74 per share.
As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate principal balance of the convertible promissory notes of $2.9 million was recorded in noncurrent liabilities under the caption convertible promissory notes on the Company’s condensed consolidated balance sheets.
It is our experience that convertible notes, including their accrued interest are converted into shares of the Company’s common stock and not settled through payment of cash. Although we are unable to predict the noteholder’s intentions, we do not expect any change from our past experience.
Convertible Notes Payable at Fair Value
We had convertible promissory notes outstanding with aggregate principal amounts of $0.5 million as of December 31, 2021 for which we elected the fair value option. As such, the estimated fair value of the note was recorded on its issue date. At each balance sheet date, we record the fair value of the convertible promissory notes with any changes in the fair value recorded in the condensed consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had a balance of $1.0 million in noncurrent liabilities related to this convertible promissory note measured at fair value.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, notes issued in 2020 with remaining aggregate principal balances of $1.1 million were converted into 281,554 shares of Common Stock at purchase prices ranging between $3.90 and $3.91 per share.
Similar to the Convertible notes discussed above, our historical experience has been that these convertible notes are converted into shares of the Company’s common stock prior to their maturity date and not settled through payment of cash.
Nonconvertible Promissory Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we have outstanding unsecured nonconvertible promissory notes in the aggregate amount of $1.2 million, which bear interest at a rate of 10% per annum and mature between January 15, 2022 and December 10, 2023. For these nonconvertible promissory notes we had a balance of $0.3 million and $0.9 million recorded as current and noncurrent liabilities, respectively, as of December 31, 2021. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, a non-convertible promissory note amounting to $0.2 million with a maturity date of January 15, 2022 was repaid in cash.
Convertible Notes Receivable
We hold convertible notes receivable from Stanton South LLC, which operates Crafthouse Cocktails and JDDC Elemental LLC which operates Midnight Theatre. These convertible notes receivable are recorded at their principal face amount plus accrued interest. Due to their short-term maturity and conversion terms (described below), these have been recorded at the face value of the note and an allowance for credit losses has not been established.
The Crafthouse Cocktails note amounts to $500,000 and is mandatorily redeemable by February 1, 2022. The Midnight Theatre notes amount to $1,000,000 and are convertible at the option of the Company into Class A and B Units of Midnight Theatre. Subsequent to year-end, on February 1, 2022, the Crafthouse Cocktails note was converted and we were issued Series 2 interests of Stanton South LLC. In addition, on each of January 3, 2022, February 2, 2022, March 22, 2022 and April 1, 2022, we issued Midnight Theatre four additional notes amounting to $1,585,500 in aggregate, on same terms as the previous note.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, could materially impact the consolidated financial statements.
We consider the fair value estimates, including those related to acquisitions, valuations of goodwill, intangible assets, acquisition-related contingent consideration and convertible debt to be the most critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements as they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and require significant or complex judgment and estimates on the part of management. Further details on each item are discussed below. See Note 18 - Fair Value Measurements in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for information pertaining to acquisition-related fair value adjustments.
Goodwill
Goodwill results from business combination acquisitions. Goodwill is recorded as the difference, if any, between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the net tangible assets and other intangible assets acquired. As of December 31, 2021, in connection with its acquisitions of 42West, The Door, Viewpoint, Shore Fire, Be Social and B/HI, we have a balance of $20.0 million of goodwill on our consolidated balance sheets which management has assigned to the entertainment publicity and marketing segment. We account for goodwill in accordance with FASB ASC No. 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). Goodwill is not amortized; however, it is assessed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if triggering events occur. The Company’s annual assessment is performed in the fourth quarter.
For purposes of the annual assessment, management initially performs a qualitative assessment, which includes consideration of the economic, industry and market conditions in addition to our overall financial performance and the performance of these assets. If our qualitative assessment does not conclude that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, we perform a quantitative analysis. In a quantitative test, the fair value of a reporting unit is determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various assumptions, including assumptions about future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on our long-term projections. Assumptions used in our impairment testing are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If not, we recognize an impairment equal to the difference between the carrying amount of the reporting unit and its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
Intangible assets
In connection with the acquisitions of 42West, The Door, Viewpoint, Shore Fire, Be Social and B/HI, the Company acquired in aggregate an estimated $13.5 million of intangible assets with finite useful lives initially estimated to range from 3 to 13 years. The intangible assets consist primarily of customer relationships, trade names and non-compete agreements.
Intangible assets are initially recorded at fair value and are amortized using the straight-line method over their respective estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. If a triggering event has occurred, an impairment analysis is required. The impairment test first requires a comparison of undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated over the useful life of an asset to the carrying value of the asset. If the carrying value of the asset exceeds the undiscounted cash flows, the asset would not be deemed recoverable. Impairment would then be measured as the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion. Events or circumstances that might require impairment testing include the loss of a significant client or clients, the identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit, loss of key personnel, the disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit, significant decline in stock price or a significant adverse change in business climate or regulations.
Business Combinations and Contingent Consideration
The determination of the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination and specifically the estimates of acquisition-related contingent consideration (sometimes referred to as “earn-out liabilities”) requires estimates and judgments of future cash flow expectations for the acquired business and the related identifiable tangible and intangible assets. Fair values of net assets acquired are calculated using expected cash flows and industry-standard valuation techniques. Fair values of earn-out liabilities are estimated using income approaches such as discounted cash flows or option pricing models.
Due to the time required to gather and analyze the necessary data for each acquisition, U.S. GAAP provides a “measurement period” of up to one year in which to finalize these fair value determinations. During the measurement period, preliminary fair value estimates may be revised if new information is obtained about the facts and circumstances existing as of the date of acquisition, or based on the final net assets and working capital of the acquired business, as prescribed in the applicable purchase agreement. Such adjustments may result in the recognition of, or an adjustment to the fair values of, acquisition-related assets and liabilities and/or consideration paid, and are referred to as “measurement period” adjustments. Measurement period adjustments are recorded to goodwill. Other revisions to fair value estimates for acquisitions are reflected as income or expense, as appropriate. See Note 6 - Acquisitions in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for information pertaining to acquisition-related fair value adjustments.
Significant changes in the assumptions or estimates used in the underlying valuations, including the expected profitability or cash flows of an acquired business, could materially affect our operating results in the period such changes are recognized.
Convertible debt
The terms of our convertible debt agreements are evaluated to determine whether the convertible debt instruments contain both liability and equity components, in which case the instrument is a compound financial instrument. Convertible debt agreements are also evaluated to determine whether they contain embedded derivatives, in which case the instrument is a hybrid financial instrument. Judgement is required to determine the classification of such financial instruments based on the terms and conditions of the convertible debt agreements.
Estimation methods are used to determine the fair values of the liability and equity components of compound financial instruments and to determine the fair value of embedded derivatives included in hybrid financial instruments. Fair values of convertible debt are estimated using pricing models such as the Monte Carlo Simulation. Evaluating the reasonableness of these estimations and the assumptions and inputs used in the valuation methods requires a significant amount of judgement and is therefore subject to an inherent risk of error. See Notes 14 - Convertible Notes Payable At Fair Value and 18 - Fair Value Measurements in the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for information pertaining to acquisition-related fair value adjustments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.