ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect Management’s current views with respect to current and future events and financial performance. You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “may”, “will”, “expect”, “anticipate”, “believe”, “estimate” and “continue”, or similar words. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the management team as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. Prospective investors are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risk and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by such forward-looking statements.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this report and in our other reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Important factors currently known to us could cause actual results to differ materially from those in forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time. We believe that its assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations and the business and operations of the Company. No assurances are made that actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from its assumptions. Factors that could cause differences include, but are not limited to, expected market demand for the Company’s services, fluctuations in pricing for materials, and competition.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context requires otherwise, the words “we”, “us”, “our”, the “Company” or “our Company” refer to Dais Corporation, a New York corporation, and its subsidiaries.
OVERVIEW
Overview
Dais Corporation (“Dais”, “us,” “we,”, the “Company”) is a nanomaterial technology company developing and commercializing products using the nanomaterial called Aqualyte. The first commercial product is the Aqualyte nanomaterial itself. It is useful in managing moisture and key gases in a variety of cross-industry products. The second commercial product is called ConsERV, a fixed plate energy recovery ventilator which is useful in meeting building indoor fresh air requirements while saving energy and lowering emissions for most forms of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment. We continue to develop other Aqualyte uses in cross-industry applications, HVAC/Refrigeration, energy, etc. One area of focused attention has been development work on a variant of Aqualyte targeting surface treatments to potentially create a protective layer designed to inactivate human coronaviruses.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 as compared with December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain data derived from our Statements of Operations:
Revenue
We generate our revenues primarily from the sale of our ConsERV cores and systems, and our Aqualyte membrane. Product sales were $372,506 and $952,845 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $580,339 or 61%. We had a 53% decrease in ConsERV sales and a 64% decrease in Aqualyte Only OEM membrane sales.
The decrease in sales revenue is attributed mainly to what management believes is a “pandemic driven bubble” in orders for Aqualyte nanomaterial in key Southeast Asia markets, and lower orders for ConsERV cores used to replace out of warranty units. Given the initiatives the Company has underway expanding the sales channels, newer ConsERV product, and strong focus on selling Aqualyte into OEM uses management believes a continued downturn will be reversed by steady increases in sales from the newer initiatives beginning no later than 2Q 2022 and beyond.
Revenues from royalty and license fees were $50,000 and $50,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Sales
Our cost of sales consists primarily of materials (including freight), direct labor, and outsourced manufacturing expenses incurred to produce our ConsERV cores and systems and Aqualyte membrane. Cost of goods sold were $267,837 and $545,068 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $277,231 or 51% resulting from reduced product sales.
Supply Chain (Availability and Increased prices) and Tightening labor market (money and people)
Current world-wide supply chain issues are impacting many industries, including those of the Company. The lead time for materials and components is increasing, resulting in longer delivery dates. Management is working with existing partners to identify multiple sources of materials and components so as not to rely heavily on one or two suppliers.
Increasing crude oil prices is influencing the cost of resins, plastics and fuel. Shipping and trucking costs have increased while capacity has contracted. These issues are creating increased costs across industries and Management is evaluating its’ pricing and lead times regularly.
The labor market is having an impact across industries as competition for workers is increasing. Management is working to anticipate workforce needs and planning accordingly.
The Company is dependent on third parties to manufacture the key components needed for its nanostructured materials and some portion of the value-added products made with these materials. Accordingly, a suppliers’ failure to supply components in a timely manner, or to supply components that meet the Company’s quality, quantity and cost requirements or technical specifications, or the inability to obtain alternative sources of these components on a timely basis or on acceptable terms, would create delays in production of the Company’s products and/or increase its unit costs of production. Certain of the components or the processes of the Company’s suppliers are proprietary. If the Company was ever required to replace any of its suppliers, it should be able to obtain comparable components from alternative suppliers at comparable costs, but this would create a delay in production and may briefly affect the Company’s operations.
Covid-19 World-wide Pandemic
Management continues to monitor the effects the pandemic is having on economies, and everyday life, across the globe. As creative solutions to defeat the current pandemic and protect us from future infections are developed, we believe our technology is uniquely positioned as its’ current products are designed to provide a solution to these issues especially in increased ventilation. The awareness of the benefits of increased ventilation in homes and workplaces is a major factor in the solution to battle the current, and future, pandemics. The ConsERV products are specifically designed to increase new, fresh, ventilated, air in our homes and workplaces. Management is developing and executing on plans to increase product awareness through existing and prospective sales channels.
Climate Change and Carbon Reduction
Countries and corporations around the world are adopting aggressive plans to achieve newly established Carbon Neutral goals by 2030 and 2050. This world-wide effort is attracting attention to innovative technologies which reduce carbon emissions. Management is confident the successful track record of current products, with a history of increasing the efficiency of HVAC systems and reducing CO2 emissions should drive increased business activity.
Research and Development
Expenditures for research, development and engineering of products are expensed as incurred. We incurred research and development costs of $223,425 and $221,700 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of of $1,725 or 1%. We account for proceeds received from government funding for research as a reduction in research and development costs. We recorded proceeds against research and development expenses on the Statements of Operations of $89,617 and $123,055 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $33,438 or 27%. The decrease in proceeds from government funding was due to the completion of U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, $1,000,000, Phase II Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) award ending in the third quarter of 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related benefits, share-based compensation, professional fees, marketing and channel support costs, and other infrastructure costs such as insurance, information technology and occupancy expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $1,958,560 and $1,079,594 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $878,966 or 81%.
Our selling, general and administrative expenses may fluctuate due to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to:
·
Additional expenses because of being an SEC reporting company including, but not limited to, director and officer insurance, director fees, SEC compliance expenses, transfer agent fees, additional staffing, professional fees, and similar expenses;
·
Additional infrastructure needed to support the expanded commercialization of our ConsERV and NanoClear products and/or new product applications of our polymer technology for, among other things, administrative personnel, physical space, marketing and channel support and information technology; and
·
The issuance and recognition of expense related to fair value of new share-based awards, which is based on various assumptions including, among other things, the volatility of our stock price.
The 81% increase in selling general and administrative expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 resulted primarily from increased payroll costs and an increase in stock based compensation provided for services.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,065,593 compared to an expense of $1,127,807 for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized a loss on a legal judgement of $382,664 in 2021, with no comparable item in 2020. Gain on change in fair value of derivative increased to $2,241,678 compared to a loss of $939,464 from 2020 to 2021 and there was an increase in gain on extinguishing debt from $0 in 2020 to $1,148,554 in 2021. The gain on extinguishing debt in 2021 was due to the settlement of our convertible notes payable.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $849,039 compared to a net loss of $2,787,733 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net loss in 2021 was primarily due to the change in fair value of derivatives and the settlement of our convertible notes payable, partially offset by a loss on a legal judgement in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated a net loss of $849,039 and has incurred significant losses since inception. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $57,823,102, total stockholders’ deficit of $8,372,175, negative working capital of $8,270,892 and cash and cash equivalents of $773,423. The Company used $1,283,772 and $556,423 of cash for operations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was funded primarily by proceeds from loans from related parties and others. There is no assurance that any such financing will be available in the future. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company is currently pursuing the following sources of short and long-term working capital:
1.
The Company has selected targeted parties that it is actively working with who are interested in licensing, purchasing the rights to, or establishing a joint venture to commercialize applications of the Company’s technology;
2.
The Company continues to seek capital from certain strategic and/or government grant opportunities and related sources. These sources may, pursuant to any agreements that may be developed in conjunction with such funding, assist in the product definition and design, roll-out and channel penetration of products; and
3.
The Company is actively working with newer investors, private equity companies, purchase order financing parties, has increased its value and potential to attract new investors in the eyes of the Management team when the Company completed the exchange program of ‘debt to equity’ in the 2nd quarter of 2021 clearing out all convertible debt in exchange for equity at a fixed price at the end of the second quarter of 2021.
Management believes:
1. Ventilation is regularly recommended as one of the solutions to Covid related mitigation and the market awareness for the ConsERV product(s) is increasing and lead activity is encouraging.
2. The Management and Board feel the Company’s ability to raise new funds is continuing to improve with (a.) the financial clarity earned with the debt to equity program completing in the 2nd Quarter of 2021, (b.) the effects of the bridge funding provided by JMS Investments and others allowing the Company to once again be fully reporting, and (c.) the shift seemingly occurring worldwide creating a pull for the Company’s products showing a proven linkage to lowering drivers for Climate Change. This said, it remains a challenging time to raise growth capital and become profitable.
3. We believe our current cash position and our projected ability to obtain additional sources of growth capital, and to generate sustainable cash flow from operations and investments into 2022 is improving yet remains challenged.
We have, and seemingly continue to, be successful in attracting new capital critical to support the Company’s operations and efforts needed to profitably manufacture and sell ConsERV and Aqualyte.
The current geopolitical environment and continuing impacts of the worldwide pandemic could affect business worldwide in the long-term, however, the Management and Board are guardedly optimist, despite these times of uncharted causes/effects with companies, markets, sales channel challenges, and people, the Company will continue to be successful in securing needed funds to fund business continuation or secure growth capital funding.
Failure by us to timely procure additional financing or investment adequate to fund the ongoing operations, including planned product development initiatives and commercialization efforts, or experience a major supply chain disruption will have material adverse consequences on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows as could any unfavorable terms. While we believe the Company’s prospects have improved for funding, there are no assurances we will be able to obtain the financing and planned product development commercialization. The Company may fail to reach an accord with the Senior Secured Note Holder who has deep rights with the assets of the Company pledged as security for repayment of the Note. Accordingly, we may not have the ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements of the Company do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets, or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Statements of Cash Flows
Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 were $773,423 compared to $36,516 as of December 31, 2020. Cash is primarily used to fund our working capital requirements.
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,283,772 and $556,423 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in net cash used in operations was primarily due to an increase in net loss (after adjusting for non-cash items) partially offset by an increase in cash from net working capital accounts. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net loss (after adjusting for non-cash items) was $3,162,483. Accounts receivable, inventory and other assets together increased by $53,624. Accounts payable, accrued liabilities, customer deposits and deferred revenue increased in total by $1,932,335. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net loss (after adjusting for non-cash items) was $1,139,702. Accounts receivable, inventory and other assets together decreased by $67,673. Accounts payable, accrued liabilities, customer deposits and deferred revenue increased in total by $515,606.
Net cash used by investing activities was $29,758 and $25,094 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, driven primarily by equipment purchases in 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2,050,437 and $613,950 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. respectively. The increase resulted from increased proceeds from notes payable.
Material Financing Transactions
In the period from June 2017 through the end of December 2019, the Company entered eight Convertible Note Holder agreements with eight Note Holders totaling with all fees, interest, and principal $2,008,812 as of December 31, 2020. The notes were not considered to be in default and were being renegotiated at December 31, 2020. Subsequently, as of May 31, 2021, each Convertible Noteholder received their fees, interest, and principal totaling $2,111,334 in shares of Common stock of the Company (at $0.30 per share) with 50% warrant coverage (1 year cash warrant with a strike price of $0.30). All documents were executed by June 30, 2021 with all equity/warrants issued by July 31, The Company issued 7,036,667 Common shares, and 3,576,733 Warrant shares in this transaction.
No new Convertible Note Transactions were entered into during 2020 or 2021
COVID-19 Disclosure
The Company’s operations have been and continue to be affected by the ongoing outbreak of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The ultimate disruption and impact on the Company which may be caused by the outbreak is uncertain. In 2020 we believe the company suffered materially adverse impacts caused by (1.) the late filing of required SEC mandated reports which resulted from professionals and company employees being ill, dislocated from jobs, taking abnormally longer times to necessary filing information due to lack of access to computer from remote locations or limited/no access to needed 3rd party professionals, etc. Further the pandemic has resulted in a material adverse impact on the Company’s operations, and cash flows as marketing plans for new product introduction were delayed. Our third-party manufacturers, third-party distributors, and our customers have been and will be disrupted by worker absenteeism, quarantines and restrictions on employees’ ability to work, office and factory closures, disruptions to ports and other shipping infrastructure, border closures, or other travel or health-related restrictions. Depending on the magnitude of such effects on our activities or the operations of our third-party manufacturers and third-party distributors, the supply of our products will be delayed, which could adversely affect our business, operations, and customer relationships. In addition, the Coronavirus (COVID-19) or other disease outbreak will in the short-run and may over the longer term adversely affect the economies and financial markets of many countries, resulting in an economic downturn that will affect demand for our products and services and impact our operating results. Future possible impacts may include, but are not limited to, disruption to the Company’s customers and revenue, absenteeism in the Company’s labor workforce, unavailability of products and supplies used in operations, and a decline in value of assets held by the Company, including inventories, property and equipment, marketable securities, and potential loss of key team members.
Economy and Inflation
Except as disclosed herein, we have not experienced any significant cancellation of orders due to the downturn in the economy. Our management believes that inflation will have an effect on our cost of goods and shipping, however sales inquiries continue to be strong through 2021. .
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any liabilities related to long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues, and results of operations, liquidity, or capital expenditures.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the accompanying financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the accompanying financial statements and the accompanying notes. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. When making these estimates and assumptions, we consider our historical experience, our knowledge of economic and market factors and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates. Management has discussed the selection of critical accounting policies and estimates with our Board of Directors, and the Board of Directors has reviewed our disclosure relating to critical accounting policies and estimates in this annual report on Form 10-K. The following critical accounting policies are significantly affected by judgments, assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Generally, we recognize revenue for products upon shipment to customers, provided no significant obligations remain and collection is probable.
In certain instances, our ConsERV system product may carry a limited warranty of up to two years for all parts contained therein except for the energy recovery ventilator core produced and sold by us. The distributor of the ConsERV system may carry a limited warranty of up to ten years. The limited warranty includes replacement of defective parts for the ConsERV system and includes workmanship and material failure for the ConsERV core. We have recorded an accrual of $91,531 for future warranty expenses on December 31, 2021, which is included in accrued expenses, other.
Revenue derived from the sale of licenses is deferred and recognized as license fee revenue on a straight-line basis over the life of the license, or until the license arrangement is terminated. We recognized license fee revenue of $50,000 and $50,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Royalties are recognized as earned. We did not recognize any revenue from royalties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company has adopted the new revenue recognition guidelines in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), commencing from the period under this report. The Company analyzes its contracts to assess that they are within the scope and in accordance with ASC 606. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as the Company fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements, whether for goods and services or licensing, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The Company acts as a principal in its revenue transactions as the Company is the primary obligor in the transactions. Generally, the Company recognizes revenue for its products upon shipment to customers, provided no significant obligations remain and collection is probable.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist primarily of receivables from the sale of our ERV products and Aqualyte membrane. We regularly review accounts receivables for any bad debts based on an analysis of our collection experience, customer credit worthiness and current economic trends. After all attempts to collect a receivable have failed, the receivable is written off against the allowance. Based on management’s review of accounts receivable, an allowance for doubtful accounts of $0 and $0 has been recorded on December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived and Intangible Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. We periodically evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. When impairment indicators exist, we use market quotes, if available or an estimate of the future undiscounted net cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life in measuring whether the asset values are recoverable. We did not recognize impairment on its long-lived assets during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Identified intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Our existing intangible assets consist solely of patents. Patents are amortized over their estimated useful or economic lives of 17 years. Patent amortization expense was $18,885 and $17,637 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Based on current capitalized costs, total patent amortization expense is estimated to be approximately $19,400 per year for the next five years and thereafter.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their fair values. That expense will be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period) or immediately if the share-based payments vest immediately.
There were no stock options issued during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposure to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risk. Terms of convertible promissory note instruments are reviewed to determine whether they contain embedded derivative instruments that are required under ASC 815 “ Derivative and Hedging” (ASC 815) to be accounted for separately from the host contract and recorded on the balance sheet at fair value. The fair value of derivative liabilities, if any, is required to be revalued at each reporting date, with corresponding changes in fair value recorded in current period operating results.
Freestanding warrants issued by us in connection with the issuance or sale of debt and equity instruments are considered to be derivative instruments and are evaluated and accounted for in accordance with the provisions of ASC 815. Pursuant to ASC 815, an evaluation of specifically identified conditions is made to determine whether fair value of warrants issued is required to be classified as equity or as a derivative liability.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are provided for the tax effects of transactions reported in the financial statements and consist of taxes currently due plus deferred taxes resulting from temporary differences. Such temporary differences result from differences in the carrying value of assets and liabilities for tax and financial reporting purposes. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the future tax consequences of those differences, which will either be taxable or deductible when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We identify and evaluate uncertain tax positions, if any, and recognize the impact of uncertain tax positions for which there is a less than more-likely-than-not probability of the position being upheld when reviewed by the relevant taxing authority. Such positions are deemed to be unrecognized tax benefits and a corresponding liability is established on the balance sheet. We have not recognized a liability for uncertain tax positions. If there were an unrecognized tax benefit, we would recognize interest accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits in interest expense and penalties in operating expenses. The Company’s 2017-2020 tax years remain open and subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For a description of recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our financial statements, see Part II, Item 8 Note 3 Significant Accounting Policies: Recent Accounting Pronouncements.