Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and discusses the financial condition and results of operations for DiaMedica Therapeutics Inc. and subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve numerous risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements as a result of these risks and uncertainties. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional cautionary information.
Business Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company committed to improving the lives of people suffering from serious diseases. DiaMedica’s lead candidate DM199 is the first pharmaceutically active recombinant (synthetic) form of the human tissue kallikrein-1 (KLK1) protein to be studied in patients, an established therapeutic modality for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke and chronic kidney disease. Our goal is to use our patented and in-licensed technologies to establish our Company as a leader in the development and commercialization of therapeutic treatments from novel recombinant proteins. Our current focus is on the treatment of acute ischemic stroke (AIS) and chronic kidney disease (CKD). We plan to advance DM199, our lead drug candidate, through required clinical trials to create shareholder value by establishing its clinical and commercial potential as a therapy for AIS and CKD.
DM199 is a recombinant form of human tissue kallikrein-1 (KLK1). KLK1 is a serine protease (protein) produced primarily in the kidneys, pancreas and salivary glands, which plays a critical role in the regulation of local blood flow and vasodilation (the widening of blood vessels which decreases vascular resistance) in the body, as well as an important role in inflammation and oxidative stress (an imbalance between potentially damaging reactive oxygen species, or free radicals, and antioxidants in your body). We believe DM199 has the potential to treat a variety of diseases where healthy functioning requires sufficient activity of KLK1 and its system, the kallikrein-kinin system (KKS).
Our product development pipeline is as follows:
Current Clinical Trials
AIS Phase 2/3 ReMEDy2 Trial
Our ReMEDy2 trial is an adaptive design, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial intended to enroll approximately 350 patients at 75 sites in the United States. Patients enrolled in the trial will be treated with either DM199 or placebo within 24 hours of the onset of AIS symptoms. The trial excludes patients treated with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and those with large vessel occlusions. The study population is representative of the approximately 80% of AIS patients who do not have treatment options today, primarily due to the limitations on treatment with tPA or mechanical thrombectomy. DiaMedica believes that the proposed trial has the potential to serve as a pivotal registration study of DM199 in this patient population.
In April 2021, we submitted an Investigational New Drug (IND) application to the FDA for the trial, which was accepted in May 2021. In September 2021, the FDA granted Fast Track Designation to the Company’s lead candidate DM199 for the treatment of AIS where tPA and/or mechanical thrombectomy are not indicated or medically appropriate.
We initiated the first site for the Phase 2/3 trial in September and successfully dosed the first patient in November 2021. Additionally, in November 2021, the FDA accepted and concluded that DiaMedica “may proceed” with the proposed clinical investigation using our amended protocol adding stroke recurrence as a second independent primary endpoint to our Phase 2/3 ReMEDy2 trial. The FDA’s acceptance of the amendment allows the Company to evaluate the effects of DM199 on both physical recoveries post AIS and the rate of recurrent AIS, as two separate, independent, primary endpoints, with each statistically powered for success. There were no changes in treatment, duration, or study population of the trial as part of this protocol amendment.
Dosing the first patient in the ReMEDy2 trial triggered a $185,000 milestone payment due to Catalent Pharma Solutions, LLC (Catalent) which was remitted during the fourth quarter of 2021. See Note 10 titled “Commitments and Contingencies” included elsewhere in this report.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resurgence in cases caused by the Delta, Omicron and other variants, some clinical trials are experiencing delays and stoppages in site activations and enrollment due to staffing and other resource shortages. We have experienced slower than expected site activations and enrollment in our ReMEDy2 trial due to the reduction or suspension of activities and staffing shortages at our and/or potential clinical study sites. We anticipate that the continuing development of variants of COVID-19, will likely continue to adversely affect our ability to initiate new clinical trial sites and recruit or enroll patients into our ReMEDy2 trial, and we cannot provide any assurance as to when these issues will resolve.
CKD Phase 2 REDUX Clinical Trial
As of December 31, 2021, we completed enrollment in our Phase 2 clinical trial for the treatment of CKD with a total of 79 subjects enrolled, including 21 African American subjects into Cohort 1, 25 subjects with IgAN into Cohort 2 and 33 subjects with Type 2 diabetes in Cohort 3.
The trial named REDUX, Latin for restore, is a multi-center, open-label investigation which targeted enrollment of patients with mild or moderate CKD (Stage II or III) and albuminuria, enrolled in three equal cohorts. The trial was conducted in the United States and was focused on participants with CKD: Cohort 1 was focused on non-diabetic, hypertensive African Americans (AA) with Stage II or III CKD. African Americans are at greater risk for CKD than Caucasians, and those African Americans who have the APOL1 gene mutation are at an even higher risk. Cohort 2 was focused on participants with IgA Nephropathy. Cohort 3 was focused on participants with Type 2 diabetes mellitus with CKD, hypertension and albuminuria (DKD). The trial evaluated two dose levels of DM199 within each cohort. Study participants received DM199 by subcutaneous injection twice weekly for 95 days. The primary study endpoints include safety, tolerability, blood pressure, albuminuria and kidney function, which were evaluated by changes from baseline in estimated glomerular filtration rate and albuminuria, as measured by the urinary albumin to creatinine ratio. Participant enrollment and dosing for this trial commenced in December 2019 and in June 2021, we announced interim results and in November, we announced additional results.
REDUX is a multi-center, open-label investigation of with interim results indicating that DM199 is demonstrating clinically meaningful improvements in kidney function in Cohorts 1 and 2, as measured by simultaneously stabilizing estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and decreasing urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR). Additionally, in patients who were hypertensive (Cohorts 1 and 3), DM199 also reduced blood pressure by clinically significant levels and importantly, there was no effect on participants who were not hypertensive (Cohort 2). We reported the following preliminary data:
●
AA: Geometric mean decrease in UACR of -55% in moderate to severe albuminuria (baseline UACR >500 µg/mg) (n=3), Stable eGFR from baseline (n=12) and a mean decrease in systolic/diastolic blood pressure -19/-13 mmHg (n=8) at the 2 µg/kg dose level;
●
IgAN: UACR geometric mean decrease of -34% (p=0.002) (baseline UACR>500 µg/mg) (n=11), eGFR and blood pressure were stable (n=16) and mean decreases in the biomarkers April and IgA1 of 35% and 22% overall, respectively; and
●
DKD: No overall treatment effect was observed for UACR, however, reductions in systolic and diastolic blood pressure (n=28) were observed.
DM199 was generally safe and well tolerated across all cohorts. Adverse events (AEs) were generally mild to moderate in severity, with the most common being local injection site irritation that resolved without medical intervention.
DM300
We have identified a potential novel new treatment for inflammatory diseases, DM300, currently in the pre-clinical stage of development.
Financial Overview
We have not generated any revenues from product sales. Since our inception, we have financed our operations from public and private sales of equity, the exercise of warrants and stock options, interest income on funds available for investment and government grants and tax credits. We have incurred losses in each year since our inception. Our net losses were $13.6 million and $12.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $82.5 million. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our product candidate development programs, our primary R&D activities, and general and administrative (G&A) support costs associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increased operating losses for at least the next several years. In the near term, we anticipate that our expenses will increase as compared to prior periods as we:
●
continue site activation and enrollment of subjects in our pivotal ReMEDy2 Phase 2/3 trial of DM199 for AIS;
●
complete patient follow-up in our REDUX Phase 2 trial of DM199 for CKD;
●
expand our team to provide support for our operations; and
●
maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio.
While we expect our rate of future negative cash flow per month will vary due to the timing of site activation and patient enrollment expenses, we expect our current cash resources will be sufficient to allow us to continue our ReMEDy2 Phase 2/3 trial in patients with AIS, complete patient follow-up in our REDUX Phase 2 trial in patients with CKD, and otherwise fund our planned operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this report. However, the amount and timing of future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the timing and results of our ongoing development efforts, including site activations and enrollment in our clinical studies, the potential expansion of our current development programs, potential new development programs, related G&A support and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. We may require significant additional funds earlier than we currently expect and there is no assurance that we will not need or seek additional funding prior to such time. We may elect to raise additional funds even before we need them if market conditions for raising additional capital are favorable.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses consist primarily of fees paid to external service providers such as contract research organizations (CROs); contractual obligations for clinical development including clinical site costs, outside nursing services, laboratory testing, preclinical trials; development of manufacturing processes; costs for production runs of DM199; salaries, benefits and share-based compensation and other personnel costs. Over the past approximately ten years, our R&D efforts have been primarily focused on developing DM199. At this time, due to the risks inherent in the clinical development process and the clinical stage of our product development programs, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of DM199 or any of our preclinical development programs. The process of conducting clinical studies necessary to obtain regulatory approval and manufacturing scale-up to support expanded development and potential future commercialization is costly and time consuming. Any failure by us or delay in completing clinical studies, manufacturing scale-up or in obtaining regulatory approvals could lead to increased R&D expenses and, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including share-based compensation related to our executive, finance, business development and support functions. G&A expenses also include insurance, including directors and officers liability coverage, rent and utilities, travel expenses, patent costs, professional fees, including for auditing, tax and legal services and milestone payments under our technology license agreement with Catalent.
Other Income, Net
Other (income) expense consists primarily of interest income and foreign currency exchange gains and losses. In past years, governmental assistance - research incentives, which were associated with the ReMEDy1 Phase 2 stroke trial, were a significant component of this line item.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Research and Development Costs
R&D costs include expenses incurred in the conduct of human clinical trials, for third-party service providers performing various treatment, testing and data accumulation and analysis related to these clinical studies; non-clinical research studies; developing the manufacturing process necessary to produce sufficient amounts of the DM199 compound for use in our clinical studies; consulting resources with specialized expertise related to execution of our development plan for our DM199 product candidate; and personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation.
We charge R&D costs, including clinical trial costs, to expense when incurred. Our human clinical trials are performed at clinical trial sites and are generally administered by us with assistance from CROs, and include outside service providers such as outside nursing services, testing laboratories and data coordination and collection. Costs of setting up clinical trial sites are accrued upon execution of the trial agreement. Expenses related to the performance of clinical trials are accrued based on contracted amounts and the achievement of agreed upon milestones, such as patient enrollment, patient follow-up, etc. We monitor levels of performance under each significant contract, including the extent of patient enrollment and other activities through communications with the clinical trial sites, CROs and supporting vendors and adjust the estimates, if required, on a quarterly basis so that clinical expenses reflect the actual work performed at each clinical trial site and by each CRO or supporting vendor.
Clinical Trial Costs
Our clinical trials are performed at clinical trial sites and are administered by us with assistance from CROs or outside contractors as necessary. Clinical trial costs are recorded or accrued based on actual invoices received and estimates of work completed to date by CROs, outside contractors and clinical trial sites that manage and perform the trials. We obtain initial estimates of accrued costs based on the trial protocol and actual enrollment of subjects, trial duration, project and data management costs, patient treatment costs and other activities as required by the trial protocol. Additionally, non-patient related costs may be charged to us and are recognized as the tasks are completed by the clinical trial site. Accrued clinical trial costs may be subject to revisions as clinical trials progress and any revisions are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revisions become known.
Share-based Compensation
We account for all share-based compensation awards using a fair value method. The cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments is measured and recognized based on the estimated grant date fair value of those awards. Compensation cost is recognized ratably using the straight-line attribution method over the vesting period, which is considered to be the requisite service period. We record forfeitures in the periods in which they occur.
The fair value of share-based awards is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based awards is affected by our common share price, as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. Risk-free interest rates are based upon United States Government bond rates appropriate for the expected term of each award. Expected volatility rates are based on the historical volatility equal to the expected life of the option. The assumed dividend yield is zero, as we do not expect to declare any dividends in the foreseeable future. The expected term of options is estimated considering the vesting period at the grant date, the life of the option and the average length of time similar grants have remained outstanding in the past.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value under the Black-Scholes option valuation model are set forth in the following table for options issued by us for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses increased slightly to $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up from $8.2 million in the prior year. This increase was primarily due to a combination of costs incurred for our pivotal Phase 2/3 ReMEDy2 trial and increased personnel costs associated with adding staff to support R&D operations. This increase was partially offset by decreased costs incurred for our earlier ReMEDy1 Phase 2 trial, which completed during 2020, and decreased costs for our REDUX trial, as the number of enrollments in the REDUX trial declined throughout 2021 as the study neared completion. We expect that our R&D expenses will increase in the future as compared to prior periods as sites are activated and enrollment increases in the ReMEDy2 trial and as we incur costs to support the conduct of the ReMEDy2 trial.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses were $4.9 million and $4.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was due to a number of factors including increased costs associated with professional services, the payment to Catalent of a milestone obligation under our technology license agreement with Catalent, increased directors and officers liability insurance costs and increased personnel costs to support our expanding clinical programs. These increases were partially offset by reduced non-cash, share based compensation costs. We did not incur significant additional G&A expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the COVID-19 pandemic, nor do we expect to incur significant additional G&A expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic going forward. We expect our G&A expenses will continue to increase in the future as compared to prior periods as we expand our development and operating activities.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.4 million for 2020. This decrease was driven primarily by cessation of R&D incentive receivables from the Australian Government, paid for qualifying research work performed by our Australian subsidiary as the ReMEDy1 trial completed in 2020 and no costs were incurred for the ReMEDy1 trial during 2021. In addition, decreased interest income recognized during 2021 as compared to 2020 related to lower interest rates also contributed to the decrease.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following tables summarize our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and cash flows for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and are intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $45.1 million, current liabilities of $1.5 million and working capital of $43.9 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $27.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, $2.0 million in current liabilities and $25.9 million in working capital as of December 31, 2020. The increases in our combined cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and in our working capital were due to net proceeds from our September 2021 private placement, partially offset by cash used in operating activities during 2021.
On September 26, 2021, we issued and sold in a private placement an aggregate of 7,653,060 common shares at a purchase price of $3.92 per share to ten accredited investors, resulting in gross proceeds of $30.0 million and net proceeds to us of $29.8 million, after deducting offering expenses.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $12.3 million compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase relates primarily to the combination of the increase in the net loss and the effects of changes in operating assets and liabilities during 2021.
Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of the net purchases of marketable securities. Net cash used in investing activities was $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to the investment of the net proceeds received in the September 2021 private placement in short-term marketable securities, partially offset by an increase in the maturities of marketable securities during 2021.
Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of net proceeds from the sale of our common shares. Net cash provided by financing activities increased slightly to $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, up from $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to greater net proceeds received from our September 2021 private placement as compared to the net proceeds received from our February 2020 and August 2020 public offerings, which involved customary underwriting fees and discounts.
Capital Requirements
Since our inception, we have incurred losses while advancing the R&D of our DM199 product candidate. We have not generated any revenues from product sales and do not expect to do so for at least three to five years. We do not know when or if, we will generate any revenues from product sales of our DM199 product candidate or any future product candidate. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval. We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses until such time as any future product sales, royalty payments, licensing fees and/or milestone payments are sufficient to generate revenues to fund our continuing operations. We expect our operating losses to increase in the near term as compared to prior periods as we continue the research, development and clinical studies of, and seek regulatory approval for, our DM199 product candidate. In the long-term, subject to obtaining regulatory approval of our DM199 product candidate or any future product candidate, and in the absence of the assistance of a strategic partner, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
Accordingly, and notwithstanding the receipt of $29.8 million in net proceeds from our September 2021 private placement, we expect we will need substantial additional capital to further our R&D activities, planned clinical studies, regulatory activities and otherwise develop our product candidate, DM199, or any future product candidates, to a point where they may be commercially sold. Although we are striving to achieve these plans, there is no assurance these and other strategies will be achieved or that additional funding will be obtained on favorable terms or at all. While we expect our rate of future negative cash flow per month will vary due to our clinical activities and the timing of expenses incurred, we expect our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities resources will be sufficient to allow us to continue our ReMEDy2 Phase 2/3 trial in patients with AIS, complete patient follow-up in our REDUX Phase 2 trial in patients with CKD, and otherwise fund our planned operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this report. However, the amount and timing of future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the timing and results of our ongoing development efforts, including the initiation of new sites and enrollment in our clinical studies, the potential expansion of current development programs, potential new development programs, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our clinical programs and operations, and related G&A support. We may require significant additional funds earlier than we currently expect and there is no assurance that we will not need or seek additional funding prior to such time, especially if market conditions for raising additional capital are favorable.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations from public and private sales of equity, the exercise of warrants and stock options, interest income on funds available for investment, and government incentive grants, and we expect to continue this practice for the foreseeable future. We do not have any existing credit facilities under which we could borrow funds. We may seek to raise additional funds through various sources, such as equity or debt financings, or through strategic collaborations and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure additional sources of funds to support our operations, or if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs or on terms acceptable to us. This is particularly true if our clinical data is not positive or economic and market conditions deteriorate.
To the extent we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our shareholders will be diluted. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include conversion discounts or covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, or strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. The availability of financing will be affected by our clinical data and other results of scientific and clinical research; the ability to attain regulatory approvals; market acceptance of our product candidates; the state of the capital markets generally with particular reference to pharmaceutical, biotechnology and medical companies; the status of strategic alliance agreements; and other relevant commercial considerations.
If adequate funding is not available when needed, we may be required to scale back our operations by taking actions that may include, among other things, implementing cost reduction strategies, such as reducing use of outside professional service providers, reducing the number of our employees or employee compensation, modifying or delaying the development of our DM199 product candidate; licensing to third parties the rights to commercialize our DM199 product candidate for AIS, CKD or other indications that we would otherwise seek to pursue, or otherwise relinquishing significant rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or granting licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us; and/or divesting assets or ceasing operations through a merger, sale, or liquidation of our company.
Commitments and Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we incur obligations to make future payments as we execute our business plan. These obligations may relate to preclinical or clinical studies, manufacturing or manufacturing process development and other related activities. Currently, these obligations include costs to be incurred with contract research organizations, central laboratory and pharmacy services, clinical study sites, home nursing services and various other vendors supporting the performance of our clinical trials. The contracts we enter into with these vendors and the commitments within these contracts are subject to significant variability based upon the actual activities/services performed by each vendor. As a result, the ultimate amounts due may be materially different as these obligations are affected by, among other factors, the number and pace of patients enrolled, the number of clinical study sites enrolling subjects, the amount of time to complete trial enrollments and the time required to finalize, analyze and report of trial results. Clinical research agreements are generally cancelable upon up to 60 days’ notice, with the Company’s obligation limited to costs incurred up to that date, including any non-cancelable costs. Cancelation terms for product manufacturing and process development contracts vary and are generally dependent upon timelines for sourcing research materials and reserving laboratory time. As of December 31, 2021, the Company estimates that its outstanding commitments, including such cancellable contracts, are approximately $6.0 million over the next 12 months and $6.9 million in the following 12 months.
As of December 31, 2021, we had future operating lease commitments totaling approximately $45,000 over the remainder of the lease, of which the entirety is due over the next 12 months.
We have entered into a license agreement with Catalent Pharma Solutions, LLC (Catalent) whereby we have licensed certain gene expression technology and we contract with Catalent for the manufacture of DM199. Under the terms of this license, certain milestone and royalty payments may become due under this agreement and are dependent upon, among other factors, clinical trials, regulatory approvals and ultimately the successful development of a new drug, the outcome and timing of which is uncertain. During fourth quarter of 2021, we remitted a milestone payment of $185,000 due upon the initiation of dosing in our ReMEDy2 pivotal trial of DM199 in AIS. As of December 31, 2021, one milestone payment obligation remains, $185,000 due upon our first regulatory approval of DM199 for commercial sale. Following the launch of our first product, we will also incur a royalty of less than 1% on net sales. The royalty term is indefinite but the license agreement may be canceled by us on 90 days’ prior written notice. The license may not be terminated by Catalent unless we fail to make required milestone and royalty payments.