ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) of the financial condition and results of operations of Deep Medicine Acquisition Corp. (the “Company,” “us” or “we”) is for the year ended March 31, 2022 and for the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through March 31, 2021. It is supplemental to, and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements for year ended March 31, 2022 and for the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through March 31, 2021 and the accompanying notes for each respective period. The Company’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Financial information presented in this MD&A is presented in United States dollars (“$” or “US$”), unless otherwise indicated.
The information about us provided in this MD&A, including information incorporated by reference, may contain “forward-looking statements” and certain “forward-looking information” as defined under applicable United States securities laws and Canadian securities laws. All statements, other than statements of historical fact, made by us that address activities, events or developments that we expect or anticipate will or may occur in the future are forward-looking statements,
including, but not limited to, statements preceded by, followed by or that include words such as “may”, “will”, “would”, “could”, “should”, “believes”, “estimates”, “projects”, “potential”, “expects”, “plans”, “intends”, “anticipates”, “targeted”, “continues”, “forecasts”, “designed”, “goal”, or the negative of those words or other similar or comparable words and includes, among others, information regarding: the Company’s ability to become profitable and generate cash in the Company’s operating activities; the Company’s need for substantial additional financing to operate the Company’s business and difficulties we may face acquiring additional financing on terms acceptable to us or at all; the Company’s significant indebtedness and significant restrictions on the Company’s operations; the Company’s ability to construct and operate the Company’s planned a magnesium research and development pilot plant and obtain necessary permits and authorizations to construct and operate the facility; the impact of global climate change on the Company’s ability to conduct future operations.; the Company’s lack of a diversified portfolio of assets; the Company’s dependence on key inputs, suppliers and skilled labor for the production of magnesium.; the Company’s ability to attract and retain key personnel; growth-related risks, including capacity constraints and pressure on the Company’s internal systems and controls; the adverse consequences of litigation we are currently involved in and litigation we may face from time to time; risk related to the protection of the Company’s intellectual and the Company’s exposure to infringement or misappropriation claims by third parties; risks related to competition; risks related to the Company’s lack of internal controls over financial reporting and their effectiveness; increased costs we are subject to as a result of being a public company in Canada and the United States; and other events or conditions that may occur in the future.
Forward-looking statements may relate to future financial conditions, results of operations, plans, objectives, performance or business developments. These statements speak only as at the date they are made and are based on information currently available and on the then current expectations of the party making the statement and assumptions concerning future events, which are subject to a number of known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from that which was expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements, including, but not limited to, risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Although we believe that the expectations and assumptions on which such forward-looking statements are based are reasonable, undue reliance should not be placed on the forward-looking statements, because no assurance can be given that they will prove to be correct. Since forward-looking statements address future events and conditions, by their very nature, they involve inherent risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those currently anticipated due to a number of factors and risks. These include, but are not limited to the risks described in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Consequently, all forward-looking statements made in this MD&A and other documents, as applicable, are qualified by such cautionary statements, and there can be no assurance that the anticipated results or developments will actually be realized or, even if realized, that they will have the expected consequences to or effects on us. The cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section should be considered in connection with any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements that we and/or persons acting on its behalf may issue. We do not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, other than as required under securities legislation.
Overview of the Business
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On October 29, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 12,650,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, which included 1,650,000 Units issued pursuant to the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, and the private sale of an aggregate of 519,500 Units to our Sponsor and I-Bankers at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit, generating gross proceeds of $5,195,000 to us that closed simultaneously with the closing of the IPO. Our Class A common stock and rights have been listed on Nasdaq commenced trading separately with the ticker symbols “DMAQ” and “DMAQR,” respectively. Each Unit consisted of one share of Class A common stock and one right to receive one-tenth of one share of Class A common stock upon the consummation of our initial Business Combination.
Transaction costs amounted to $7,282,500 consisting of $2,530,000 in cash of underwriting commissions, $4,427,500 of business combination marketing fee, and $325,000 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of the IPO, cash of $764,101 was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for working capital purposes. As of March 31, 2022, the Company had available cash of $877,099 on its balance sheet and a working capital of $655,693.
We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the private placement of the Private Placement Units, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial Business Combination (including pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the IPO or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial Business Combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the IPO, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or rights.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
•
other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO. Following the IPO, we will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after the IPO. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. After the IPO, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates. We expect our expenses to increase substantially after the closing of the IPO.
For the year ended March 31, 2022, we had a net loss of $414,045, which consists of $409,912 of operating and formation costs and unrealized loss on our marketable securities held in the trust account of $4,133.
For the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through March 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $59,395 which consisted of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021, we had cash of $877,099 and $500,067, respectively, and prepaid expenses of $315,306 and $37,500, respectively.
For the year ended March 31, 2022, net cash used in operating activities was $697,868. Net loss of $414,045 was affected by unrealized loss on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $4,133. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $287,956 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from July 8, 2020 (inception) through March 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $50,033. Net loss of $59,395 was affected by the increase in prepaid expenses of $37,500 for legal services, partially offset by the increase in accrued expenses to related parties amounted to $46,000.
Prior to the completion of the IPO, the Company lacked the liquidity it needed to sustain operations for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statement. The Company has since competed its IPO at which time capital in excess of the funds deposited in the Trust Account and/or used to fund offering expenses was released to the Company for general working capital purposes. Accordingly, management has since re-evaluated the Company’s liquidity and financial condition and determined that sufficient capital exists to sustain operations for at least one year from the date that the financial statement was issued, and therefore substantial doubt has been alleviated.
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of the IPO through a capital contribution from our initial stockholders of $50,000 for the Founder Shares and $500,000 in loans available from our Sponsor under an unsecured promissory note. Pursuant to the full exercise by the Underwriters of their over-allotment option, our net proceeds from (i) the sale of the Units in the IPO, after deducting offering expenses of approximately $500,000, underwriting commissions of $2,530,000, and (ii) the sale of the Private Placement Units for a purchase price of $5,195,000, was $128,665,000. Of this amount, $127,765,000 was held in the Trust Account. The proceeds held in the Trust Account were invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. The remaining $764,101 was not held in the Trust Account. In the event that our offering expenses exceed our estimate of $500,000, we may fund such excess with funds not to be held in the Trust Account. In such case, the amount of funds we intend to be held outside the Trust Account would decrease by a corresponding amount. Conversely, in the event that the offering expenses are less than our estimate of $500,000, the amount of funds we intend to be held outside the Trust Account would increase by a corresponding amount.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding after the completion of the IPO, to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from the IPO held outside of the Trust Account or from interest earned on the funds held in our Trust Account and released to us for this purpose. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Prior to the completion of our initial Business Combination, we have available to us the $764,101 of proceeds held outside the Trust Account. We will use these funds to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into private placement-equivalent units at a price of $10.00 per unit (which, for example, would result in the holders being issued 165,000 shares of Class A common stock if $1,500,000 of notes were so converted since the 150,000 rights included in such units would result in the issuance of 15,000 shares upon the closing of our Business Combination), at the option of the lender.
Such units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. The terms of such working capital loans by our Sponsor or its affiliates, or our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during that period to include approximately $250,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting successful business combinations; $100,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $75,000 for Nasdaq continued listing fees; $300,000 for director and officer liability insurance premiums; $115,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves (including taxes net of anticipated interest income); and approximately $60,000 as fees to our Chief Financial Officer.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed initial Business Combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific Business Combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the IPO in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses
larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Units, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Related Party Transactions
In March 2021, our initial stockholders purchased 2,875,000 Founder Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $50,000, or approximately $0.017 per share. The number of Founder Shares issued was determined based on the expectation that such Founder Shares would represent 20% of the outstanding shares upon completion of the IPO (not including the shares of Class A common stock underlying the Private Placement Units or the representative shares). The per share purchase price of the Founder Shares was determined by dividing the amount of cash contributed to the company by the aggregate number of Founder Shares issued. In October 2021, we effected a 0.1 for 1 stock dividend for each share of Class B common stock outstanding, resulting in our Sponsor holding an aggregate of 3,162,500 Founder Shares.
We pay Weixuan Luo, our Chief Financial Officer, monthly fees of $5,000 for her services commencing on August 1, 2020. Upon completion of our initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. We will also issue to our officers and directors an aggregate of 300,000 post Business Combination shares within 10 days following the Business Combination with the same lock-up restrictions as the Founder Shares and same registration rights as our Founder Shares.
Our Sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our Sponsor, officers, directors or our or their affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on our behalf.
Prior to the consummation of the IPO, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $500,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the IPO. These loans are non-interest bearing, unsecured and are due upon completion of our initial Business Combination. As of March 31, 2022 and 2021, we had a loan payable to our Sponsor in amount of $500,000.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into private placement-equivalent units at a price of $10.00 per unit (which, for example, would result in the holders being issued 165,000 shares of Class A common stock if $1,500,000 of notes were so converted since the 150,000 rights included in such units would result in the issuance of 15,000 shares upon the closing of our Business Combination), at the option of the lender. Such units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. The terms of such working capital loans by our Sponsor or its affiliates, or our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement we will enter into with our initial stockholders, our Sponsor and I-Bankers on or prior to the closing of the IPO, we may be required to register certain securities for sale under the Securities Act. These holders, and holders of units issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, are entitled under the registration rights agreement to make up to three demands that we register certain of our securities held by them for sale under the Securities Act and to have the securities covered thereby registered for resale pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders have the right to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the costs and expenses of filing any such registration statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of March 31, 2022. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our Chief Financial Officer monthly fee of $5,000 for accounting, administrative and support services. We will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $4,427,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, we recognized the remeasurement from initial book value to redemption value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted
beginning on January 1, 2021. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company”, we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.