Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report, as well as Item 1. Business of this Annual Report, for an overview of our operations and business environment.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations as a percentage of net revenue:
Operating Results for year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table presents the consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the changes from the prior periods (in thousands):
Net revenue. Our business generates revenue primarily through the delivery of a variety of performance-based marketing services, including customer acquisition, managed services and software services.
The following table presents revenue by type for each segment and the changes from the prior periods:
Customer Acquisition Revenue. Customer acquisition contracts deliver potential consumers or leads (i.e. number of clicks, emails, calls and applications) to the customer in real-time based on predefined qualifying characteristics specified by our customer.
Our Brand Direct segment experienced an increase in Customer acquisition revenue of $65.3 million or 36% during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Customer acquisition revenue for Marketplace increased by $68.2 million or 44% during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in both the Brand Direct and Marketplace segments was primarily due to the migration of consumers to the online shopping experience, especially in the auto and health insurance verticals.
The Medicare Annual Enrollment Period (“AEP”) and under-65 health open enrollment period (“OEP”) which occurred during the fourth quarter and was led by the addition of Crisp Results, also served to bolster our performance, resulting in a record breaking year.
Advertisers are following the consumer. As consumers spend more time online, researching products and services, shopping and spending online, advertisers are increasing their spend on digital channels to connect with consumers where they are. And as a result of our effectiveness, advertiser clients spend more with us, which in turn allows us to deploy more media dollars, engage more consumers, grow our first-party data asset and deliver an enhanced return on investment (“ROI”).
The more our first-party data asset grows, the better we become at targeting and engaging consumers, and that leads to better ROI for our advertiser clients, which leads them to spending more with us.
Managed Services Revenue. Managed services contracts provide continuous service of managing the customer’s media spend for the purpose of generating leads through a third-party supplier of leads, as requested by our customer. Managed services revenue experienced a decrease of $8.7 million or 36% during the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily driven by lower third-party supplier leads.
Software Services Revenue. Software services contracts provide the customer with continuous, daily access to the Company’s proprietary software. Software services revenue as a percentage of total revenue was considered insignificant during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of revenue and gross profit. Cost of revenue primarily includes media and other related costs, such as the cost to acquire user traffic through the purchase of impressions, clicks or actions from publishers or third-party intermediaries, including advertising exchanges, and the direct technology costs that enable media acquisition. These media costs are used primarily to drive user traffic to the Company’s and our customers’ media properties. Cost of revenue also includes indirect costs such as data verification, hosting and fulfillment costs.
The following table presents the gross profit percentage (gross profit as a percentage of total net revenue) by segment and the changes from prior period:
Gross profit for Brand Direct increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by substantial diversification in our distribution channels as we continue to scale and grow as well strong execution and strategic investments in technology, like DMS Voice, which allowed us to create efficiencies and reduce our cost of goods sold. The creation of DMS Voice enabled us to streamline and eliminate systems to result in better experiences for our publisher partners, advertiser clients and consumers and has added capabilities, which have resulted in revenue and margin improvements.
Gross profit for Marketplace decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the expansion in the auto and health insurance business at compressed margins, as well as recent reduction of price paid per lead by several auto insurance and education customers, even as our media costs remained flat. Beginning in Q2, the auto insurance industry began to experience macro headwinds which increased throughout the year. By September, 14 of the 20 largest private auto insurers
were experiencing double-digit declines in loss ratios. As a result, the carriers reduced their advertising spend through lower click prices, negatively impacting margins of DMS and our peers.
Gross profit for Other decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to changes in revenue mix and compressed lower profit margins.
Total gross profit slightly increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of the combined effect of market expansion, the strategic investment in DMS Voice (interactive voice recognition technology) and the recent acquisitions of AAP and Crisp which have higher margin profiles.
Salaries and related costs. Total compensation includes salaries, commissions, bonuses, payroll taxes and retirement benefits.
Salaries and related costs increased by $14.6 million or 44% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by stock-based compensation resulting from timing of the initial stock-based award made in Q4 2020 after company went public in July 2020. In addition, increases in headcount as a result of required expansion of our workforce to support the Company’s growth, as well as the addition of full-time employees from two acquisitions the Company completed in 2021 contributed to the increase.
As a relatively newly formed public company, we rightsized some of our corporate functions and invested in people, processes and technology to position, improve and sustain performance and comply with our fiduciary obligations; building a competitive and entrepreneurial workforce that helps ensure we have the critical skill sets that innovative minds and the passion for the continued implementation of sophisticated processes and technology; to measure, analyze and optimize while the sustained quality and accuracy remain top priorities.
General and administrative. General and administrative consist of expenses incurred in our normal course of business relating to office supplies, computer and technology, rent and utilities, insurance, legal and professional fees, state and local taxes and licenses, penalties and settlements and bad debt expense, as well as sales and marketing expenses relating to advertising and promotion. We also include other expenses such as investment banking expenses, fundraising costs and costs related to the advancement of our corporate social responsibility program.
General and administrative expenses increased $13.0 million or 43% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by higher software and voice enabled technology expenses as well as an overall increase in insurance, legal and professional fees related to compliance, partially offset by a decrease in rental expense due to office closures.
Depreciation and amortization. Property, plant and equipment consists of computers and office equipment, furniture and fixtures, leasehold improvements and internally developed software costs. Intangible assets subject to amortization include technology, customer relationships, brand, and non-competition agreements.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $7.4 million or 41% during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by acquired Intangible Assets associated with the Crisp Results and Aimtell/Aramis/PushPros (“AAP”) acquisitions as well as continued investments in internally developed software placed in service over the last two years.
Acquisition costs. Acquisition related costs are not considered part of the consideration for acquisitions and are expensed as incurred. This includes acquisition incentive compensation and other transaction related costs. Acquisition costs decreased $2.8 million or 59% during the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to comparatively higher cost in 2020 resulting from the July 2020 Business Combination.
Contingent consideration changes in fair value of acquisition related to the purchases of Crisp Results and AAP increased $1.1 million or greater than 100% during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities represents the fair value remeasurement adjustments to the outstanding Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the Business Combination. The change in fair value of the outstanding Private Placement Warrants decreased $18.1 million primarily due to the lower observed market pricing of DMS shares for the year ended December 31, 2021. (see Note 10. Fair Value Measurements).
Change in Tax Receivable Agreement Liability. For the year ended December 31, 2021 the company recorded an adjustment to our Tax Receivable Agreement (“TRA”) Liability resulting in a benefit of $15.3 million due to current expectations regarding the recoverability of the related business combination TRA deferred tax asset (discussed in Income tax expense below). Those expectations indicate it is more likely than not that due to historical book losses for the last 3-years at DMS LLC
recoverability of a significant portion of the business combination TRA deferred tax asset is not both probable and estimable for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest expense. Interest expense increased by $0.4 million or 3% during the year ended December 31, 2021. The change in Interest expense for year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to higher outstanding debt balance, which was partially offset by a decline in interest rates compared to the same period in the prior year. Our debt, which carries a variable interest rate based on multiple options at either LIBOR plus 5% or an alternate base rate, plus an agreed upon margin with Truist Bank, the Company’s financial institution since May 25, 2021. Since May 25, 2021 our interest rate is based on LIBOR plus 5% (see Note 7. Debt).
Income tax expense. The Company recorded $19.3 million and $3.1 million income tax expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The blended effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 76% which varies from our statutory U.S. tax rate due to taxable income or loss that is allocated to the non-controlling interests and the recognition of a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets related to the Business Combination. The blended effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was (29)% which varied from our statutory U.S. tax rate due to taxable income or loss that is allocated to the non-controlling interests (see Note 14. Income Taxes).
Non-controlling interests. As a result of the Aimtell/PushPros/Aramis and Crisp Results acquisitions, our non-controlling interests own approximately 41.6% of the ownership interest of DMSH and we allocate their respective portion of net income or loss to the DMSH Units held by the non-controlling interests.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In addition to providing financial measurements based on accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), this Annual Report includes additional financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP (“non-GAAP”), including Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Combined Adjusted EBITDA, Unlevered Free Cash Flow, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS. A reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures can be found below.
We use these financial measures internally to review the performance of our business units without regard to certain accounting treatments and non-recurring items. We believe that presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations. Because of these limitations, management relied primarily on its GAAP results and uses non-GAAP measures only as a supplement.
Adjusted Revenue
Adjusted Revenue is a non-GAAP financial measure presented as an alternative method for assessing the Company’s operating results in a manner that is focused on the performance of our underlying operations. Management believes this measure provides useful information because, while the majority of our business is comprised of lead generation contracts which are accounted for on a gross basis, a portion of our agency managed services contracts are accounted for on a net basis. In this regard, management believes that Adjusted Revenue provides useful information regarding operating performance across our business, without regard to the accounting treatment of individual contracts, and allows management to build forecasts on a consistent basis across the business.
Management further uses Adjusted Revenue to compare the performance of divisions within the Company against each other and to isolate our core operating performance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, management is discontinuing use of Adjusted Revenue going forward in 2022. Management believes that it is appropriate to do so at the current time given that the vast majority of our contracts are now accounted for on a gross basis. In addition, management believes that focusing on GAAP revenue will allow management, analysts and investors to focus on a single measure of revenue and simplify the Company’s disclosures going forward.
Adjusted Revenue is defined as revenue as reported under GAAP, without regard to netting of costs applicable to revenues earned under contracts that are deemed to be entered into on an agency basis. The following table provides a reconciliation of Adjusted Revenue to revenue, the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands):
______________
(1) Includes the gross up for certain Managed services contracts that are presented net of costs under GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA, Unlevered Free Cash Flow and Unlevered Free Cash Flow Conversion
We use the non-GAAP measures of Adjusted EBITDA and Unlevered Free Cash Flow to assess operating performance. Management believes that these measures provide useful information to investors regarding DMS’s operating performance and its capacity to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures. DMS believes that these measures are used by many investors, analysts and rating agencies as a measure of performance. By reporting these measures, DMS provides a basis for comparison of our business operations between current, past and future periods by excluding items that DMS does not believe are indicative of our core operating performance.
Financial measures that are non-GAAP should not be considered as alternatives to operating income, cash flows from operating activities or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance, or cash flows as measures of liquidity. These measures have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, DMS relies primarily on its GAAP results and uses Adjusted EBITDA and Unlevered Free Cash Flow only as a supplement.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss), excluding (a) interest expense, (b) income tax expense, (c) depreciation and amortization, (d) change in fair value of warrant liabilities, (e) debt extinguishment, (f) stock-based compensation, (g) change in tax receivable agreement liability, (h) restructuring costs, (i) acquisition costs, (j) other expense.
Unlevered Free Cash Flow is defined as Adjusted EBITDA, less capital expenditures, and Unlevered Free Cash Flow Conversion is defined as Unlevered Free Cash Flow divided by Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table provides a reconciliation between Adjusted net income and Adjusted EBITDA, and Unlevered Free Cash Flow, from Net income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure (in thousands):
______________
(1)Mark-to-market warrant liability adjustments.
(2)Balance includes business combination transaction fees and related payments on Company’s EIP, acquisition incentive payments, contingent consideration accretion, earnout payments and pre-acquisition expenses.
(3)Balance includes legal fees associated with acquisitions, investor management fees and costs related to philanthropic initiatives, and private warrant transaction related costs.
(4)Costs savings as a result of the company reorganization initiated in Q2 2020.
(5)Cost synergies expected as a result of the full integration of the acquisitions.
(6)Pre-acquisition Adjusted EBITDA results from the Aimtell/Aramis/PushPro and Crisp, and SmarterChaos acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(7)For the year ended December 31, 2020, represents certain unusual bad debt expenses related to potentially uncollectible receivables that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and an unexpected business interruption. Management has determined that these items are not indicative of normal operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, represents bad debt expense associated with a specific strategic customer that we believe will be settled over time.
A reconciliation of Unlevered Free Cash Flow to net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is presented below (in thousands):
______________
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2020, represents certain unusual bad debt expenses related to potentially uncollectible receivables that resulted from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and an unexpected business interruption. Management has determined that these items are not indicative of normal operations. For the year ended December 31, 2021, represents bad debt expense associated with a specific strategic customer that we believe will be settled over time.
(2)Pre-acquisition Adjusted EBITDA results from the Aimtell/Aramis/PushPro and Crisp, and SmarterChaos acquisitions during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(3)Costs savings as a result of the company reorganization initiated in Q2 2020.
(4)Cost synergies expected as a result of the full integration of the acquisitions.
(5)Balance includes business combination transaction fees and related payments on Company’s EIP, acquisition incentive payments, contingent consideration accretion, earnout payments and pre-acquisition expenses.
(6)Balance includes legal fees associated with acquisitions, investor management fees and costs related to philanthropic initiatives, and private warrant transaction related costs.
(7)Mark-to-market warrant liability adjustments.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS:
We use the non-GAAP measures Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS to assess operating performance. Management believes that these measures provide investors with useful information on period-to-period performance as evaluated by management and comparison with our past financial and operating performance. Management also believes these non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as this metric generally eliminates the effects of certain items that may vary from company to company for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net loss attributable to Digital Media Solutions, Inc. adjusted for (x) costs associated with the Business Combination, acquisition-related costs, equity based compensation and lease restructuring charges and (y) the reallocation of net income (loss) attributable to non-controlling interests from the assumed acquisition by Digital Media Solutions, Inc. of all units of Digital Media Solutions Holdings, LLC ("DMSH LLC") (other than units held by subsidiaries of Digital Media Solutions, Inc.) for newly-issued shares of Class A Common Stock of Digital Media Solutions, Inc. on a one-to-one basis. We define adjusted pro forma net loss per share as adjusted pro forma net loss divided by the weighted-average shares of Class A Common Stock outstanding, assuming the acquisition by Digital Media Solutions, Inc. of all outstanding DMSH LLC units (other than units held by subsidiaries of Digital Media Solutions, Inc.) for newly-issued shares of Class A Common Stock on a one-to-one-basis.
The following table presents a reconciliation between GAAP Earnings Per Share and Non-GAAP Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS (In thousands, except per share data):
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The following table summarizes certain key measures of our liquidity and capital resources (in thousands):
Our capital sources are focused on investments in our technology solutions, corporate infrastructure and strategic acquisitions to further expand into new business sectors and/or expand sales in existing sectors. We generate sufficient cash flows for working capital and expect to do so for the foreseeable future.
Our principal sources of liquidity on a short-term basis are cash and cash equivalents, and cash flows provided by operations. Our primary use of cash is compensation to our employees and payments for general operating expenses and interest expense.
Borrowings under the Revolving Facility bear interest, at our option, at either (i) adjusted LIBOR plus 4.25% or (ii) a base rate (which is equal to the highest of (a) Administrative Agent’s prime rate, (b) the federal funds rate, as in effect from time to time, plus 0.50%, (c) one-month LIBOR plus 1.00%, and (d) 1.75% (the “Base Rate”)), plus 3.25%. The Term Loan bears interest at our option, at either (i) adjusted LIBOR plus 5.00% or (ii) the Base Rate plus 4.00%. Under the Revolving Facility, DMS LLC will pay a 0.50% per annum commitment fee in arrears on the undrawn portion of the revolving commitments. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective interest rate was 6.29%. Since May 25, 2021 our interest rate is based on LIBOR plus 5%.
The Term Loan, which was issued at an original issue discount of 1.80% or $4.2 million, will be subject to payment of 1.0% of the original aggregate principal amount per annum paid quarterly, with a bullet payment at maturity. The Term Loan will mature, and the revolving credit commitments under the Revolving Facility will terminate, on May 25, 2026, when any outstanding balances will become due.
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $17.0 million provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in sales year-over-year coupled with comparatively lower acquisition related expenses, partially offset by increases in expenses driven by higher headcount as a result of required expansion of our workforce to support the Company’s growth.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $21.1 million or 160% to $34.2 million from $13.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to acquisitions of Aimtell/Aramis/PushPros and Crisp Results made during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10.5 million, reflecting a decrease of $14.1 million or 57%, as compared to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was mainly due to the net effect of repayments of long-term debt and notes payable from borrowings incurred in connection with the establishment of our revolving credit facility.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our Unlevered Free Cash Flow conversion rate was 84.3% and 80.9%, respectively. The slight increase was primarily due to higher business performance.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any outstanding off-balance sheet guarantees, interest rate swap transactions or foreign currency forward contracts. In addition, we do not engage in trading activities involving non-exchange traded contracts. In our ongoing business, we do not enter into transactions involving, or otherwise form relationships with, unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships that are established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In doing so, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. A number of the estimates and assumptions relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. We base these estimates and assumptions on historical experience or on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we reconsider and evaluate our estimates and assumptions.
We believe that the accounting policies listed below involve our more significant judgments, estimates and assumptions and, therefore, could have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. In addition, we believe that a discussion of these policies is necessary to understand and evaluate the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Refer to Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 1. Financial Statements of this Annual Report, for further information on our critical and other significant accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
The Company derives revenue primarily through the delivery of various types of services, including customer acquisition, managed services and software services. Effective January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new revenue recognition standard using the modified retrospective method. The adoption of this new standard did not have a material impact on the measurement, recognition and disclosure of revenue in the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The Company recognizes revenue when the Company transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The Company recognizes revenue pursuant to the five-step framework: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including any constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the performance obligations.
The transaction price is measured based on the consideration the Company expects to receive from a contract with a customer and for which it is probable the Company will collect substantially all of the consideration to which it is entitled under the contract. The Company’s contracts with customers contain variable consideration; however, uncertainty related to variable consideration is resolved on a monthly basis. Therefore, the transaction price for any given period is fixed and no estimation of variable consideration is required (except as discussed within the Customer Acquisition subsection).
The Company’s standard payment terms are typically 30 days. The Company does not have any significant financing arrangements with customers.
If a customer pays consideration before the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied, such amounts are recorded as a contract liability (i.e., deferred revenue) on the consolidated balance sheets.
The Company elected to use the practical expedient which allows the Company to record costs to obtain a contract (i.e., sales commissions) as expense as incurred when the amortization period would have been one year or less. Costs to fulfill a contract, including nominal configuration costs, are not material.
The Company elected the practical expedient to not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which revenue is recognized at the amount to which the Company has the right to invoice for services performed.
Customer acquisition
The Company’s performance obligation for Customer acquisition contracts is to deliver an unspecified number of potential customers or leads (i.e., number of clicks, emails, calls and applications) to the customer in real-time, on a daily basis as the leads are generated, based on predefined qualifying characteristics specified by our customer. The contracts generally have a one-month term and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for all leads delivered to the customer. The Company’s customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided, as the Company satisfies its performance obligations. The Company recognizes revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied over time.
When there is a delay between the period in which revenue is recognized and when a customer invoice is issued, revenue is recognized and the corresponding amounts are recorded as unbilled revenue (i.e., contract assets) within Accounts receivable, net on the consolidated balance sheets. In line with industry practice, the Company applies the constraint on variable consideration and records revenue based on internally tracked conversions (leads delivered), net of the amount tracked and subsequently confirmed by customers. A significant portion of the unbilled estimated revenue balance is finalized and invoiced to customers within sixty days following the period of service. Any remaining estimates are finalized and invoiced as billing totals are reconciled with the customer. Historical estimates related to unbilled revenue have not been materially different from actual revenue billed.
Managed services
The Company’s performance obligation for Managed service contracts is to provide continuous service of managing the customer’s media spend for the purpose of generating leads through a third-party supplier of leads, as requested by our customer. Each month of service is distinct, and any variable consideration is allocated to a distinct month. Therefore, revenue is recognized as the performance obligation is satisfied each month and there is no estimation of revenue required at each reporting period for managed services contracts.
The Company enters into agreements with internet search companies, third-party publishers and/or strategic partners to generate customer acquisition services for their Managed service customers. The Company receives a fee from its customers and separately pays a fee to the internet search companies, third-party publishers and/or strategic partners. The third-party supplier is primarily responsible for the performance and deliverable to the customer, and the Company solely arranges for the third-party supplier to provide services to the customer. Therefore, in certain cases, the Company acts as the agent and the net fees earned by the Company are recorded as revenue, with no associated costs of revenue attributable to the Company.
Software services
The Company’s performance obligation for Software services contracts is to provide the customer with continuous, daily access to the Company’s proprietary software. Service provided each month is distinct, and any variable consideration is allocated to a distinct month. Therefore, revenue is recognized as the performance obligations are satisfied each month and there is no estimation of revenue required at each reporting period for Software services contracts.
Acquisitions
Under the acquisition method of accounting, the Company recognizes, separately from goodwill, the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated acquisition date fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities are recorded as goodwill.
The Company performs valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and allocates the purchase price to its respective assets and liabilities. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. As a result, actual results may differ from these estimates. During the measurement period, the Company may record adjustments to acquired assets and assumed liabilities, with corresponding offsets to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of a measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
At the acquisition date, the Company measures the fair values of all assets acquired and liabilities assumed that arise from contractual contingencies. The Company also measures the fair values of all non-contractual contingencies if, as of the acquisitions date, it is more likely than not that the contingencies will give rise to assets or liabilities.
Acquisition related costs not considered part of the considerations are expensed as incurred and recorded in Acquisition costs within the consolidated statement of operations.
Contingent consideration
The Company recognizes the fair value of any contingent consideration that is transferred to the seller in a business combination on the date at which control of the acquiree is obtained. Contingent consideration is classified as a liability or as equity on the basis of the definitions of an equity instrument and a financial liability. Since the Company’s contingent consideration can be paid in cash or DMS Class A Common Stock, at the election of the Company, the Company classifies its contingent consideration as a liability. Contingent consideration payments related to acquisitions are measured at fair value at each reporting period using Level 3 unobservable inputs. The Company’s estimates of fair value are based upon projected cash flows, estimated volatility and other inputs which are uncertain and involve significant judgments by management. Any changes in the fair value of these contingent consideration payments are included in income from operations in the consolidated statements of operations.
Income taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more-likely-than-not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. A valuation allowance will be recorded to reduce deferred tax assets to an amount that is anticipated to be realized on a more likely than not basis. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated by applying existing tax laws and the rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the year of the enacted rate change.
The Company accounts for uncertainty in income taxes using a recognition and measurement threshold for tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, which are subject to examination by federal and state taxing authorities. The tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on technical merits of the position. The amount of the tax benefit recognized is the largest amount of the benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The effective tax rate and the tax basis of assets and liabilities reflect management’s estimates of the ultimate outcome of various tax uncertainties. The Company recognizes penalties and interest related to uncertain tax positions within the provision (benefit) for income taxes line in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
DMSH, the Company’s accounting predecessor, is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes and is not subject to entity-level U.S. federal income tax, except with respect to UE, which was acquired in November 2019. Because UE is treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes, it is subject to entity-level U.S. federal income tax. As a result of the Business Combination, Blocker’s allocable share of earnings from DMSH is also subject to U.S. federal and state and local income taxes.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Through the completion of the 2020 tax return during the interim period ended September 30, 2021, we identified an error recorded upon the Business Combination that resulted in a decrease in the deferred tax asset of $2.1 million, a decrease in the Tax Receivable Agreement liability of $1.8 million and a decrease in Additional Paid-In Capital of $0.3 million, as compared to the amounts recorded in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 and interim periods in the current fiscal year. As the effect of the correction to these accounts was not material to the prior period financial statements, we elected to correct the balance as of September 30, 2021, with the offset to Additional Paid-In Capital, which was consistent with the method to record the Deferred Tax Asset and Tax Receivable Agreement liability on the date of the Business Combination. There was no impact to continuing operations, net income, or related per-share amounts for each period.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a full valuation allowance on our DTA related to the Tax Receivable Agreement along with the entire DTA inventory at DMS, Inc. and Blocker, as these assets are not more likely than not to be realized based on the positive and negative evidence that we considered. The Tax Receivable Agreement liability that originated from the Business Combination is not probable under ASC 450 - Contingencies since a valuation allowance has been recorded against the related DTA. As such, the Tax Receivable Agreement Liability of $15.3 million has been reversed through Income Before Taxes as a Change in Tax Receivable Agreement Liability. The remaining short-term Tax Receivable Agreement liability of $1.3 million is attributable to carryback claims. We will continue to evaluate the positive and negative evidence in determining the realizability of the Company’s DTAs.
Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets
We establish an income tax valuation allowance when available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider the amounts and timing of expected future deductions or carryforwards and sources of taxable income that may enable utilization. We maintain an existing valuation allowance until enough positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Changes in the amount or timing of expected future deductions or taxable income may have a material impact on the level of income tax valuation allowances. Our assessment of the realizability of the deferred tax assets requires judgment about its future results. Inherent in this estimation is the requirement for us to estimate future book and taxable income and possible tax planning strategies. These estimates require us to exercise judgment about our future results, the prudence and feasibility of possible tax planning strategies, and the economic environment in which the Company does business. It is possible that the actual results will differ from the assumptions and require adjustments to the allowance. Adjustments to the allowance would affect future net income.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition accounting method, which requires us to determine the fair value of net assets acquired and the related goodwill and other intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management's judgment and involves the use of significant estimates, including projections of future cashflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples.
We review goodwill as of December 31st each year and whenever events or significant changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We evaluate the recoverability of goodwill at a reporting unit level. We have 3 reporting units that were subject to the 2021 annual impairment testing. Our annual impairment review as of December 31, 2021 did not result in an impairment charge for any of our reporting units.
The fair value of each reporting unit for 2021 was estimated using a combination of the income approach, which incorporates the use of the discounted cash flow method, and the market approach, which incorporates the use of earnings and revenue multiples based on market data.
We review intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization whenever events or circumstances indicate that a carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined by comparing the carrying value of these assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by these asset groups. These asset groups are impaired when their carrying value exceeds their fair value. Impaired intangible assets with definite lives subject to amortization are written down to their fair value with a charge to expense in the period the impairment is identified. Intangible assets with definite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis with estimated useful lives generally between 1 and 9 years. Events or circumstances that might require impairment testing include the loss of a significant client, the identification of other impaired assets within a reporting unit, loss of key personnel, the disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit, significant decline in stock price or a significant adverse change in business climate or regulations.
Software development costs
Costs for software developed for internal use are capitalized during the preliminary stage and post-implementation stages and any research and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Costs incurred in the application development stage are capitalized when the internal use software is placed in service, and amortized over the estimated economic life of the software from the date of implementation.
The capitalization and ongoing assessment of recoverability of development costs require considerable judgment by management with respect to certain external factors, including estimated economic life. Capitalized software development costs are amortized over an estimated useful life of three years.
Private Placement Warrants
The Company’s Private Placement Warrants are accounted for under ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity as they do not meet the criteria to be classified in stockholders’ equity. Since the Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815, we recorded these Private Placement Warrants as liabilities on the balance sheet at fair value, with subsequent changes in their respective fair values recognized in the consolidated statement of earnings (loss) and consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss) at each reporting date. The Private Placement Warrants were valued using a Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model as described in Note 10. Fair Value Measurements, to the consolidated financial statements. The changes in the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants may be material to our future financial results.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Refer to Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report, for a more detailed discussion on recent accounting pronouncements and the related impact on our consolidated financial statements.