Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of DermTech, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, “DermTech,” “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a molecular diagnostic company developing and marketing novel non-invasive genomics tests to aid in the diagnosis and management of various skin conditions, including skin cancer, inflammatory diseases, and aging-related conditions. Our technology provides a highly accurate alternative to surgical biopsy, minimizing patient discomfort, scarring, and risk of infection, while maximizing convenience. Our scalable genomics assays have been designed to work with our Smart Sticker that are used to non-invasively collect a tissue sample for analysis.
We are initially commercializing tests that will address unmet needs in the diagnostic pathway of pigmented skin lesions, such as moles or dark colored skin spots. The DMT facilitates the clinical assessment of pigmented skin lesions for melanoma. We have initially marketed this test directly to a concentrated group of dermatology clinicians and are currently expanding marketing efforts to a broader group of dermatology clinicians. The simple application of our Smart Sticker to collect samples non-invasively may allow us to eventually market the DMT to primary care physicians more broadly, beyond integrated primary care networks, and expand our efforts through telemedicine channels. We process our tests in our high complexity molecular laboratory that is certified under CLIA, CAP accredited and New York licensed. We also provide laboratory services to several pharmaceutical companies that access our technology on a contract basis within their clinical trials or other studies to better advance new drugs.
Events, Trends and Uncertainties
The DMT (without the add-on test for TERT) became eligible for Medicare reimbursement on February 10, 2020. Each reference to the DMT in this paragraph refers only to the DMT without the add-on test for TERT. In late October 2019, the AMA provided us with a PLA Code. Pricing of $760 for the PLA Code was published on December 24, 2019 as part of the CLFS for 2020. The Final LCD expanded the coverage proposal in the Draft LCD from one to two tests per date of service and it allows clinicians to order the DMT if they have sufficient skill and experience to decide whether a pigmented lesion should be biopsied. Our local Medicare Administrative Contractor, Noridian has issued its own Local Coverage Decision (“Noridian’s LCD”) announcing coverage of the DMT. Even though the effective date of Noridian’s LCD was June 7, 2020, Noridian began reimbursing us for the DMT as of February 10, 2020. With Medicare coverage granted, we have the opportunity to approach commercial payors, and as a result, we believe that the DMT may generate significant revenues in 2022 and 2023. No LCD currently covers the optional add-on test for TERT available to those ordering the DMT.
Despite the grant of Medicare coverage for the DMT (without the add-on test for TERT), uncertainty surrounds commercial payor reimbursement, including governmental and commercial payors, of any test incorporating new technology, including tests developed using our technologies. Because each payor generally determines for its own enrollees or insured patients whether to cover or otherwise establish a policy to reimburse our tests, seeking payor approvals is a time-consuming and costly process. We cannot be certain that coverage for our current test and our planned future tests will be provided in the future by additional commercial payors or that existing policy decisions or reimbursement levels will remain in place or be fulfilled under existing terms and provisions. If we cannot obtain or maintain coverage and reimbursement from private and governmental payors such as Medicare and Medicaid for our current test, or new tests or test enhancements that we may develop in the future, our ability to generate revenues could be limited. This may have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operation, and cash flows.
Revenue Effects Related to COVID-19 Pandemic
Assay Revenue
Beginning in March 2020 and continuing through the end of 2021, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has reduced patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing and reduced access by our sales force for in-office sales calls, which has resulted in a reduced volume of billable samples received relative to our pre-pandemic expectations. April 2020 billable sample volume was down by approximately 80%, commensurate with the closure of dermatology offices, compared to the average monthly billable sample volume for the two months preceding the beginning of the COVID-19 stay-at-home orders. Despite the downturn in billable samples in April 2020, we saw a stabilization of billable sample volume throughout the rest of the second quarter of 2020 and through the end of 2021 as various states and dermatology offices opened throughout the country. Despite not all dermatology practices returning to full operations, billable sample volume first exceeded pre-pandemic levels in July 2020. Billable sample volume for the three months ended December 31, 2021 was 1% higher than billable sample volume for the three months ended September 30, 2021 despite the Delta and Omicron
variants that drove the surge of COVID-19 cases during the fourth quarter of 2021. Billable sample volume for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was 86% higher than billable sample volume for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Billable sample volume for the three months ended December 31, 2021 was 42% higher than billable sample volume for the three months ended December 31, 2020. Billable sample volumes could continue to be impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and further impacted by a potential resurgence of the virus or its variants in the future.
In April 2020, we made available a remote telemedicine collection option for the DMT. Using the remote telemedicine collection option, a clinician can choose to assess the patient’s skin and suspicious lesion(s) via a teledermatology telemedicine appointment and, if indicated, submit a patient-specific order to DermTech for the DMT. In this case, a Smart Sticker Collection Kit is then mailed to the patient directly. During a follow-up telemedicine appointment, a clinician instructs and supervises the patient to collect their sample with the Smart Sticker. The patient then returns the collected sample(s) back to DermTech via a pre-labeled shipping envelope for analysis. Test results are made available to the ordering clinician within a few days.
In July 2021, we launched another telemedicine option available to patients through the DermTech Connect mobile application, where permitted by law and consistent with applicable standards of care and practice guidelines. DermTech Connect enables a user to take a picture of a suspicious lesion with their phone and submit the picture to an independent clinician to assess the lesion. As of the date of this report, DermTech Connect is only available to patients of clinicians subscribed to DermTech Connect in eight states and remains limited in operations. Subscribing clinicians utilizing DermTech Connect charge a pre-determined amount for the patient services and no claims are submitted for reimbursement of the clinical telemedicine services. These subscribing clinicians pay DermTech a fixed amount for use of the DermTech Connect platform. The clinician can also determine, if they deem it medically necessary, to order the DMT, in which case a Smart Sticker Collection Kit is mailed to the patient, followed by at-home self-collection with remote virtual supervision by a DermTech patient liaison. Many state laws and regulations impose various requirements on the practice of telemedicine, the regulatory landscape is evolving and DermTech Connect is not, and may not become, available in all states. The telemedicine market is relatively new and unproven, especially within dermatology, and it is uncertain whether the telemedicine options for the DMT will achieve and sustain high levels of demand, consumer acceptance and market adoption, as well as face challenges in the regulatory landscape, which is complex and evolving.
While the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing (including as a result of clinician offices closing again due to a COVID-19 outbreak within the practice, or patients avoiding in-person visits to the dermatology clinic for fear of contracting COVID-19 or any of its viral variants), we expect that our revenues will depend to an extent on the willingness of clinicians and their patients to use our telemedicine option for the DMT, as well as on our ability to demonstrate the value of our telemedicine option to health plans and other purchasers of healthcare for beneficiaries. We also expect that the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will continue to adversely affect our revenues by reducing access to clinician offices by patients for in-person testing and by our sales force for in-office sales calls.
Contract Revenue
Contract revenues with pharmaceutical companies relate to ongoing clinical trial contracts and new contracts. Contract revenue can be highly variable as it is dependent on the pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trial progress, which can be difficult to forecast due to variability of patient enrollment, drug safety and efficacy and other factors. Many of our contracts with third parties are structured to contain milestone billing payments, which typically are advance payments on work yet to be performed. These advanced payments are structured to help fund operations and are included in deferred revenue as the work has not yet been performed. These advance payments will remain in deferred revenue until we process the laboratory portion of the contracts allowing us to recognize the revenue.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials. The extent of such effect on our future revenue is uncertain and will depend on the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials.
Optional Add-on Test for TERT (formerly known as PLAplus)
During the second quarter of 2021, we announced the launch of the optional add-on test for TERT (then known as PLAplus) available to those ordering the DMT, which delivers objective and actionable information to guide clinical management decisions for skin lesions suspicious of melanoma. This add-on test combines TERT promoter DNA driver mutation analyses as a reflex test to the DMT’s standard RNA gene expression test. TERT is individually associated with histopathologic features of aggressiveness and poor survival in melanoma. The combined tests elevate the sensitivity from 91% to 97% and maintain a negative predictive value of >99%, resulting in a less than 1% probability of missing melanoma. By combining RNA gene expression and DNA mutation analyses, the DMT provides a highly accurate non-invasive genomic test for enhanced early melanoma detection. For a discussion of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on recognized revenue derived from the DMT, refer to “Assay Revenue” under “Revenue Effects Related to COVID-19 Pandemic” above.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We generate revenue through laboratory services that are billed to Medicare, private medical insurance companies and to pharmaceutical companies who order our laboratory services, which can include sample collection kits, assay development, genomic analysis, data analysis and reporting. Our revenue is generated from two revenue streams: contract revenue and assay revenue. Assay revenue can be highly variable as it is based on payments received by private insurance payors that are not under contract and can vary based on patient insurance coverage, deductibles and co-pays. As much of our assay revenue is driven by the samples that are sent by physicians to our central lab for testing, a key performance measure for us is samples that are received and processed by our central lab successfully, also known as billable samples. Our laboratory services are ordered by customers on projects that may span over several years, which makes our contract revenue highly variable. Segments of these contracts may be increased, delayed or eliminated based on the success of each customers’ clinical trials or other factors.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses are primarily related to our specialty field sales force, market research, reimbursement efforts, trade show attendance, public relations, and general marketing. We expect these expenses to increase significantly as we expand our direct consumer marketing efforts and continue to add to our specialty sales force, marketing and payor access teams throughout 2022.
Research and Development Expenses
Our R&D expenses consist primarily of salaries and fringe benefits, clinical trials, consulting costs, facilities costs, laboratory costs, equipment expense, and depreciation. We also conduct clinical trials to validate the performance characteristics of our tests and to show medical cost benefit in support of our reimbursement efforts. We expect these expenses to increase significantly as we continue to develop new products and expand the use of our existing products.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist of senior management compensation, consulting, legal, billing and collections, human resources, information technology, accounting, insurance, and general business expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses, especially employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, insurance, accounting, and legal fees, to continue to increase due to operating as a publicly traded company.
Financing Activities
Business Combination
On August 29, 2019, the Company and DermTech Operations consummated the transactions contemplated by the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of May 29, 2019, by and among the Company, Merger Sub and DermTech Operations. We refer to this agreement, as amended by that certain First Amendment to Agreement and Plan of Merger dated as of August 1, 2019, as the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into DermTech Operations, with DermTech Operations surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. We refer to this transaction as the Business Combination.
Immediately following the completion of the Business Combination, the Company changed its name from Constellation Alpha Capital Corp. to DermTech, Inc. and effected the Reverse Stock Split. Prior to the closing of the Business Combination, the Company’s stock was listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “CNAC.” On August 30, 2019, the Company’s common stock commenced trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “DMTK.”
2019 PIPE Financing
On August 29, 2019, immediately prior to the completion of the Business Combination, the Company issued to certain accredited investors, in a private placement transaction (the “2019 PIPE Financing”) an aggregate of 3,076,925 shares of common stock and 1,231 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock for aggregate gross proceeds of $24.0 million, or $6.50 per share of common stock on an as-converted basis. The 2019 PIPE Financing was conducted pursuant to the terms of separate Subscription Agreements and Amended and Restated Subscription Agreements, dated between May 22, 2019 and August 1, 2019, entered into by the Company and the investors. After giving effect to the Reverse Stock Split, each share of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock was convertible into 500 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to conditions and adjustment as provided in the Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
On August 10, 2020, entities affiliated with Farallon Capital Management, L.L.C. (the “Farallon Entities”) converted an aggregate of 1,231 shares of Series A Preferred Stock into 615,385 shares of common stock. On September 9, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Elimination of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to eliminate its Series A Convertible Preferred Stock.
2020 PIPE Financing
On February 28, 2020, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors for a private placement of the Company’s equity securities (the “2020 PIPE Financing”). Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”) served as lead placement agent for the 2020 PIPE Financing with William Blair & Company, L.L.C. acting as joint placement agent. Lake Street Capital Markets, LLC acted as co-placement agent. The 2020 PIPE Financing closed on March 4, 2020.
Pursuant to the 2020 PIPE Financing, on March 4, 2020 the Company issued an aggregate of 2,467,724 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $10.50 per share, 3,199 shares of Series B-1 Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series B-1 Shares”) at a purchase price of $10.50 per share of common stock issuable upon conversion thereof, which were convertible into an aggregate of up to 3,198,942 shares of common stock, and 524 shares of Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series B-2 Shares”) at a purchase price of $10.50 per share of common stock issuable upon conversion thereof, which are convertible into an aggregate of up to 523,809 shares of common stock, for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $65.0 million.
At the Company’s annual meeting held on May 26, 2020, the Company’s stockholders voted to approve the 2020 PIPE Financing, which resulted in the automatic conversion of the Series B-1 Shares into 3,198,949 shares of common stock on May 27, 2020. Each Series B-2 Share was convertible into 1,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to conditions and adjustment as provided in the Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock. On August 10, 2020, the Farallon Entities converted an aggregate of 524 shares of Series B-2 Preferred Stock into 523,814 shares of common stock. On September 9, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Elimination of Series B-1 Convertible Preferred Stock and Certificate of Elimination of Series B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware to eliminate its Series B-1 and B-2 Convertible Preferred Stock.
2020 At-The-Market Offering
On November 10, 2020, the Company entered into a sales agreement with Cowen relating to the sale of shares of the Company’s common stock from time to time with an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. During 2020, the Company issued an aggregate of 951,792 shares of common stock pursuant to the sales agreement at a weighted average purchase price of $20.97, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $20.0 million. During 2021, the Company issued an aggregate of 530,551 shares of common stock pursuant to the sales agreement at a weighted average purchase price of $46.33 resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $24.6 million, reduced by $0.7 million in issuance costs, resulting in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $23.8 million. The Company did not issue or sell any shares of common stock pursuant to the sales agreement in the fourth quarter of 2021.
2021 Underwritten Public Offering
On January 6, 2021, the Company, entered into an Underwriting Agreement with Cowen and William Blair & Company, L.L.C. as representatives of several underwriters (the “Underwriters”). The Company agreed to issue and sell up to 4,237,288 shares of its common stock including up to 635,593 shares that could be purchased by the Underwriters pursuant to a 30-day option granted to the Underwriters by the Company.
On January 11, 2021, the Company closed the underwritten public offering of 4,872,881 shares of its common stock, which included the exercise in full by the Underwriters of their option to purchase up to 635,593 additional shares, at a price to the public of $29.50 per share. The Company’s aggregate gross proceeds from the offering, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, were $143.7 million.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Assay Revenue
Assay revenues grew $6.8 million or 160% to $11.0 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $4.2 million for fiscal year 2020. Billable samples increased to approximately 44,620 for fiscal year 2021 compared to approximately 24,000 for fiscal year 2020, and to approximately 13,700 for fiscal year 2019. Sample volume is dependent on two major factors: the number of clinicians who order an assay in any given quarter and the number of assays ordered by each clinician during the period. The number of ordering clinicians and the utilization per clinician can vary based on a number of factors including the types of patients presenting skin cancer conditions, clinician reimbursement, office workflow, market awareness, clinician education and other factors. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our assay revenue by, among other things, limiting patient access to
clinician offices for in-person testing and limiting access by our sales force for in-office sales calls. Additionally, assay revenue increased due, in part, to our new contracts with Blue Shield of California, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, and Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.
Contract Revenue
Contract revenues with pharmaceutical companies decreased $0.8 million to $0.8 million for fiscal year 2021, or 50%, compared to $1.6 million for fiscal year 2020. Contract revenue can be highly variable as it is dependent on the pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trial progress, which can be difficult to forecast due to variability of patient enrollment, drug safety and efficacy and other factors. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected and will continue to negatively affect our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials. The extent of such effect on our future revenue is uncertain and will depend on the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials. Many of our contracts with third parties are structured to contain milestone billing payments, which typically are advanced payments on work yet to be performed. These advanced payments are structured to help fund operations and are included in deferred revenue as the work has not yet been performed. As of December 31, 2021, the deferred revenue amount for these contracts, which is the advanced payments minus the value of work performed, was $1.4 million. These advanced payments will remain in deferred revenue until we process the laboratory portion of the contracts allowing us to recognize the revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenues increased $4.6 million, or 77%, to $10.6 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $6.0 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was largely attributable to a higher billable sample volume in 2021, and higher consulting, software and equipment costs. As of December 31, 2021, a large portion of the costs of revenue are fixed, and these costs include the CLIA facility, quality assurance, management and supervision and equipment calibration and depreciation. The variable cost of revenue expenses incurred primarily relate to compensation-related costs for our laboratory scientists and technicians, laboratory supplies, shipping costs, equipment maintenance, and utilities. We remain committed to continuing the automation of our laboratory processes in order to become more cost efficient and productive.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $21.5 million, or 134%, to $37.6 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $16.1 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher compensation-related costs from the expansion of the commercial team, increased spending on marketing and payor infrastructure and activities, and additional consulting, software, and travel expenses. We expect to add to our specialty sales force, marketing and payor access teams throughout 2022 and 2023, and increase spending on direct-to-consumer marketing campaigns, which collectively would significantly increase our sales and marketing expenses.
Research and Development
R&D expenses increased $11.0 million, or 207%, to $16.3 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $5.3 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was due to higher compensation and recruiting costs of expanding the R&D team, including the addition of a new Chief Scientific Officer and Chief Medical Officer, increased clinical trial costs, increased consulting, software and travel expenses and increased spending on laboratory supplies to support new product development. We expect these expenses to increase as we continue to grow the R&D team and focus on the development of our Luminate test, our basal and squamous cell skin cancer assays and other products in our pipeline.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $11.0 million, or 80%, to $24.8 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $13.8 million for fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher payroll-related costs and stock-based compensation as we continue to add additional infrastructure such as human resources, billing, information technology and legal resources, higher insurance, taxes, public company costs, audit fees, consulting expenses, and facility costs, offset by lower loss contingency and legal fees.
Interest Income, net
Interest income, net for fiscal year 2021 was $0.2 million compared to interest income, net of $40,000 for fiscal year 2020. Interest income, net for 2021 consists primarily of interest earned on our short-term marketable securities.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability for fiscal year 2021 was a loss of $1.1 million compared to a loss of $1.2 million for fiscal year 2020. The change in fair value of warrant liability is calculated by adjusting the value of the outstanding Private SPAC Warrants held by original holders to the current market value at each reporting period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have never been profitable and have historically incurred substantial net losses, including net losses of $20.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, $36.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and $78.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $206.4 million, and for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we had negative operating cash flow of $62.1 million. We completed the 2020 PIPE Financing in March 2020, which raised a total of $65.0 million in gross proceeds. At the end of 2020 and throughout 2021, we raised approximately $44.5 million in gross proceeds facilitated through our At-the-Market Offering. In addition, we completed the 2021 Underwritten Public Offering in January 2021, which raised a total of $143.7 million in gross proceeds. We have historically financed operations through private placement and public equity offerings.
We expect our losses to continue as a result of costs relating to ongoing R&D expenses, increased general and administrative expenses and increased sales and marketing costs for existing and planned products. These losses have had, and will continue to have, an adverse effect on our working capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with our commercialization and development efforts, we are unable to predict when we will become profitable, and we may never become profitable. Our inability to achieve and then maintain profitability would negatively affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents totaled approximately $176.9 million and short-term marketable securities totaled approximately $48.4 million. Based on our current business operations, we believe our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. While we believe we have enough capital to fund anticipated operating costs for at least the next 12 months, we expect to incur significant additional operating losses over at least the next several years. We anticipate that we will raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations or licensing arrangements in order to support our planned operations and to continue developing and commercializing genomic tests. We may also consider raising additional capital in the future to expand our business, to pursue strategic investments or to take advantage of financing opportunities. Our present and future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
our revenue growth rate and ability to generate cash flows from operating activities;
•
the willingness of clinicians and their patients to use our telemedicine option for the DMT and the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic in reducing patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing and access by our sales force for in-office sales calls;
•
the duration and extent of the effects of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our pharmaceutical customers’ clinical trials;
•
our sales and marketing and R&D activities;
•
effects of competing technological and market developments;
•
costs of and potential delays in product development;
•
changes in regulatory oversight applicable to our tests; and
•
timing of and costs related to future international expansion.
There can be no assurances as to the availability of additional financing or the terms upon which additional financing may be available to us. If we are unable to obtain sufficient funding at acceptable terms, we may be forced to significantly curtail our operations, and the lack of sufficient funding may have a material adverse impact on our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flow Analysis
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021
Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 totaled $62.1 million, primarily driven by the $78.3 million net loss offset partially by non-cash related items, including $13.3 million in stock-based compensation, $1.1 million from the change in fair value of warrant liability, $1.3 million in amortization of operating lease right of use assets and $1.0 million in depreciation. In addition, we had a cash inflow of $4.3 million from the increase in accounts payable and accrued compensation which was offset by cash outflows of $2.4 million through the increase of accounts receivable, $1.7 million through the increase of prepaid expenses and other assets and $1.4 million through the decrease of the operating lease liability.
Net cash used in investing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 totaled $12.5 million, which related to the cash outflows of $48.1 million from the purchase of marketable securities and $2.7 million from the purchase of equipment partially
offset by the cash inflow from the sale and maturity of marketable securities of $38.3 million. Additional laboratory equipment investment will be needed to install complex automation systems and other genomic testing equipment needed to expand testing capacity.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 totaled $230.3 million, which was driven by $134.6 million in net proceeds raised from the 2021 Underwritten Public Offering, $23.8 million in net proceeds from the sale of securities under our At-the-Market Offering and $70.3 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants, predominately from the exercise of 12.1 million of our outstanding SPAC Warrants.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net cash used in operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 totaled $28.7 million, primarily driven by the $36.5 million net loss offset by non-cash related items, including $5.0 million in stock-based compensation, $1.2 million from the change in fair value of warrant liability, and $0.5 million in depreciation. In addition, we had a cash inflow of $0.8 million through the increase of accounts payable and accrued compensation as well as a $1.6 million of cash inflow through the increase of accrued liabilities and deferred revenues. This was offset by the cash outflow through the increase of prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.5 million as well as an increase in accounts receivable of $0.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $41.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the purchase of $41.7 million in short-term marketable securities and $1.8 million in purchases of property and equipment. This was offset by cash inflows from the sale and maturity of marketable securities of $2.2 million. As we scale our sales force, the expected timing of a corresponding increase in assay volume is uncertain due, in part, to challenges presented by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, such as related limits on patient access to clinician offices for in-person testing. Additional laboratory equipment investment will be needed to install complex automation systems and other genomic testing equipment needed to expand testing capacity.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $78.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, which was predominantly driven by the $59.9 million and $19.1 million in net proceeds raised from the 2020 PIPE Financing and At-the-Market Offering, respectively, and $1.3 million from the exercise of stock options and warrants. This was offset by the payment made by the Company of the deferred underwriting fees of $1.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined under Item 303 of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires that management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the amounts of revenues and expenses reported during the period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates these estimates and judgments, including but not limited to those related to assay revenue, stock-based compensation, short-term marketable securities, accounts receivable, accrued bonus, warrant liability, right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and the realization of deferred tax assets. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements included in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies and judgments are most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results based upon the SEC’s defined criteria.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is generated from two revenue streams, contract revenue and assay revenue. We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). The core principle of ASC 606 is that the Company recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The ASC 606 revenue recognition model consists of the following five steps: (1) identify the contracts with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
(a)
Assay Revenue
We generate revenues from the DMT we provide to healthcare clinicians throughout the United States to assist in a clinician’s diagnosis of melanoma. We provide prescribing clinicians with our Smart Sticker to perform non-invasive skin biopsies of clinically ambiguous pigmented skin lesions on patients. We also offer a telemedicine solution where a clinician can choose to assess the patient’s skin and suspicious lesion(s) via a telemedicine appointment and, if indicated, submit a patient-specific order to DermTech for the DMT. A patient can also initiate the process by downloading our telemedicine app, DermTech Connect, which uses store-and-forward technology to allow the patient to take a picture of a suspicious lesion with their phone and have the picture reviewed by a clinician to assess if a DMT is warranted. The DermTech Connect app was initially beta tested in Florida and we have subsequently expanded into seven additional states. We plan to make DermTech Connect available in more states where legally permitted in the future as we expand the clinician network to review pictures of suspicious lesions.
Once the sample is collected by the healthcare clinician or the patient via the telemedicine solution, it is returned to our CLIA laboratory for analysis. The patient’s ribonucleic acid (“RNA”) and deoxyribonucleic acid (“DNA”) are extracted from the Smart Sticker and analyzed using gene expression technology to determine if the pigmented skin lesion contains certain genomic features indicative of melanoma. Upon completion of the gene expression analysis, a final report is drafted and provided to the clinician detailing the test results for the pigmented skin lesion indicating whether the sample collected is indicative of melanoma or not. A detailed historical analysis of payments made to us by private health insurance payors is used to estimate the expected receipt of funds for payment of billed amounts. These payments can vary widely from payor to payor and can be halted for routine audits or other reasons.
(b)
Contract Revenue
Contract revenue is generated from the sale of laboratory services and Smart Stickers to third party companies through contract research agreements. Revenues are generated from providing gene expression tests to facilitate the development of drugs designed to treat dermatologic conditions. The provision of gene expression services may include sample collection using our Smart Stickers, assay development for research partners, RNA extraction, isolation, expression, amplification and detection, including data analysis and reporting.
See Note 1(l) of our consolidated financial statements for a full discussion of our revenue recognition policy around assay revenue and contract revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation costs associated with stock option awards and other forms of equity compensation are measured at the grant-date fair value of the awards and recognized over the requisite service period of the awards on a ratable basis. We grant stock options to purchase common stock to employees with exercise prices equal to the fair market value of the underlying stock. The fair market value of stock options is based on the closing stock price on the grant date.
The fair value of each stock option award is estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. Such value is recognized as expense over the requisite service period using the ratable method. The expected term of options is based on the simplified method which defines the expected term as the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted average vesting period for all option tranches. The expected volatility of stock options is based upon the historical volatility of a number of related publicly traded companies in similar stages of development as well as the volatility of our common stock. The risk-free interest rate is based on the average yield of U.S. Treasury securities with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the share-based awards. The assumed dividend yield was based on our expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future.
We account for stock options to non-employees using the fair value approach. The fair value of these options is measured using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model, reflecting the same assumptions applied to employee options, other than expected life, which is assumed to be the remaining contractual life of the award. Options that are granted to employees generally have a requisite service period of three to four years.
Restricted stock units (“RSUs”) are considered restricted stock. The fair market value of RSUs is based on the closing stock price on the grant date. We recognize stock-based compensation expense based on the fair value on a ratable basis over the requisite service periods of the awards. RSUs that are granted to employees have a requisite service period typically between two and four years.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1(u) of our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of new accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.
Management’s Remediation Plan
To remediate these material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting related to assay revenue and accounts receivable described in Item 9A - Controls and Procedures, we plan to implement or improve documentation of alternative internal control procedures to verify the completeness and accuracy of customer contracts received and the delivery of test results.