Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
Our company, dMY Technology Group, Inc. VI (previously known as TdMY Technology Group, Inc.) is a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on April 16, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from April 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and our initial public offering, described below. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of the initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating
income in the form investment income from the trust account (as defined below).
Our sponsor is dMY Sponsor VI, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on September 30, 2021. On October 5, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 24,150,000 units, including 3,150,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $241.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $15.0 million, of which approximately $8.5 million and approximately $440,000 was for deferred underwriting commissions and offering costs allocated to derivate warrant liabilities, respectively.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 6,830,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant to the sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $6.8 million.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering and the private placement, $241.5 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was placed in a trust account located in the United States with American Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a business combination successfully. We must complete one or more initial business combinations having an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the net assets held in the trust account (net of amounts disbursed to management for working capital purposes and excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the interest earned on the trust account) at the time of the agreement to enter into the initial business combination. However, we will only complete a business combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
We will have 18 months from the closing of our initial public offering, to consummate an initial business combination. However, if we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate an initial business combination within 18 months, we may, but are not obligated to, extend the period of time to consummate a business combination once by an additional three months (for a total of 21 months to complete an initial business combination), provided that, the only way to extend the time available for us to consummate the initial business combination is for our sponsor or its affiliates or designees, upon five days’ advance notice prior to the deadline, to deposit into the trust account an amount of $0.10 per share of Class A common stock, or approximately $2.4 million in the aggregate, on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline. Any such payments would be made in the form of a loan. Public Stockholders will not be offered the opportunity to vote on or redeem their shares in connection with any such extension.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 18 months from the closing of our initial public offering, or April 5, 2023, or 21 months from the closing of our initial public offering, or July 5, 2023, if extended (the “combination period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as
reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account calculated as of two business days prior to the consummation of the initial business combination, including interest (net of amounts withdrawn to fund working capital requirements, and/or to pay for our tax obligations (“permitted withdrawals”) and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law; and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $647,000 in cash, approximately $15,000 of interest income available in the trust account to pay for taxes and a working capital deficit of approximately $821,000 (not taking into account tax obligations of approximately $55,000 that may be paid using investment income earned in trust account).
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of our initial public offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to purchase the founder Shares and a loan under a promissory note with our sponsor (the “note”) in the amount of approximately $75,000. We fully repaid the note balance on October 4, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of our initial public offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of our initial public offering and the private placement held outside of the trust account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us funds as needed under working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the trust account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for our initial public offering, and since the closing of our initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of investment income from the trust account. We will continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. Additionally, we recognize non-cash
gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our derivative liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from April 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $14.4 million, which consisted of approximately $394,000 of general and administrative expenses, approximately $55,000 of franchise tax expense, non-operating
losses of approximately $13.6 million from the change in fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $441,000 for offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, offset by approximately $15,000 of interest income from investments held in the trust account.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
On October 5, 2021, we entered into an agreement with our sponsor, pursuant to which we agreed to pay our sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon completion of a business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. We prepaid such fees in full and as of December 31, 2021, we had an unused balance of $150,000 in prepaid expenses recorded in the accompanying balance sheet.
Our sponsor, executive officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket
expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that are made to our sponsor, executive officers or directors of our sponsor, or our executive officers or directors or their affiliates.
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants), or warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the working capital loans and loans made to extend our time period of consummating an initial business combination, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and stockholder rights agreement signed upon the consummation of our initial public offering. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $4.8 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of our initial public offering. An additional fee of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.5 million in the aggregate will be payable to certain of the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to certain of the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
We account for the public warrants and private placement warrants as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of public warrants and private placement were initially measured at fair value using Black-Scholes option pricing model and Monte-Carlo simulation method. Beginning in November 2021, the fair value of public warrants has been measured based on the listed market price of such public warrants. The private placement warrants were measured at fair value using a Black Scholes model at December 31, 2021.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 24,150,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheet.
Under ASC 480, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of our initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (loss) Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per share of common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the respective period. We have not considered the effect of the public warrants and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 18,905,000 shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K
and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.