Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” sections elsewhere in the Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Our mission is to make biology easier to engineer.
Ginkgo is building the industry-standard horizontal platform for cell programming. We use our platform to program cells on behalf of our customers. These “cell programs” are designed to enable biological production of products as diverse as novel therapeutics, key food ingredients, and chemicals currently derived from petroleum. We have worked on cell programs in end markets as diverse as specialty chemicals, agriculture, food, consumer products, and pharmaceuticals. Biology did not evolve by end market. All of these applications run on cells which have a common code-DNA-and a common programming platform can enable all of them. Because of this shared platform, we are able to drive scale and learning efficiencies while maintaining flexibility and diversity in our program areas. Ultimately, customers come to us because they believe we maximize the probability of successfully developing their products.
The foundation of our platform includes two core assets that execute a wide variety of cell programs for customers according to their specifications: our Foundry and our Codebase.
●Our Foundry wraps proprietary software and automation around core cell engineering workflows- designing DNA, writing DNA, inserting that DNA into cells, testing to measure cell performance-and leverages data analytics and data science to inform each iteration of design. The software, automation and data analysis pipelines we leverage in the Foundry drive a strong scale economic: we have scaled the output of the Foundry by roughly 3X annually since we started measuring it around 2015 (with the exception of 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic) and over that time, the average cost per unit operation has fallen by approximately 50% every year. We expect to be able to pass some of these savings along to our customers, allowing them to take more “shots on goal” with their programs.
●Our Codebase includes both our physical (engineered cells and genetic parts) and digital (genetic sequences and performance data) biological assets, and accumulates as we execute more cell programs on the platform. Every program, whether successful or not, generates valuable Codebase and helps inform future experimental designs and provides reusable genetic parts, making our cell program designs more efficient.
As the platform scales, we have observed a virtuous cycle between our Foundry, our Codebase, and the value we deliver to customers. We believe this virtuous cycle sustains Ginkgo’s growth and differentiated value proposition.
●Foundry: As we take on more work in the Foundry, we benefit from scale economics, which over time may lead to lower program costs. We expect that these lower costs, in turn, will drive additional demand for our cell programming capabilities.
●Codebase: Cell programs also generate Codebase, which can drive better experimental direction and improve the odds of technical success, further increasing our customer value proposition, which we believe will result in additional demand.
Put simply: we believe that as the platform improves with scale, it drives more scale, which drives further platform improvements, and so on. We believe this positive feedback loop has the potential to drive compounding value creation in the future as every new program we add contributes to both near-term revenues and has the potential to add significant downstream economics.
Our commercial team is organized to both establish new relationships with potential customers (traditional business development) as well as maintain and expand relationships with our existing customers (which we call “alliance management”). We recognize the cross-functional efforts required to sign any new contract and so our business development
teams do not receive a commission or cash bonus based on target sales, but rather a base salary and annual equity grants driven by overall contribution and performance, in line with how we compensate other employees.
Our business development team has both expertise in relevant industries (Consumer & Technology, Industrial & Environment, Agriculture, Food & Nutrition, Pharma & Biotech and Government & Defense) as well as expertise in our Foundry capabilities and synthetic biology. With this background we are able to identify industry or consumer challenges where biology can serve as a solution. Our categories of customers, independent of industry, include potential customers who have research and development (“R&D”) teams with some synthetic biology capabilities where choosing Ginkgo can bring automation, scale and codebase beyond their own; potential customers who are considering but have not yet built lab-scale capabilities where a partnership with Ginkgo allows them to spend their capital on commercialization efforts; and potential customers who are not yet working in synthetic biology whose industries or products stand to be disrupted by biological solutions. Our business development team, with support from our Codebase and Foundry team members, crafts solutions for each of these types of customers through a strategic discussion of customer needs and fit with Ginkgo capabilities.
To grow existing customers, our alliance management team, through close collaboration on our existing programs, seeks technical and business opportunities for our customers that serve as the basis for consideration of future programs. As our programs demonstrate technical success, our existing customers often bring their next strategic R&D needs to our attention.
Our business model mirrors the structure of our platform and we are compensated in two primary ways. First, we charge usage fees for Foundry services, in much the same way that cloud computing companies charge usage fees for utilization of computing capacity or contract research organizations (CROs) charge for services. Additionally, we negotiate a value share with our customers (typically in the form of royalties, milestones, and/or equity interests) in order to align our economics with the success of the programs enabled by our platform. As we add new programs, our portfolio of programs with this “downstream” value potential grows.
With a mission to make biology easier to engineer, we have always recognized the imperative to invest in biosecurity as a key component of our platform. We care how our platform is used, and biosecurity is a necessary complement to synthetic biology that helps us ensure our cell programming work is conducted and deployed responsibly. The near-term growth of the biosecurity sector is highly dependent on domestic and international government initiatives and investment and Ginkgo has been supporting and engaging with domestic and international organizations and governments to help shape the understanding of a robust biosecurity program.
In the second quarter of 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we launched our commercial offering of COVID-19 testing products and services for businesses, academic institutions, and other organizations in which we generate product and service revenue. Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, we launched our pooled testing initiative which focuses on providing end-to-end COVID-19 testing and reporting services to public health authorities. We are currently offering pooled testing and reporting services for K-12 schools across the United States, at airports through our partnership with XpresCheck and the CDC, as well as through other congregate settings such as our partnership with Eurofins. In the future, we believe that testing services may have a value proposition internationally and in other use cases including wastewater monitoring and air monitoring.
Generating Economic Value Through Cell Programs
Our cell programming platform is a key enabling technology and source of intellectual property for our customers’ products. We earn Foundry revenue for our research and development (“R&D”) services as well as through a share of the value of products created using our platform.
We structure Foundry revenue to include some combination of the following:
●Foundry usage fees in the form of:
●upfront payments upon consummation of an agreement or other fixed payments that are generally recognized over our period of performance;
●reimbursement for costs incurred for R&D services;
●milestone payments upon the achievement of specified technical criteria;
plus,
●downstream value share payments in the form of:
●milestone payments upon the achievement of specified commercial criteria;
●royalties on sales of products from or comprising engineered organisms;
●royalties related to cost of goods sold reductions realized by our customers;
or,
●downstream value share in the form of equity interests in our customer.
●downstream value share in the form of equity interest appreciation is not recognized as revenue but is expected to contribute to future cash flows upon liquidation, the amount and timing of which is inherently unpredictable.
Downstream value share arrangements which involve equity interests generally fall into two categories: Platform Ventures and Structured Partnerships.
Platform Ventures
Platform Ventures allow leading multinationals to partner with Ginkgo and financial investors to form new ventures in identified market segments with potential to benefit from synthetic biology. In exchange for an equity position in the venture, we contribute license rights to our proprietary cell programming technology and intellectual property, while our partners contribute relevant industry expertise, other resources and venture funding. We also provide R&D services for which we receive cash payments for our costs incurred, plus a margin. Platform Ventures include:
Joyn Bio, LLC
Founded in 2017, Joyn Bio, LLC (“Joyn”) was formed to focus on engineered microbes for use in agricultural applications. Along with certain of our investors, we formed Cooksonia, LLC (“Cooksonia”) which holds a 50% equity interest in Joyn. Bayer CropScience LP contributed cash of $80 million plus intellectual property and holds the remaining 50% equity interest in Joyn. We provided license rights to our intellectual property and platform at inception in return for our equity interest in Joyn, which was recorded at an initial fair value of $97.9 million. The carrying value of our equity method investment in Joyn was $11.7 million as of December 31, 2021. Ginkgo also entered into a Foundry Services Agreement (“Joyn FSA”) with Joyn under which we provide R&D services. Joyn paid us a non-refundable $20.0 million prepayment for services to be provided under the Joyn FSA and made an additional $15.0 million prepayment for services during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Motif FoodWorks, Inc.
Founded in 2018, Motif FoodWorks, Inc. (“Motif”) was formed to focus on the application of synthetic biology to reduce the reliance on animal products in the food industry. We entered into an intellectual property contribution agreement that granted Motif rights to our intellectual property, subject to mutually agreed upon technical development plans. In return for our contribution of intellectual property and access to our platform, we received shares of common stock in Motif. The initial fair value of our common stock investment in Motif was $65.1 million which has subsequently been reduced to a carrying value of zero as a result of the allocation of losses under our accounting for equity method investments. Motif was capitalized through Series A preferred stock financings that raised approximately $119 million in gross proceeds from an investor group which included certain of our investors, Louis Dreyfus Company and Fonterra Co-operative Group Limited. In June 2021, Motif raised an additional $226 million through a Series B preferred stock financing. Ginkgo also entered into a Technical Development Agreement with Motif under which we provide R&D services in return for cash consideration on a cost-plus fixed margin basis. Motif launched its first product, HEMAMI, in 2021.
Allonnia, LLC
Founded in 2019, Allonnia, LLC (“Allonnia”) was formed to focus on the application of synthetic biology in the waste bioremediation and biorecovery industries. We entered into an intellectual property contribution agreement that granted Allonnia rights to our intellectual property, subject to mutually agreed upon technical development plans. In return for our contribution of intellectual property and access to our platform, we received common units in Allonnia with a right to additional units subject to additional closings of Allonnia’s Series A preferred units. The initial fair value of our common units received in Allonnia was $24.5 million, subsequently increased by $12.7 million in 2021, all of which has been reduced
to a carrying value of zero as a result of the allocation of losses under our accounting for equity method investments. Allonnia was capitalized through Series A preferred unit financings that raised approximately $52 million in gross proceeds from an investor group which included certain of our investors and Battelle Memorial Institute. Ginkgo also entered into a Technical Development Agreement with Allonnia under which we provide R&D services in return for cash consideration on a cost-plus fixed margin basis.
Arcaea, LLC (FKA Kalo Ingredients, LLC)
Founded in 2021, Arcaea, LLC (“Arcaea”) was formed to focus on the application of synthetic biology in the beauty and personal care products industry. In March 2021, we entered into an intellectual property contribution agreement that granted Arcaea rights to our intellectual property, subject to mutually agreed upon technical development plans. In return for our contribution of intellectual property and access to our platform, we received common units in Arcaea with a right to additional units subject to additional closings of Arcaea’s Series A preferred units. The initial fair value of our common units received in Arcaea was $11.9 million which has subsequently been reduced to a carrying value of zero as a result of the allocation of losses under our accounting for equity method investments. Arcaea was capitalized through a Series A preferred unit financing that raised approximately $77 million in gross proceeds from an investor group which included certain of our investors, CHANEL and Givaudan. Upon the closing of the Series A preferred unit financing in July 2021, we received an additional 5,229,900 common units in Arcaea. The fair value of our Arcaea common units received in July 2021 of $35.5 million has subsequently been reduced to a carrying value of zero as a result of the allocation of losses under our accounting for equity method investments. Ginkgo also entered into a Technical Development Agreement with Arcaea under which we provide R&D services in return for cash consideration on a cost-plus fixed margin basis.
Ayana Bio, LLC
Founded in September 2021, Ayana Bio, LLC (“Ayana”) was formed to identify and design new bioactive compounds for use as complementary medicine to support human health and wellness. Ayana was capitalized through a Series A funding that raised $30 million in gross proceeds from an investor group comprising certain of our investors. We hold an interest in 9,000,000 common units (representing 100% of common units at inception) of Ayana and have also provided Ayana with certain licenses to our intellectual property for use in the development or production of products that we have agreed to research and develop under technical development plans. We concluded that we hold a variable interest in and are the primary beneficiary of Ayana, and as a result, we have consolidated the financial statements of Ayana into our consolidated financial statements.
Verb Biotics, LLC
Founded in September 2021, Verb Biotics, LLC (“Verb”) was formed to identify and design new strains of probiotic bacteria with advanced properties for human nutrition, health, and wellness. Verb was capitalized through a Series A funding that raised $30 million in gross proceeds from an investor group comprising certain of our investors. We hold an interest in 9,000,000 common units (representing 100% of common units at inception) of Verb and have also provided Verb with certain licenses to our intellectual property for use in the development or production of products that we have agreed to research and develop under technical development plans. We concluded that we hold a variable interest in and are the primary beneficiary of Verb, and as a result, we have consolidated the financial statements of Verb into our consolidated financial statements.
Structured Partnerships
Structured Partnerships allow Ginkgo to: i) partner with early stage synthetic biology product companies to adopt our Foundry as their cell programming R&D platform, in which we offer flexible commercial terms on the Foundry usage fees including the ability to pay a portion or all of such upfront fees in the form of equity, in addition to downstream value share consideration (“Startup Structured Partnership”); and ii) partner with existing entities with complementary assets for high potential synthetic biology applications in a large-scale, multi-program collaboration (“Legacy Structured Partnership”). In the second half of 2021, we entered into our initial five Startup Structured Partnerships in which a component of the Foundry usage fees included upfront payments in the form of equity consideration. In aggregate, the upfront consideration received in
the form of equity was $16.5 million, which will be recognized as revenue over our period of performance. Prior to 2021, we had entered into two Legacy Structured Partnerships:
Genomatica, Inc.
Genomatica, Inc. (“Genomatica”) is a biotechnology company specializing in the development and manufacturing of intermediate and specialty chemicals from both sugar and alternative feedstocks. In 2016 and 2018, we entered into separate preferred stock purchase agreements in which we offered cash and R&D services to Genomatica in exchange for its preferred shares. The initial cost of the investment in Genomatica’s preferred stock was $55.0 million, which is the carrying value of the investment at December 31, 2021 as we account for the investment at historical cost.
Synlogic, Inc.
Synlogic, Inc. (“Synlogic”) is a publicly traded clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on advancing drug discovery and development for synthetic biology-derived medicines. In 2019, we entered into several agreements with Synlogic whereby we purchased Synlogic common stock and warrants to purchase Synlogic common stock and agreed to provide R&D services to Synlogic. At inception, the fair value of Synlogic common stock and warrants was recorded at $35.8 million and $14.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of Synlogic common stock and warrants was $15.3 million and $6.2 million, respectively.
See Notes 10 and 20 of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details of our investments in and the material terms of our agreements with our Platform Ventures and Structured Partnerships.
Key Business Metrics
A cell program (or “program”) is the work we do for our customers to enable their product(s) of interest. Programs are defined by a technical development plan. We generally exclude proof-of-concept projects and other exploratory work undertaken on a customer’s behalf from the program count. In the near-term, programs deliver multi-year revenue from platform usage fees. Over the long-term, program growth drives a physical infrastructure scale economic through our Foundry, a data and learning scale economic through our Codebase and accumulation of downstream value share. Our key business metrics comprise New Programs, Current Active Programs, and Cumulative Programs.
New Programs
New Programs represent the number of unique programs commenced within the reporting period. As new programs have multi-year durations, we view this metric as an indication of future Foundry revenue growth.
Current Active Programs
Current Active Programs represent the number of unique programs for which we performed R&D services in the reporting period. We view this metric as an indication of current period and future Foundry revenue.
Cumulative Programs
Cumulative Programs represent the cumulative number of unique programs Ginkgo has commenced. We view this metric as an indication of our competitive advantage and as a leading indicator of the mid- to long-term potential economic value derived from downstream value share arrangements. The cumulative number of programs also contributes to Codebase, which accumulates with each additional program we conduct over time and drives better experimental direction and improves the odds of technical success in current and future programs.
We believe the preceding metrics are important to understand our current business. These metrics may change or be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business develops. For example, as our program mix changes, our data gathering abilities expand or our understanding of key business drivers develops, we anticipate updating these metrics or their definitions to reflect such changes.
Business Combination
We entered into the Merger Agreement with Soaring Eagle Acquisition Corp. (“SRNG”) on May 11, 2021. On September 14, 2021, the SRNG shareholders approved and adopted the Merger Agreement and the other proposals described in SRNG’s definitive proxy statement/prospectus included in SRNG’s registration statement on Form S-4 (File No. 333-256121), which was declared effective by the SEC on August 11, 2021. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination on September 16, 2021, SEAC Merger Sub Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of SRNG (“Merger Sub”), merged with and into Ginkgo, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased, and Ginkgo survived the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of SRNG, which was renamed “Ginkgo Bioworks Holdings, Inc.”
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). Under the guidance in ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”), SRNG was treated as the “acquired” company for accounting and financial reporting purposes. We were deemed the accounting predecessor of the combined business, and as the parent company of the combined business, are the successor SEC registrant, meaning that our financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in future periodic reports filed with the SEC. The most significant change in our reported financial position and results of operations as a result of the Business Combination was a net increase in cash (as compared to our audited consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020) of $1,509.6 million, including $760.0 million in proceeds from the PIPE Investment (as defined below) that was consummated substantially simultaneously with the closing of the Business Combination. The transaction costs for the Business Combination totaled $108.1 million.
As the successor to an SEC-registered and publicly-listed company, we will need to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources.
Modification of Equity Awards in Connection with Business Combination
Prior to the Business Combination, our restricted stock units (“RSUs”) were granted with both a service-based vesting condition and a performance-based vesting condition. We have historically not recognized any stock-based compensation expense associated with these awards as the achievement of the performance condition required a change in control or an initial public offering (both as defined in the underlying award agreement) that was not deemed probable of occurring. The Business Combination did not meet the performance condition required for vesting of our RSUs.
On November 17, 2021 our board of directors modified the vesting terms of RSUs to allow 10% of the RSUs that met the service condition as of the closing of the Business Combination (the “10% RSUs”) to vest with respect to the performance condition, effective as of November 19, 2021, the date on which the Form S-8 registration statement covering such shares became effective. The remaining RSUs vested in full with respect to the performance condition on or before March 15, 2022. The change to the vesting terms was accounted for as a modification and resulted in approximately $1,492.2 million of incremental stock-based compensation expense in the fourth quarter of 2021. The 10% RSUs representing approximately 5.7 million shares were settled in cash for a total cash payment of $76.5 million equal to the fair value of the stock on the Form S-8 effective date. Stock-based compensation expense also increased by $173.5 million related to RSU earnout shares which were also subject to the same performance condition as the underlying RSUs. Additionally, the earnout shares vest upon achieving certain target stock price thresholds. The first target stock price of $12.50 per share was achieved on November 15, 2021.
Acquisition of Dutch DNA Biotech B.V.
On July 1, 2021, we acquired 100% of the equity of Dutch DNA Biotech B.V. (“Dutch DNA”), a company based in the Netherlands with a proprietary platform technology focused on the development of fungal strains and fermentation processes for the production of proteins and organic acids. Dutch DNA's significant expertise and fungal strain assets for the large-scale production of proteins is expected to add a valuable set of tools to Ginkgo's Codebase and broader platform for cell programming. The total acquisition date fair value of the consideration transferred for Dutch DNA was $35.3 million. Dutch
DNA's results of operations have been included in our condensed consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss since the date of acquisition.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Foundry Revenue
We generate Foundry revenue through the execution of license and collaboration agreements whereby customers obtain license rights to our proprietary technology and intellectual property for use in the development and commercialization of engineered organisms and derived products. Under these agreements, we typically provide R&D services for cell programming with the goal of producing an engineered cell that meets a mutually agreed specification. Our customers obtain license rights to the output of our services, which are primarily the optimized strains or cell lines, in order to manufacture and commercialize products derived from that licensed strain or cell line. Generally, the terms of these agreements provide that we receive some combination of: (1) Foundry usage fees in the form of (i) upfront payments upon consummation of the agreement or other fixed payments, (ii) reimbursement for costs incurred for R&D services and (iii) milestone payments upon the achievement of specified technical criteria, plus (2) downstream value share payments in the form of (i) milestone payments upon the achievement of specified commercial criteria, (ii) royalties on sales of products from or comprising engineered organisms arising from the collaboration or licensing agreement and (iii) royalties related to cost of goods sold reductions realized by our customers. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, royalties did not comprise a material amount of our revenue.
Foundry revenue includes transactions with Platform Ventures as well as Structured Partnerships where, as part of these transactions, we received an equity interest in such entities. Specifically related to the Platform Ventures, in these transactions, we received upfront non-cash consideration in the form of common equity interests in these entities, while the Platform Ventures each received cash equity investments from strategic partners and financial investors. We view the upfront non-cash consideration as prepayments for licenses which will be granted in the future as we complete mutually agreed upon technical development plans. In these instances, we also receive cash payments for our costs incurred for the R&D services performed by us, plus a margin. We are not compensated through additional milestone or royalty payments under these arrangements. Our transactions with Genomatica and Synlogic included the purchase of equity securities and the provision of R&D services. As we perform R&D services under the mutually agreed upon development plans, we recognize a reduction in the prefunded obligation based on costs incurred, plus margin basis. Because of our equity holdings in these entities, each is considered as a related party. Revenue from Startup Structured Partnerships was not material in 2021. These arrangements are further described in Notes 10, 11, 20 and 24 of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Downstream value share in the form of equity interest appreciation is not recognized as revenue but is expected to contribute to future cash flows upon liquidation, the amount and timing of which is inherently unpredictable. Equity investees are accounted for as equity method investments, cost method investments or carried at fair value.
Biosecurity Revenue
In the second quarter of 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we launched our commercial offering of COVID-19 testing products and services for businesses, academic institutions, and other organizations in which we generate product and service revenue. We generate product revenue through the sale of lateral flow assay (“LFA”) diagnostic test kits, polymerase chain reaction (“PCR”) sample collection kits and pooled test kits, all of which we sell to our customers on a standalone basis. We generate service revenue primarily through the sale of our end-to-end COVID-19 testing services which consist of multiple promised goods and services including sample collection kits, physician authorizations, onsite test administration, outsourced laboratory PCR analysis, and access to results reported through a web-based portal.
Generally, the terms of these agreements provide that we are entitled to compensation: (i) upon delivery of diagnostic test kits when no service is provided and (ii) when services are included, upon the reporting of results to the customer.
Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, we launched our pooled testing initiative which focuses on providing end-to-end COVID-19 testing and reporting services to public health authorities. We are currently offering pooled testing and reporting services for K-12 schools across the United States, at airports through our partnership with XpresCheck and the CDC, as well as through other congregate settings such as our partnership with Eurofins and Quest Laboratories in the state of Texas. In the future, we believe that testing services may have a value proposition internationally and in other use cases including
wastewater monitoring and air monitoring. The amount and components of Biosecurity revenue are dependent on the demand for COVID-19 testing products and services which is uncertain in 2022 and beyond.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Cost of Biosecurity Product Revenue
Cost of Biosecurity product revenue consists of costs associated with the sale of diagnostic and sample collection test kits which includes costs incurred to purchase test kits from third parties.
Cost of Biosecurity Service Revenue
Cost of Biosecurity service revenue consists of costs associated with the provision of our end-to-end COVID-19 testing services, which includes costs incurred to provide sample collection kits, physician authorizations, onsite test administration, outsourced laboratory PCR analysis, access to results reported through our proprietary web-based portal and reporting of results to public health authorities.
Research and Development Expenses
The nature of our business, and primary focus of our activities, generates a significant amount of R&D expenses. R&D expenses represent costs incurred by us for the following:
●development, operation, expansion and enhancement of our Foundry and Codebase; and
●development of new offerings, such as Biosecurity.
The activities above incur the following expenses:
●laboratory supplies, consumables and related services provided under agreements with third parties and in-licensing arrangements;
●personnel compensation and benefits; and
●rent, facilities, depreciation, software, professional fees and other direct and allocated overhead expenses.
We expense R&D costs as incurred. As we grow our active programs and customer base and invest in our Foundry and Codebase, we anticipate that our R&D expenses will continue to increase. The nature, timing, and estimated costs required to support our growth will be dependent on advances in technology, our ability to attract new customers and the rate of market penetration within our existing customer industries.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, R&D expenses included a significant adjustment for stock-based compensation expense as a result of the modification of vesting terms of RSUs and the vesting of certain earnout shares (as further described above in “Modification of Equity Awards in Connection with Business Combination”).
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses consist primarily of costs for personnel in executive, business development, finance, human resources, legal and other corporate administrative functions. G&A expenses also include legal fees incurred relating to corporate, intellectual property and patent matters, professional fees incurred for accounting, auditing, tax and administrative consulting services, insurance costs, and facility-related costs not otherwise included in R&D expenses.
We expect our G&A expenses will continue to increase as we pursue organic and inorganic growth initiatives. The increases will likely relate to additional personnel, system costs and increased costs related to business development, finance and legal matters, along with increased expenses related to operating as a publicly traded company, such as fees related to audit, legal and tax services, regulatory compliance programs and investor relations.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, G&A expenses included a significant adjustment for stock-based compensation expense as a result of the modification of vesting terms of RSUs and the vesting of certain earnout shares (as further described above in “Modification of Equity Awards in Connection with Business Combination”).
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest related to our lease financing obligation.
Loss on Equity Method Investments
Loss on equity method investments includes our share of losses from certain of our equity method investments under the Hypothetical Liquidation at Book Value (“HLBV”) method.
Loss on Investments
Loss on investments includes the change in fair value of Synlogic common stock, warrants to purchase Synlogic common stock and change in fair value of Cronos Group Inc. ("Cronos") common stock.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities includes the change in fair value of private placement warrants (“Private Placement Warrants”) and publicly-traded warrants (“Public Warrants”), which are classified as liabilities and were assumed as part of the Business Combination.
Gain on Settlement of Partnership Agreement
Gain on settlement of partnership agreement includes payments made by Amyris, Inc. (“Amyris”) under a settlement agreement.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net primarily consists of change in fair value of our convertible notes with Access Bio, Inc. (“Access Bio”) and promissory note with Glycosyn which we have elected to account for under the fair value option and income generated from achieving milestones under our agreement with the National Institutes of Health (“NIH”).
Provision for Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our audited consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance against deferred tax assets is recorded if, based on the weight of the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized. For all periods presented, we have recorded a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets that are not expected to be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions using a more-likely-than-not threshold for recognizing and resolving uncertain tax positions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors, including, but not limited to, changes in the law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position.
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $665.2 million, of which $139.2 million begin to expire in 2029. We have approximately $526.0 million of federal net operating losses as of December 31, 2021 that can be carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2021, we had state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $529.3 million, of which $485.9 million begin to expire in 2029. We have approximately $43.4 million of state net operating losses as of December 31, 2021 that can be carried forward indefinitely.
Income taxes are determined at the applicable tax rates adjusted for non-deductible expenses, R&D tax credits and other permanent differences. Our income tax provision may be significantly affected by changes to our estimates.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of operations for each period presented:
(1) In the fourth quarter of 2021, R&D and G&A expenses included a significant adjustment for stock-based compensation expense as a result of the modification of the vesting terms of RSUs and all related earnout shares (as further described above in “Modification of Equity Awards in Connection with Business Combination”). Total stock-based compensation expense inclusive of employer payroll taxes was allocated as follows (in thousands):
Foundry Revenue
Foundry revenue was $113.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $53.8 million in Foundry revenue was primarily attributable to the progress of programs with existing and new customers, including downstream value share revenue related to the achievement of commercial milestones.
The total number of Current Active Programs increased from 49 in 2020 to 71 in 2021. In 2021, 31 New Programs were commenced. Cumulative Programs increased from 74 in 2020 to 105 in 2021. The number of customers increased from 22 in 2020 to 33 in 2021.
While the majority of Foundry revenue today is made up of Foundry usage fees, as we increase Cumulative Programs and to the extent our customers successfully commercialize products built on our platform, downstream value share is expected to comprise a larger proportion of Foundry revenue. Downstream value share in the form of equity interest appreciation is not recognized as revenue but is expected to contribute to future cash flows upon liquidation, the amount and timing of which is inherently unpredictable.
Biosecurity Revenue
Biosecurity revenue was $200.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $183.4 million in Biosecurity revenue was comprised of an increase in product revenue of $14.3 million and an increase in service revenue of $169.1 million.
The amount and components of Biosecurity revenue are dependent on the demand for COVID-19 testing products and services which is uncertain in 2022 and beyond.
Cost of Biosecurity Product and Service Revenue
Cost of Biosecurity product and service revenue was $129.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $114.1 million was driven by the increase in the demand for our COVID-19 testing products and services.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $1,149.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $159.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $989.9 million was primarily attributable to increases in stock-based compensation expense of $930.3 million (inclusive of employer payroll taxes) as a result of the modification of the vesting terms of RSUs and certain earnout shares in the fourth quarter of 2021 (as further described above in “Modification of Equity Awards in Connection with Business Combination”), personnel-related compensation and benefits expense of $22.6 million, rent and facilities expense of $11.8 million, and professional fees of $6.0 million. The remaining increase was attributable to depreciation and amortization expense of $14.9 million and other direct and allocated overhead expenses. Increases in research and development expenses not attributable to stock-based compensation expense supported the Foundry operations, enhancements of Foundry and Codebase, and development of our Biosecurity offering.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $863.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $38.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $824.6 million was primarily attributable to increases in stock-based compensation expense of $756.9 million (inclusive of employer payroll taxes) as a result of the modification of the vesting terms of RSUs and certain earnout shares in the fourth quarter of 2021 (as further described above in “Modification of Equity Awards in Connection with Business Combination”), personnel-related compensation and benefits expense of $23.5 million, professional fees of $19.9 million, software and technology expense of $7.2 million, rent and facilities expense of $4.2 million, insurance expense of $3.5 million and marketing expense of $2.7 million. The remaining increase was attributable to business taxes and other direct and allocated overhead expenses. Increases in general and administrative expenses not attributable to stock-based compensation expense supported the growth of Foundry and Biosecurity revenue and activities related to public company readiness.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.8 million and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $1.8 million was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates on our cash held in money market accounts.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $2.4 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and was related to our lease financing obligation.
Loss on Equity Method Investments
Loss on equity method investments was $77.3 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $76.9 million was attributable to our equity method investments in Joyn, Allonnia and Arcaea. The fair value of the initial equity we received in Arcaea of $47.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was reduced to zero during the period as a result of the application of the HLBV method. The fair value of the additional equity we received in Allonnia of $12.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was also reduced to zero during the period as a result of the application of the HLBV method. Under the HLBV method, we absorb losses as a common unit holder prior to preferred unit holders due to a substantive profit-sharing agreement where the preferred unit holders receive preferential distribution rights. Because we have no commitment to fund the losses of Arcaea or Allonnia, no further losses on these equity method investments were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021. The loss on our equity method investment in Joyn increased from $0.4 million to $17.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively, representing our share of the investee’s losses under the HLBV method.
Loss on Investments
Loss on investments was $11.5 million and $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change of $7.8 million was attributable to fluctuations in the stock price of our shares of Synlogic and Cronos common stock and warrants to purchase Synlogic common stock.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $58.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to a decrease in the estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and a decrease in the quoted price of the Public Warrants.
Gain on Settlement of Partnership Agreement
Gain on settlement of partnership agreement was $23.8 million and $8.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $15.5 million was due to Amyris making a prepayment in 2021 in full settlement of all amounts due under the partnership agreement.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net was $(1.7) million and $7.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $9.5 million was primarily attributable to a $6.6 million decrease in payments received from the NIH, a $4.5 million change in fair value of the Access Bio convertible notes and Glycosyn promissory note, partially offset by net increase in other miscellaneous income.
Non-GAAP Information
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, each non-GAAP financial measures, are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use this non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that this non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
We define EBITDA as net loss attributable to Ginkgo Bioworks Holdings, Inc. stockholders before the impact of interest income, interest expense, provision for income taxes and depreciation and amortization.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation expense, gain or loss on equity method investments, gain or loss on investments, change in fair value of warrant liabilities and other income and expenses. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends because it eliminates the effect of financing activities, investing activities, and certain non-cash charges and other items. Adjusted EBITDA includes non-cash adjustments such as stock-based compensation, gain or loss on equity method investments, and gain or loss on changes in fair value of our investments, warrant liabilities and loans
receivable. Adjusted EBITDA also considers cash components which are not part of our ongoing operating results, such as gains related to settlement payments from Amyris and certain funding received from the NIH to invest in our Biosecurity development related to COVID-19. We believe Adjusted EBITDA, although not a replacement for financial performance measures reported under U.S. GAAP, provides investors with a means to compare our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA we may generate future income or incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by future income or future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. Our computation of these measures, especially Adjusted EBITDA, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies because not all companies calculate these measures in the same way.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by primarily relying on our U.S. GAAP results supplemented by EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. You should review the reconciliation of net loss attributable to Ginkgo Bioworks Holdings, Inc. stockholders to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss attributable to Ginkgo Bioworks Holdings, Inc. stockholders to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2021, includes $5.0 million in employer payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation.
(2)For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, represents losses on equity method investments under the HLBV method of $77.3 million and $0.4 million, respectively, net of losses attributable to non-controlling interests.
(3)Includes loss on the change in fair value of our common stock investments in Synlogic and Cronos and warrants to purchase Synlogic common stock, which are all carried at fair value.
(4)For the year ended December 31, 2021, includes $3.7 million in mark-to-market adjustments on Access Bio convertible notes and the Glycosyn promissory note. For the year ended December 31, 2020, includes $6.6 million received from the NIH.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Prior to the Business Combination, our sources of liquidity have been predominantly from proceeds from equity offerings, convertible notes offerings, payments received for R&D services under license and collaboration arrangements including those received on an upfront basis and upon accomplishment of milestones, payments received from Biosecurity product sales and services, and government grants. Upon the closing of the Business Combination in September 2021, we received net proceeds totaling approximately $1,509.6 million, inclusive of $760.0 million from the PIPE Investment. As of December
31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,550.0 million which we believe will be sufficient to enable us to fund our projected operations through at least the next 12 months from the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Material Cash Requirements
We anticipate that our expenditures will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
●continue our R&D, activities under existing and new programs and further invest in our Foundry and Codebase;
●hire additional personnel and secure facilities to support our expanding R&D efforts;
●develop and expand our offerings, including Biosecurity;
●upgrade and expand our operational, financial and management systems and support our operations;
●acquire companies, assets or intellectual property that advance our company objectives;
●maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property; and
●incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
Leases
We have various noncancelable operating leases for office and laboratory space that begin to expire on dates ranging from 2030 through 2036. As of December 31, 2021, we have minimum rental commitments under noncancelable operating leases of $20.6 million in 2022 and $664.8 million thereafter. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Purchase Obligations
We have a noncancelable purchase obligation with a supplier under which we are obligated to pay at least $109.0 million, and up to $150.0 million, over a seven year term ending in 2026 for minimum purchases of certain equipment, associated consumables and other goods and services. The purchase obligation includes variable license fees and milestone payments of up to $11.5 million upon achievement of development and regulatory milestones. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $86.5 million remaining under the purchase obligation, with approximately $13 million payable within 12 months. Additionally, we have minimum purchase volume commitments with certain suppliers. See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Capital Expenditures
We anticipate our cumulative spending on capital expenditures to be in the range of $115 million over the next twelve months, subject to management’s ongoing reassessment, to support our commercial plan as we strategically invest in capacity and technology to deliver new cell programs.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for each period presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of net loss of $1,836.6 million, adjusted for net change in operating assets and liabilities of $61.5 million and non-cash charges of $1,644.4 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $114.1 million driven by an increase in Biosecurity revenue and a decrease in deferred revenue of $10.5 million, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $44.8 million primarily due to Biosecurity revenue accruals, an increase in deferred
rent of $6.0 million as a result of entering into new leases and expanding the terms of existing leases and an increase in other non-current liabilities of $18.6 million primarily due to a $20.0 million customer deposit liability. Non-cash adjustments primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $29.1 million, stock-based compensation expense of $1,606.0 million, loss on equity method investments of $77.3 million and loss on investments of $11.5 million, partially offset by gain on change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $58.6 million and non-cash equity consideration of $24.2 million from milestones associated with a customer collaboration arrangement.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of net loss of $126.7 million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $26.5 million, offset by non-cash adjustments of $17.4 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease in current and non-current deferred revenue of $19.4 million, an increase in accounts receivable and accounts receivable from related parties of $14.2 million and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $11.4 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable of $7.0 million and an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $8.7 million. Non-cash adjustments primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $13.9 million, loss on equity method investments of $0.4 million and loss on investments of $3.7 million, partially offset by changes in the fair value of loans receivable of $1.1 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $56.5 million associated with Foundry capacity and capability investments, purchase of non-marketable equity securities of $5.0 million and acquisition of Dutch DNA for $12.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $57.8 million, including costs associated with Foundry capacity and capability investments and purchase of Access Bio’s convertible notes of $10.0 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of net proceeds received from the Business Combination of $1,509.6 million, non-controlling interest contributions of $59.9 million related to our consolidated variable interest entities (“VIEs”), Ayana and Verb, partially offset by repurchases of common stock from our founders of $25.0 million and tax withholding payments related to net share settlement of equity awards of $9.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of the net proceeds from the issuance of our Series E convertible preferred stock.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, are reflected in our consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when the customer obtains control of the promised goods or services, at an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a
customer, (ii) identify the promises and distinct performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligations.
Foundry Revenue
We generate license and service revenue through the execution of license and collaboration agreements whereby customers obtain license rights to our proprietary technology and intellectual property for use in the research, development and commercialization of engineered organisms and derived products. Under these agreements, we typically provide R&D services, which includes the provision of a license to our intellectual property. Additionally, the customer obtains license rights to the output of our services in order to commercialize the resulting output of such services. Generally, the terms of these agreements provide that we receive some combination of: (1) Foundry usage fees in the form of (i) upfront payments upon consummation of the agreement or other fixed payments, (ii) reimbursement for costs incurred for R&D services and (iii) milestone payments upon the achievement of specified technical criteria, plus (2) downstream value share payments in the form of (i) milestone payments upon the achievement of specified commercial criteria, (ii) royalties on sales of products from or comprising engineered organisms arising from the collaboration or licensing agreement and (iii) royalties related to cost of goods sold reductions realized by our customers.
Our collaboration and licensing agreements often contain multiple promises, including (i) licenses and assignments of intellectual property and materials and (ii) R&D services, and we determine whether each of the promises is a distinct performance obligation based on the nature of each agreement. As we are generally performing R&D services that are highly integrated and interrelated to the licenses and assignments of intellectual property and materials, the promises are generally inseparable. As such, we typically combine the R&D services, licenses, and assignments into a single performance obligation. However, for certain agreements, we only grant licenses or effects such transfers and assignments upon the successful completion of the R&D services or delivery of a developed product. For these agreements, we typically consider (i) the R&D services and (ii) the licenses, transfers, and assignments as distinct performance obligations, as each is transferred separately and has a separately identifiable benefit. Options to acquire additional goods and services are evaluated to determine if such options provide a material right to the counterparty that it would not have received without entering into the contract. If so, the option is accounted for as a separate performance obligation. If not, the option is considered a marketing offer which is accounted for as a separate contract upon the counterparty’s election.
At contract inception, we determine the transaction price, including fixed consideration and any estimated amounts of variable consideration. Any upfront cash payment received upon consummation of the agreement is fixed and generally nonrefundable. Variable consideration is subject to a constraint, and amounts are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Variable consideration may include reimbursement for costs incurred for our R&D efforts, milestone payments upon the achievement of certain technical and commercial criteria, and royalties on sales of products from or comprising engineered organisms arising from the agreement. With respect to the R&D reimbursements and milestone payments, we use the most likely amount method to estimate variable consideration. With respect to agreements that include royalties on sales or other contingent payments based on sales, we apply the royalty recognition constraint which requires a constraint until the royalty or value-sharing transaction occurs. Certain agreements contain payment in the form of equity or other non-cash consideration. Any non-cash consideration is measured at the fair value of the non-cash consideration at contract inception.
For agreements with promises that are combined into a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. For agreements with multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations using the relative standalone selling price methodology. For agreements featuring variable consideration, we allocate variable consideration to one or more, but not all, performance obligations if certain conditions are met. Specifically, we assess whether the variable consideration relates solely to our efforts to satisfy the performance obligation and whether allocating such variable consideration entirely to the performance obligation is consistent with the overall allocation objective. If these conditions are not met, we allocate the variable consideration based on the relative standalone selling price methodology. The key assumptions utilized in determining the standalone selling price for each performance obligation include development timelines, estimated R&D costs, commercial markets, likelihood of exercise (in the case of options considered to be material rights), and probabilities of success.
For agreements where the licenses or assignments are considered separate performance obligations or represent the only performance obligation, we recognize revenue at the point in time that we effectively grant the license as the licenses or assignments represent functional intellectual property. For agreements where the licenses and the R&D services represent a
combined performance obligation, we recognize revenue over the period of performance using a measure of progress based on costs incurred to date as compared to total estimated costs.
We evaluate our measure of progress to recognize revenue at each reporting period and, as necessary, adjust the measure of progress and related revenue recognition. Our measure of progress and revenue recognition involves significant judgment and assumptions, including, but not limited to, estimated costs and timelines to complete our performance obligations. We evaluate contract modifications and amendments to determine whether any changes should be accounted for prospectively or on a cumulative catch-up basis. We utilize the right to invoice practical expedient when we have a right to consideration in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of our performance to date.
Royalties are recognized as revenue when sales have occurred as we apply the sales or usage-based royalties recognition constraint. We have determined the application of this exception is appropriate because the license granted in the agreement is the predominant item to which the royalties relate.
As we receive upfront payments for technical services under certain of our arrangements, we evaluate whether any significant financing components exist given the term over which the fees will be earned may exceed one year. Based on the nature of our agreements, there are no significant financing components as the purpose of the upfront payment is not to provide financing, but rather to secure technical services, exclusivity rights, and Foundry capacity, or the timing of transfer of those goods or services is at the discretion of the customer.
Deferred revenue represents consideration received by us in excess of revenue recognized and primarily results from transactions where we receive upfront payments and non-cash equity consideration. In instances where we have received consideration in advance for an undefined number of technical development plans (“TDPs”) under our customer agreements, we record the advance payments as deferred revenue, net of current portion on our consolidated balance sheets. Upon the execution of a specific TDP, we reclassify the estimated consideration to be earned under that TDP within the next twelve months as current deferred revenue. We also classify unexercised material rights related to future TDPs as deferred revenue, net of current portion on our consolidated balance sheets. When a TDP is executed, and the material right is exercised, the amount allocated to the material right, which will be earned within the next twelve months, is reclassified to current deferred revenue. All other deferred revenue is classified as current or non-current based on the timing of when we expect to earn the underlying revenue based upon the projected progress of activities under the TDP.
Variable Interest Entities
We evaluate our variable interests in VIEs and consolidate VIEs when we are the primary beneficiary. We determine whether we are the primary beneficiary of each VIE based on our assessment of whether we possess both (i) the power to direct the activities that most significantly affect the VIE’s economic performance and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses that could be significant to the VIE or the right to receive benefits that could be significant to the VIE. We reevaluate the accounting for our VIEs upon the occurrence of events that could change the primary beneficiary conclusion. With respect to our investments in Motif, Allonnia, Genomatica and Arcaea, we have concluded these entities represent variable interest entities. However, although we hold board representation and are involved in the ongoing development activities of the entities via participation on joint steering committees, we have concluded that we are not the primary beneficiary of these entities. We have reached this conclusion due to the fact that: (i) we do not control the board of directors of Motif, Allonnia, Genomatica or Arcaea and no voting or consent agreements exist between ourselves and other members of each respective board of directors or other investors, (ii) the holders of preferred security interests in Motif, Allonnia, Genomatica and Arcaea hold certain rights that require their consent prior to the taking of certain actions, which include certain significant operating and financing decisions and (iii) our representation on the joint steering committee of each respective entity does not give us control over the development activities of either Motif, Allonnia, Genomatica or Arcaea as all votes must pass by consensus and there are no agreements in place that would require either entity to vote in alignment with ourselves. As our involvement in Motif, Allonnia, Genomatica and Arcaea does not give us the power to control the decisions with respect to the development or other activities, which are the most significant activities of Motif, Allonnia, Genomatica or Arcaea, we have accordingly concluded that we are not the primary beneficiary. Additionally, with respect to Cooksonia’s investment in Joyn, as Cooksonia does not control Joyn’s board of directors, it does not have the power to control the decisions related to the development activities of Joyn, which are the most significant activities of Joyn. Accordingly, Cooksonia is not the primary beneficiary of Joyn.
With respect to Cooksonia, we have concluded that we hold a variable interest in this entity through our equity interest and we are the primary beneficiary of Cooksonia as we control the most significant activities of Cooksonia, we control 100% of the board of directors of Cooksonia and we hold a controlling financial interest in Cooksonia. With respect to Ayana and
Verb, two Platform Ventures formed in September 2021 by us and certain of our investors, we concluded that we hold a variable interest in these entities through our equity interests and are the primary beneficiary of Ayana and Verb as we control the most significant activities of these entities. These conclusions were reached because, as of the primary beneficiary assessment date, for both Verb and Ayana: (i) we have substantive control of the board of directors; (ii) all capital contributions were made by our related parties; and (iii) we or our related parties comprise the entirety of the Joint Steering Committee, the governing body which holds significant oversight with respect to the entities' research and development programs. As a result, we have consolidated the financial statements of Cooksonia, Ayana and Verb in accordance with ASC 810, Consolidation (“ASC 810”), into our consolidated financial statements and have recognized a non-controlling interest associated with the minority equity interest held by the other investors of these VIEs.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the book values of the assets to the expected future net undiscounted cash flows that the assets are expected to generate. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the book values of the assets exceed their fair value.
Determination of Fair Value of Non-cash Consideration in Platform Ventures
The fair value of non-cash consideration received in relation to our Platform Ventures is in return for the license rights conveyed to the counterparty. We value the non-cash consideration, which is generally common stock or common units, at inception of the agreements using an option pricing method (“OPM”). The OPM used a back-solve methodology to infer the total equity value based on the pricing of the preferred financing round associated with the formation of the respective Platform Ventures, which was contemporaneous with the intellectual property agreements that conveyed our license rights to such Platform Ventures.
Determination of Fair Value of Loans Receivable
We have elected the fair value option under ASC 825, Financial Instruments (“ASC 825”), to account for our loans receivable. We use various valuation techniques to fair value our loans receivable, which are dependent on the terms of the underlying agreements, and record the gains or loss arising from the change in fair value as a component of other (expense) income, net in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our loans receivable balance primarily consisted of our revolving promissory note with Glycosyn and a series of convertible notes with Access Bio. We used a probability-weighted discounted cash flow valuation approach to value our revolving promissory note with Glycosyn. Under this approach, the present value of the expected cash flows was calculated under various settlement scenarios and then weighted based on the probability of each scenario. Significant inputs used in valuing the Glycosyn promissory note included the probability and timing of each scenario, debt recovery rate and discount rate. We used a binomial lattice model and a Monte-Carlo simulation model to determine the value of our convertible notes with Access Bio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Significant inputs used under the binomial lattice model included equity volatility, time to maturity, risk-free rate, risk-adjusted rate and dividend yield. Under the Monte-Carlo simulation model, the future stock price of Access Bio was simulated over the term of the notes to assess the value of the settlement features which included conversion into stock at a discount determined under a reset provision tied to the stock price of Access Bio and redemption at maturity. Significant inputs used under the Monte Carlo simulation model were the discount rate and equity volatility. Refer to Note 5 of our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. We recognize the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition-date fair values and recognize any excess of the total consideration paid over the fair value of the identifiable net assets as goodwill. Significant management judgments and assumptions are required in determining the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities assumed, particularly intangible assets and their estimated useful lives and the value of contingent consideration payable. As a result, we obtain the assistance of third-party valuation specialists in estimating fair value of intangible assets and contingent consideration payable. Significant estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, the expected costs to reproduce an asset, useful lives and discount rates. Significant estimates in valuing earnout provisions related to contingent consideration payable include, among other factors, future revenue projection of the acquired business, probabilities of achieving certain technical and commercial milestones and appropriate discount rates used in computing present values. While management believes those expectations and
assumptions are reasonable, they are inherently uncertain. Unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances may occur, which could affect the estimates and assumptions.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is measured based on grant-date fair values and is recognized over the requisite service period. For awards that vest solely based on a service condition, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. For awards that vest based on performance and market conditions, we recognize compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method on a tranche-by-tranche basis. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of certain assumptions, including fair value of common stock (for options granted prior to the Business Combination), expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. For awards with market conditions, we determine the grant date fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model, which incorporates various assumptions including expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected term, and expected dividend yield.
Following the Business Combination, the fair value of our common stock is based on the quoted market price on the NYSE. Prior to the Business Combination, the fair value of our common stock underlying our stock-based awards was determined considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our assessment of additional objective and subjective factors. These judgments and estimates included: (i) a discount for lack of marketability; (ii) external market data; (iii) historical activity by us in selling equity to outside investors; (iv) our stage of development; (v) rights and preferences of our equity securities that rank senior to common stock; and (vi) the likelihood of the various scenarios, among others. Changes to these assumptions could result in different fair values of common stock.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our stock-based awards could be materially different.
JOBS Act and Emerging Growth Company Status
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. As an emerging growth company (“EGC”) under the JOBS Act, we may delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. Other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act for EGCs include an exemption from the requirement to provide an auditor’s report on internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, an exemption from any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation and less extensive disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements. Additionally, the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an EGC to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected not to opt out of the extended transition period and, therefore, while we are an EGC we will not be subject to new or revised accounting standards while they become applicable to other public companies that are not EGCs, unless we choose to early adopt a new or revised accounting standard.
We will remain classified as an EGC until the earlier of: (i) the last day of our first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of completion of the IPO of SRNG, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt instruments during the previous three fiscal years or (iv) the date on which we are deemed a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies,” of our consolidated financial statements contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.