ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations related to future events and our future financial performance that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our intentions, plans, objectives, expectations, forecasts and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Our goal is to discover, develop and deliver therapeutics to defeat degeneration.
Our strategy is guided by three overarching principles that we believe will significantly increase the probability of success and will accelerate the timing to bring effective therapeutics to patients with neurodegenerative diseases:
•Genetic Pathway Potential: We select our therapeutic targets and disease pathways based on genes that, when mutated, cause, or are major risk factors for, neurodegenerative diseases. We refer to these genes as degenogenes;
•Engineering Brain Delivery: We engineer our product candidates to cross the BBB and act directly in the brain; and
•Biomarker-Driven Development: We discover, develop and utilize biomarkers to select the right patient population and demonstrate target engagement, pathway engagement and impact on disease progression of our product candidates.
By executing this strategy with a team of experienced and passionately dedicated scientists and drug developers, we believe we can succeed in a field that has seen limited progress over the past several decades. We have a focused yet diversified portfolio with five clinical programs and more than fifteen programs in the preclinical development stage.
We have also developed a proprietary BBB platform technology, our transport vehicle ("TV"), which enables multiple modality-based platforms to deliver a wide range of large-molecule therapeutics across the BBB, including enzymes, antibodies, proteins and oligonucleotides. This technology is designed to engage specific BBB transport receptors, which are ubiquitously expressed in brain capillaries and facilitate transport of proteins into the brain. We are currently optimizing and broadening this platform technology.
Our clinical-stage programs are:
•our leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 ("LRRK2") inhibitor program, to be developed in collaboration with Biogen, to address Parkinson’s disease ("PD");
•our ETV:IDS program, our lead brain-penetrant enzyme replacement therapy ("ERT"), enabled by our enzyme transport vehicle ("ETV"), which is designed to restore iduronate 2-sulfatase ("IDS"), and reduce glycosaminoglycans ("GAGs"), both peripherally and in the brain, in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis II ("MPS II", or "Hunter syndrome");
•our eukaryotic initiation factor 2 B ("eIF2B") activator program to address diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ("ALS") and frontotemporal dementia ("FTD");
•our CNS-penetrant receptor interacting serine/threonine protein kinase 1 ("RIPK1") inhibitor program, partnered with Sanofi, to address neurological diseases such as ALS, multiple sclerosis ("MS") and Alzheimer's disease; and
•a second non-CNS penetrant RIPK1 inhibitor, partnered with Sanofi, to address peripheral inflammatory diseases such as cutaneous lupus erythematosus ("CLE") and ulcerative colitis.
The following table summarizes key information about our clinical stage programs:
To complement our internal capabilities, we have entered into arrangements with biopharmaceutical companies, patient-focused data companies, numerous leading academic institutions and foundations to gain access to new product candidates, enable and accelerate the development of our existing programs and deepen our scientific understanding of certain areas of biology. We currently rely on third-party contract manufacturers to manufacture and supply our preclinical and clinical materials to be used during the development of our product candidates. We currently do not need commercial manufacturing capacity.
Since we commenced operations, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to discovering, acquiring and developing product candidates, building our BBB platform technology and assembling our core capabilities in understanding key neurodegenerative disease pathways.
Key operational and financing milestones for the year ended December 31, 2021 and in 2022 to date include:
•LRRK2
◦In January 2021, we announced completion of the BIIB122/DNL151 Phase 1b study in Parkinson’s patients. In March 2021, we completed our Phase 1 study of BIIB122/DNL151. In May 2021, we presented results from both studies at the International Association of Parkinsonism and Related Disorders Virtual Congress held on May 1-4. BIIB122/DNL151 was generally well tolerated, and target engagement and pathway engagement biomarker goals were met;
◦In September 2021, at Biogen’s R&D Day event, we provided a progress update on our collaboration with Biogen to develop BIIB122/DNL151 for PD. Together with Biogen, we highlighted data supporting the advancement to late-stage clinical development and ongoing start-up activities for BIIB122/DNL151 in preparation to commence PD studies. As previously announced, two studies are planned: one in participants with PD who do not carry a LRRK2 mutation and another in PD participants with LRRK2 mutations. Biogen will lead operationalization and conduct of these studies;
•ETV:IDS
◦In February 2021, we reported three-month data from Cohort A (n=5) in a Phase 1/2 study of DNL310 in patients with Hunter syndrome. The data showed that DNL310 treatment resulted in normalization of GAG levels in cerebrospinal fluid ("CSF") and a safety and tolerability profile consistent with standard of care ERT;
◦In March 2021, we announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") granted Fast Track designation to DNL310 for the treatment of patients with Hunter syndrome;
◦In July 2021, we reported positive interim data from the Phase 1/2 study of ETV:IDS (DNL310) in patients with Hunter syndrome (MPS II). The data demonstrated durability of effect with CNS impact, improved peripheral activity after switching from standard of care, and a safety profile consistent with standard of care enzyme replacement therapy. Furthermore, initial indications of improved clinical symptoms and function, assessed as exploratory endpoints, were reported by investigators and parents in all five patients enrolled in Cohort A. We also shared data from Cohort B, which is designed to inform dose selection; exploratory biomarker data demonstrated activity of DNL310 across all dose regimens. Based on these data, we began enrolling Cohort C in the Phase 1/2 study to further investigate clinical endpoints, and we plan to initiate a pivotal Phase 2/3 study of DNL310 in the first half of 2022;
◦On February 10, 2022, we reported longer-term and additional patient data across Cohorts A and B in the ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial. Longer-term data in 20 patients show sustained normalization to healthy levels of CSF heparan sulfate and improvements in markers of lysosomal function consistent with durable CNS activity, now with up to one year of intravenous dosing with DNL310. Across Cohorts A (n=5) and B (n=15), all patients had normalized levels of heparan sulfate in CSF by Week 24 of treatment with DNL310, which were sustained in all 5 patients from Cohort A at Week 49. Rapid response was observed in most patients after 4 to 6 weekly intravenous doses of DNL310, including in patients on lower dose regimens of DNL310. Furthermore, the observed decline in urine and serum heparan sulfate was consistent with improved peripheral activity with DNL310. These results are consistent with robust and efficient crossing of the BBB by DNL310 and durable activity in the CNS. Furthermore, the observed decline in urine heparan and dermatan sulfate, as well as CSF dermatan sulfate, was consistent with increased peripheral and central activity with DNL310 compared to standard-of-care, respectively. Exploratory lysosomal lipid biomarker data showed further reductions with longer duration of treatment with DNL310, consistent with improved lysosomal function. Exploratory clinical outcomes data at Week 24 from Cohort A (n=5), and now including Cohort B (n=12; 3 of 15 total patients had not reached Week 24 at the time of the data cut in September 2021), suggest improved clinical symptoms and function in the majority of patients as reported by investigators and parents/caregivers. The safety profile of DNL310, which included data up to Weeks 56 and 39 from Cohorts A and B, respectively, remained consistent with standard-of-care enzyme replacement therapy. The safety profile of DNL310, which now includes data up to Weeks 56 and 39 from Cohorts A and B, respectively, remains consistent with standard-of-care enzyme replacement therapy. DNL310 was generally well tolerated with the most common treatment-emergent adverse events being infusion-related reactions ("IRRs"). IRRs occurred in 15 of 20 (75%) patients;
•eIF2B
◦In October 2021, we presented results from a Phase 1 healthy volunteer study demonstrating that DNL343 met safety and biomarker goals. The Phase 1 data supported initiation of a Phase 1b study in participants with ALS, which commenced dosing in August 2021;
•RIPK1
◦In June 2021, we announced that our collaboration partner Sanofi commenced dosing in a Phase 2 study of SAR443122/DNL758, a peripherally-restricted small molecule inhibitor of RIPK1, in patients with CLE, triggering a $15.0 million milestone which was received in July 2021;
◦In October 2021, we announced that our collaboration partner Sanofi advanced development of SAR443820/DNL788 in ALS and that the U.S. FDA granted SAR443820/DNL788 Fast Track designation for the potential treatment of ALS. Results from a Phase 1 study of SAR443820/DNL788 in healthy volunteers demonstrated robust target engagement at doses that were generally well tolerated. Sanofi plans to initiate the Phase 2 study in ALS, named HIMALAYA, in Q1 2022;
◦In January 2022, we announced that Sanofi also plans to initiate a Phase 2 trial of SAR443820/ DNL788 in multiple sclerosis, and a Phase 2 trial of SAR443122/ DNL758 in patients with ulcerative colitis;
•PTV:PGRN and ATV:TREM2
◦In January 2021, GLP toxicology studies were initiated for DNL919 (ATV:TREM2), triggering the second preclinical milestone payment under the Takeda Collaboration Agreement of $8.0 million, which was received in March 2021;
◦In November 2021 and January 2022 we announced that Takeda exercised its options, pursuant to our existing collaboration agreement to co-develop and co-commercialize DNL593 (PTV:PGRN) and DNL919 (ATV:TREM2), respectively, triggering option exercise fees of $5.0 million for each program, which were both received in December 2021;
◦On January 13, 2022, we announced that the DNL919 (ATV:TREM2) IND application had been placed on clinical hold by the FDA. We received a formal clinical hold letter and are moving forward to address the FDA’s observations related to the preclinical toxicology assessment and to provide the information requested to initiate clinical studies, including proposed changes to the clinical trial protocol, the informed consent form, and the investigator brochure. We expect a delay of at least 3 months to our plans to begin dosing in a first-in-human clinical trial of DNL919. We intend to provide an update once a clear path forward is established;
◦In January 2022, the CTA for DNL593 was approved by the MHRA, triggering a $12.0 million milestone from Takeda which was received in February 2022. We expect to commence dosing of DNL593 in healthy volunteers in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in Q1 2022. Pending initial clinical data from the Phase 1/2 study, we expect to begin dosing participants with FTD-GRN in the second half of 2022;
•Other
◦In January 2021, following achievement of human biomarker proof of concept with DNL310 for Hunter syndrome, we announced the addition of five new brain-penetrant ERT programs in our ETV portfolio including: (1) ETV:Gcase for Gaucher disease and Parkinson’s disease; (2) ETV:GAA for Pompe disease; (3) ETV:IDUA for MPS I; (4) ETV:NAGLU for MPS IIIB; and (5) ETV:ARSA for metachromatic leukodystrophy ("MLD"); and
◦In August 2021, we entered into a lease for approximately 65,000 square feet of laboratory, office and warehouse premises in Salt Lake City, Utah ("SLC lease"). The build-out of the Utah site to expand our clinical manufacturing capabilities for biologic therapeutics (large molecules) has been initiated. We plan to use the premises for the manufacture of materials for toxicology studies and drug substance for early human clinical studies with the goal of increasing flexibility and speed in advancing new investigational therapies into clinical trials.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any product revenue since our inception. We have funded our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock, the sale of common stock in public offerings, and payments received from our collaboration agreements with Takeda, Sanofi and Biogen.
We have incurred significant operating losses to date and expect to continue to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. We had net losses of $290.6 million and $197.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019, respectively. Due to revenue recognized from our collaboration arrangement with Biogen, we had net income of $71.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $645.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses as we advance our current clinical stage programs through healthy volunteer and patient trials; broaden and improve our BBB platform technology; acquire, discover, validate and develop additional product candidates; obtain, maintain, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio; and hire additional personnel.
License and Collaboration Agreements
Takeda
In January 2018, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Takeda (“Takeda Collaboration Agreement”) pursuant to which we granted Takeda an option with respect to three of our programs to develop and commercialize, jointly with us, certain biologic products that are enabled by our BBB delivery technology and intended for the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. The three programs were our ATV:BACE1/Tau, ATV:TREM2 and PTV:PGRN programs. The Takeda Collaboration Agreement became effective in February 2018 when the requirements of the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976 ("HSR") were satisfied. In February 2019, we amended the Takeda Collaboration Agreement to replace the ATV:BACE1/Tau program with the ATV:Tau program.
Under the terms of the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, Takeda paid us a $40.0 million upfront payment, and is obligated to pay us up to an aggregate of $25.0 million with respect to each of the three programs under the Takeda Collaboration Agreement directed to a target and based upon the achievement of certain preclinical milestone events, up to $75.0 million in total, of which we have earned and received $31.0 million to date. Takeda is also obligated to pay us a $5.0 million option fee for each target for which Takeda exercises its option, up to $15.0 million in total. Option fees of $10.0 million were triggered in the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of Takeda's opt-ins on the PTV:PGRN and ATV:TREM2 programs.
Pursuant to the terms of the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, we entered into the Purchase Agreement with Takeda in January 2018, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell, and Takeda agreed to purchase, 4,214,559 shares of our common stock for an aggregate purchase price of $110.0 million. We closed the sale of the 4,214,559 shares of our common stock to Takeda on February 23, 2018.
After Takeda exercises its option for a particular target, we and Takeda will share equally the development and commercialization costs, and, if applicable, the profits, for each collaboration program. However, for each collaboration program, we may elect not to continue sharing development and commercialization costs, or Takeda may elect to terminate our cost-profit sharing rights and obligations if, following notice from Takeda and a cure period, we fail to satisfy our cost sharing obligations with respect to the relevant collaboration program. After such an election by us or termination by Takeda becomes effective, we will no longer be obligated to share in the development and commercialization costs for the relevant collaboration program, and we will not share in any profits from that collaboration program. Instead we will be entitled to receive tiered royalties. The royalty rates will be in the low- to mid-teen percentages on net sales, or low- to high-teen percentages on net sales if we have met a certain co-funding threshold at the time of our election to opt out of co-development or Takeda’s termination of our cost-profit sharing rights and obligations, and, in each case, these royalty rates will be subject to certain reductions specified in the Takeda Collaboration Agreement. Takeda will pay these royalties to us for each biologic product included in the relevant collaboration program, on a country-by-country basis, until the latest of (i) the expiration of certain patents covering the relevant biologic product, (ii) the expiration of all regulatory exclusivity for that biologic product, and (iii) an agreed period of time after the first commercial sale of that biologic product in the applicable country, unless biosimilar competition in excess of a significant level specified in the Takeda Collaboration Agreement occurs earlier, in which case Takeda’s royalty obligations in the applicable country would terminate.
In addition, if Takeda exercises its option for all three collaboration programs, Takeda may be obligated to pay us up to an aggregate of $407.5 million upon achievement of certain clinical milestone events and up to an aggregate of $300.0 million in regulatory milestone events relating to receipt of regulatory approval in the United States, certain European countries and Japan. Takeda may also be obligated to pay us up to $75.0 million per biologic product upon achievement of a certain sales-based milestone, or an aggregate of $225.0 million if one biologic product from each program achieves this milestone.
We have recognized collaboration revenue of $29.9 million, $27.2 million and $5.9 million associated with the Takeda Collaboration Agreement in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and an offset to research and development expense for cost sharing reimbursements of $13.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. We recorded a receivable of $13.7 million and $8.0 million from Takeda as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Through December 31, 2021, we have received $31.0 million in preclinical milestone payments and $10.0 million of option exercise fees from Takeda and have not recorded any product sales under the Takeda Collaboration Agreement.
Sanofi
In October 2018, we entered into the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement with Sanofi pursuant to which certain small molecule CNS and peripheral RIPK1 inhibitors contributed by Sanofi and by us will be developed and commercialized. The Sanofi Collaboration Agreement became effective in November 2018 when the HSR requirements were satisfied. Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Sanofi paid us a $125.0 million upfront payment. Under the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement, Sanofi is required to make milestone payments up to approximately $1.1 billion upon achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestone events. Such milestone payments include $215.0 million in clinical milestone payments and $385.0 million in regulatory milestone payments for CNS Products, as defined, that are developed and approved in the United States, by the European Medicines Agency ("EMA") and in Japan for three indications, including Alzheimer's disease. These milestones also include $120.0 million in clinical milestone payments, $175.0 million in regulatory milestone payments and $200.0 million in commercial milestone payments for Peripheral Products, as defined, that are developed and approved in the United States, by the EMA and in Japan for three indications. Through December 31, 2021, we have received milestone payments of $25.0 million under the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement.
We will share profits and losses equally with Sanofi for CNS Products sold in the United States and China, and receive variable royalties on net sales for CNS Products sold outside of the United States and China and for Peripheral Products sold worldwide, each as further described below. RIPK1 Inhibitors contributed by Sanofi and developed and commercialized under the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement will be subject to lower milestone and royalty payments to us compared to RIPK1 Inhibitors contributed by us. We will also retain responsibility for certain payment obligations under our agreement with an academic institution which licensed certain intellectual property to us that we are sublicensing to Sanofi under the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement.
We and Sanofi will jointly develop CNS Products pursuant to a global development plan. We will be responsible, at our cost, for conducting Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials for CNS Products in Alzheimer’s disease and any activities required to support such clinical trials and specific for Alzheimer’s disease ("Denali CNS Development Activities"). Sanofi is responsible, at its cost, for all other Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials for CNS Products, including for ALS and multiple sclerosis. Sanofi will lead the conduct of all Phase 3 and later stage development trials for CNS Products, with Sanofi and us funding 70% and 30% of such costs, respectively. We have the ability to opt out of the cost-profit sharing provisions of the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement, as further described below.
Sanofi will lead commercialization activities globally for CNS Products. We may elect to conduct certain co-commercialization activities outside of MS with respect to each CNS Product in the United States and/or China, provided that the cost-profit sharing provisions of the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement for the relevant CNS Product are still in effect, as further described below.
We may opt out of the cost-profit sharing provisions of the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement for CNS Products in the United States and China on a CNS Product-by-CNS Product and country-by-country basis. Sanofi may also terminate our cost-profit sharing provisions of the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement in its entirety if, following notice from Sanofi and a cure period, we fail to satisfy our cost-sharing obligations. After such an opt out by us or termination by Sanofi, we will no longer be obligated to share in the development and commercialization costs for the applicable CNS Products and we will not share in the applicable profits from such CNS Products. Instead, we will be entitled to receive tiered royalties on net sales of the applicable CNS Products in the relevant country (or countries). The royalty rates will be a percentage in the low double digits to mid-teens, but may increase to the mid-teens to low-twenties percentages for all countries in which Sanofi is paying royalties on the applicable CNS products, if we have met certain co-funding thresholds at the time of our election or Sanofi’s termination of our cost-profit sharing rights and obligations.
Sanofi will be responsible, at its cost, for conducting activities relating to the development and commercialization of all Peripheral Products. Sanofi will lead commercialization activities globally for Peripheral Products. We will be entitled to receive tiered royalties in the low- to mid- teen percentages on net sales of Peripheral Products.
We have recognized collaboration revenue of $15.0 million, $1.1 million and $20.8 million associated with the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and recorded no receivable from Sanofi, and a receivable of $44,303 on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Through December 31, 2021, we have received milestone payments of $25.0 million and have not recorded any product sales under the Sanofi Collaboration Agreement.
Biogen
In August 2020, we entered into the Provisional Biogen Collaboration Agreement with Biogen pursuant to which we granted Biogen a license to co-develop and co-commercialize our LRRK2 Program, an option in respect of two Option Programs, and a right of first negotiation with respect to the ROFN Programs should we decide to seek a collaboration with a third party for such programs. In October 2020, we entered into the LRRK2 Agreement and the ROFN and Option Agreement with Biogen. The material terms of the LRRK2 Agreement and the ROFN and Option Agreement were consistent with, and superseded, the Provisional Biogen Collaboration Agreement.
The LRRK2 Agreement
The LRRK2 Agreement includes our LRRK2 Products that penetrate the BBB, including DNL201 and BIIB122/DNL151, as well as those that do not penetrate the BBB. Based on the totality of preclinical and clinical data to date, both DNL201 and BIIB122/DNL151 (two chemically distinct LRRK2 inhibitors) have met our requirements to proceed into further late-stage clinical testing, however, BIIB122/DNL151 has been selected to proceed due to pharmacokinetic properties that provide additional dosing regimen flexibility.
Under the terms of the LRRK2 Agreement, Biogen paid us a $400.0 million upfront payment in October 2020. With respect to the LRRK2 Program, Biogen is required to make milestone payments up to approximately $1.125 billion upon achievement of certain development and sales milestone events. Such milestone payments include $375.0 million in development, $375.0 million upon first commercial sale, and $375.0 million in net sales-based milestones. We will share profits and losses equally with Biogen for LRRK2 Products in the United States and will share profits and losses in China with Biogen sharing 60% of such profits and losses and us sharing 40% of such profits and losses. We will be entitled to receive royalties in the high teens to low twenties percentages on net sales for LRRK2 Products outside of the United States and China.
We and Biogen are jointly developing LRRK2 Products pursuant to a clinical development plan set forth within the LRRK2 Agreement. We and Biogen will share responsibility and costs for global development of LRRK2 Products pursuant to a mutually agreed development plan and budget " LRRK2 Development Activities"), with Biogen funding 60% of such costs and us funding 40% of such costs. We have the ability to opt out of the development cost sharing arrangement, as further described below. Biogen will lead commercialization activities globally for LRRK2 Products. We will co-commercialize the LRRK2 Products with Biogen in the United States and China, provided that the profit-sharing arrangement for the LRRK2 Products is still in effect, as further described below.
We may opt out of development cost sharing worldwide and upon such election, from any further profit-sharing from the LRRK2 Program. We also have the right to opt-out of the profit-sharing arrangement for the LRRK2 Program or for only those LRRK2 Products that do not penetrate the BBB (“Peripheral LRRK2 Products”), in each of the United States and China. After such an opt out, we will no longer be obligated to share in the development and commercialization costs for, or be entitled to share in the applicable revenues from, such LRRK2 Program (or from the Peripheral LRRK2 Products) for such country, as applicable. If we choose to exercise our opt out rights, we will be entitled to receive tiered royalties on net sales of the applicable LRRK2 Program in the relevant country (or countries). The royalty rates for the applicable LRRK2 Program will be a percentage in the high teens to low twenties, but may increase to the low twenties to mid-twenties, if we have met certain co-funding thresholds or there has been a first commercial sale at the time of our election.
The ROFN and Option Agreement
In addition to the LRRK2 Program, Biogen also received an exclusive option to license two preclinical programs enabled by our TV technology platform, including our ATV:Abeta program and a second program utilizing our TV technology for an unnamed target, excluding small molecules, AAVs and oligonucleotides. Biogen’s option may be triggered up to initiation of IND-enabling studies for each program and continues for each program until a specified period of time after delivery of an option data package or 30 business days after the 5th anniversary of the effective date of the Provisional Biogen Collaboration Agreement, whichever is earlier.
Further, Biogen will have the right of first negotiation on two additional TV-enabled therapeutics within the field of Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, ALS or multiple sclerosis should we decide to seek a collaboration with a third party for such programs, but this does not include any of our small molecule, AAVs or oligonucleotide programs. The ROFN period continues until seven years after the effective date of the Provisional Biogen Collaboration Agreement or the date on which we have offered Biogen two ROFN Programs and for which Biogen has agreed to trigger a ROFN for such program, whichever is earlier. However, if we do not execute an agreement with a third party with respect to a particular ROFN Program offered to Biogen within a specified amount of time, then Biogen will have one additional right to exercise the ROFN again with respect to such ROFN Program.
Under the ROFN and Option Agreement, Biogen paid us a $160 million upfront payment in October 2020. With respect to the options granted by us to Biogen, if exercised, Biogen is obligated to pay to us an aggregate of up to $270 million in option exercise and development milestone payments and an aggregate of up to $325.0 million upon first commercial sale, and up to $290.0 million of net sales-based milestone payments, following the achievement of certain prespecified milestone events and if Biogen exercises both of its options. Furthermore, Biogen is obligated to pay us royalties in the mid-single digit to mid-teens percentages, depending on the program for which Biogen exercises its option and upon the achievement of certain sales thresholds.
In addition, if Biogen exercises its ROFN with respect to an eligible Denali program, the parties are obligated to negotiate in good faith for a specified period of time regarding the financial and other terms of an agreement pursuant to which Biogen would obtain rights to such program.
Common Stock Purchase Agreement
In August 2020, in connection with the Provisional Biogen Collaboration Agreement, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with BIMA, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell, and BIMA agreed to purchase, 13,310,243 shares of our common stock (the “Shares”) for an aggregate purchase price of $465.0 million pursuant to the terms and conditions thereof. The sale of the Shares closed, and payment was received, in September 2020.
In relation to the Biogen Collaboration Agreement, we have recognized related party collaboration revenue of $3.7 million and $307.4 million and a related party offset to research and development expense of $6.5 million and $9.3 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have recorded cost sharing reimbursements due from Biogen of $1.2 million on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. Through December 31, 2021, we have not received any milestone payments from Biogen and have not recorded any product sales under the Biogen Collaboration Agreement.
F-star
In August 2016, we entered into a License and Collaboration Agreement ("F-star Collaboration Agreement") with F-star Gamma Limited (“F-star Gamma”), F-star Biotechnologische Forschungs-und Entwicklungsges m.b.H ("F-star GmbH") and F-star Biotechnology Limited ("F-star Ltd") (collectively, “F-star”). The goal of the collaboration is the development of Fcabs to enhance delivery of therapeutics across the BBB into the brain. The collaboration leverages F-star’s modular antibody technology and our expertise in the development of therapies for neurodegenerative diseases. In connection with the entry into the F-star Collaboration Agreement, we also purchased an option for an upfront option fee of $0.5 million (the "buy-out-option"), to acquire all of the outstanding shares of F-star Gamma pursuant to a pre-negotiated buy-out option agreement (the "Option Agreement").
In May 2018, we exercised such buy-out option and entered into a Share Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with the shareholders of F-star Gamma and Shareholder Representative Services LLC, pursuant to which we acquired all of the outstanding shares of F-star Gamma (the “Acquisition”).
As a result of the Acquisition, F-star Gamma became our wholly-owned subsidiary and the entity's name was changed to Denali BBB Holding Limited. In addition, we became a direct licensee of certain intellectual property of F-star Ltd by way of our assumption of F-star Gamma’s license agreement with F-star Ltd, dated August 24, 2016, (the “F-star Gamma License”). We made initial exercise payments of $18.0 million in aggregate under the Purchase Agreement and the F-star Gamma License, less the net liabilities of F-star Gamma, which were approximately $0.2 million. In addition, we are required to make future contingent payments, to F-star Ltd and the former shareholders of F-star Gamma, up to a maximum amount as of the date of acquisition of $447.0 million in the aggregate upon the achievement of certain defined preclinical, clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones. These include up to $27.0 million in preclinical contingent payments, $50.0 million in clinical contingent payments, $120.0 million in regulatory contingent payments and $250.0 million in commercial contingent payments. The amount of the contingent payments will vary based on whether F-star delivers an Fcab (constant Fc-domains with antigen-binding activity) that meets pre-defined criteria and whether the Fcab has been identified solely by us or solely by F-star Ltd. or jointly by us and F-star Ltd. In June 2019, we made a payment of $1.5 million to F-star Ltd upon the achievement of a specified preclinical milestone in our ETV:IDS program.
Under the terms of the original F-star Collaboration Agreement, we could nominate up to three Fcab targets (“Accepted Fcab Targets”) within the first three years of the date of the F-star Collaboration Agreement. Upon entering into the F-star Collaboration Agreement, we selected transferrin receptor (“TfR”) as the first Accepted Fcab Target and paid F-star Gamma an upfront fee of $5.5 million, which included selection of the first Accepted Fcab Target. In May 2018, we exercised our right to nominate two additional Fcab Targets and identified a second Accepted Fcab Target. We made a one-time payment for the two additional Accepted Fcab Targets of $6.0 million in the aggregate and extended the time period for our selection of the third Accepted Fcab Target until approximately the fourth anniversary of the date of the original F-star Collaboration Agreement, or August 2020. We did not identify a third Fcab Target.
We recognized $1.5 million of consideration as research and development expense in the year ended December 31, 2019, after which $19.8 million of total consideration was recognized, which remains unchanged through December 31, 2021. No research and development expense was recognized for consideration under the F-star Purchase Agreement in the years ended December 31, 2021. We recognized an additional $0.1 million, $1.2 million and $1.1 million of research and development expense related to the funding of F-star research costs for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In July 2021, we executed a side letter to our agreements with F-star which confirmed the completion of the research services performed by F-star Ltd that were funded by us.
Genentech
In June 2016, we entered into an Exclusive License Agreement with Genentech. The agreement gives us access to Genentech’s LRRK2 inhibitor program. As consideration to date, we have paid Genentech $12.5 million in the aggregate, including an upfront fee, a technology transfer fee and a clinical milestone payment, all of which was recorded as research and development expense as incurred. No amounts were recorded in the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020. The first clinical milestone payment of $12.5 million was recorded as research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2017.
We may owe Genentech milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, up to a maximum of $315.0 million in the aggregate. These milestones include up to $37.5 million in clinical milestone payments, $102.5 million in regulatory milestone payments and $175.0 million in commercial milestone payments. In addition, we may owe royalties on net sales of licensed products ranging from low to high single-digit percentages, with the exact royalty rate dependent on various factors, including (i) whether the compound incorporated in the relevant licensed product is a Genentech-provided compound or a compound acquired or developed by us, (ii) the date a compound was first discovered, derived or optimized by us, (iii) the existence of patent rights covering the relevant licensed product in the relevant country, (iv) the existence of orphan drug exclusivity covering a licensed product that is a Genentech-provided compound and (v) the level of annual net sales of the relevant licensed product. We also have the right to credit a certain amount of third-party royalty and milestone payments against royalty and milestone payments owed to Genentech, up to a maximum reduction of fifty percent. Under the terms of our LRRK2 Agreement with Biogen, Biogen is responsible for 50% of any payment obligation to Genentech under this agreement accruing after October 2020.
Unless earlier terminated, the agreement with Genentech will continue in effect until all of our royalty and milestone payment obligations to Genentech expire. Following expiration of the agreement, we will retain the licenses under the intellectual property Genentech licensed to us on a non-exclusive, royalty-free basis.
Components of Operating Results
Collaboration Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales for the foreseeable future. All revenue recognized to date has been collaboration and license revenue from our collaboration agreements with Takeda, Sanofi and Biogen.
In the future, we will continue to recognize revenue from the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, Sanofi Collaboration Agreement, and Biogen Collaboration Agreement, and may generate revenue from product sales or milestones, royalties and cost reimbursement from other collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We expect that our revenue will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year as a result of the timing and amount of license fees, milestones, reimbursement of costs incurred and other payments and product sales, to the extent any are successfully commercialized. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development activities account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We record research and development expenses as incurred. Research and development expenses incurred by us for the discovery and development of our product candidates and BBB platform technology include:
• external research and development expenses, including:
-expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research organizations ("CROs"), preclinical testing organizations, contract development and manufacturing organizations ("CDMOs"), academic and non-profit institutions and consultants;
-expenses to acquire technologies to be used in research and development that have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use;
-fees related to our license and collaboration agreements;
•personnel related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense; and
•other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs.
A portion of our research and development expenses are direct external expenses, which we track on a program-specific basis once a program has commenced late-stage IND-enabling studies.
Program expenses include expenses associated with our most advanced product candidates and the discovery and development of backup or next-generation molecules. We also track external expenses associated with our TV platform. These expenses include those incurred by us relating to our Takeda Collaboration Agreement, Sanofi Collaboration Agreement and Biogen Collaboration Agreement. All external costs associated with earlier stage programs, or that benefit the entire portfolio, are tracked as a group. We do not track personnel or other operating expenses incurred for our research and development programs on a program-specific basis. These expenses primarily relate to salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, facility expenses including rent and depreciation, and lab consumables.
Where we share costs with our collaboration partners, such as in our Biogen Collaboration Agreement and Takeda Collaboration Agreement, research and development expenses may include cost sharing reimbursements from or payments to our partner, respectively.
It is challenging to predict the nature, timing and estimated long-range costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of, and obtain regulatory approval for, any of our product candidates. This is made more challenging by events outside of our control, such as the recent COVID-19 pandemic. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales or licensing of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with drug development, including the uncertainty of:
•our ability to add and retain key research and development personnel;
•our ability to establish an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies;
•our ability to successfully develop, obtain regulatory approval for, and then successfully commercialize, our product candidates;
•our successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•the costs associated with the development of any additional product candidates we identify in-house or acquire through collaborations;
•our ability to discover, develop and utilize biomarkers to demonstrate target engagement, pathway engagement and the impact on disease progression of our molecules;
•our ability to establish agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing, if our product candidates are approved;
•the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any milestone payments thereunder;
•our ability to obtain and maintain patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates if and when approved;
•our receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•our ability to commercialize products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
•the continued acceptable safety profiles of the product candidates following approval.
A change in any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate. We expect our research and development expenses to increase at least over the next several years as we continue to implement our business strategy, advance our current programs, expand our research and development efforts, seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, access and develop additional product candidates and incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts. In addition, product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally incur higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include personnel-related expenses, such as salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense, expenses for outside professional services and allocated expenses. Outside professional services consist of legal, accounting and audit services and other consulting fees. Allocated expenses consist of rent, depreciation and other expenses related to our office and research and development facility not otherwise included in research and development expenses. We expect to increase our administrative headcount as we advance our product candidates through clinical development, which will increase our general and administrative expenses.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net, consists primarily of interest income and investment income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, gains and losses on foreign currency hedges, and sublease income.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations (in thousands): __________________________________________________
*Percentage is not meaningful.
Collaboration revenue. Collaboration revenue was $48.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $335.7 million recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $287.0 million was primarily due to $307.4 million of revenue recognized under our Biogen Collaboration Agreement in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with $3.7 million recognized in the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease of $303.7 million was partially offset by increases in revenue recognized under our Takeda Collaboration Agreement and Sanofi Collaboration Agreement of $2.8 million and $13.9 million, respectively.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses were $265.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $212.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by program and category (in thousands):_________________________________________________
*Percentage is not meaningful.
(1)Personnel-related expenses include stock-based compensation expense of $50.0 million and $29.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, reflecting an increase of $21.0 million.
(2)Cost sharing reimbursements include $6.5 million and $9.3 million from Biogen during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which relate to LRRK2 program external expenses and LRRK2 program internal expenses which are included within Personnel-related expenses, and $13.7 million from Takeda during the year ended December 31, 2021, which relates to PTV:PGRN and ATV:TREM2 program external and internal expenses, which are included within TV platform and other program external expenses, and Personnel related expenses, respectively.
The increase in research and development expenses of approximately $52.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
•an increase of $31.4 million in personnel-related expenses, consisting of a $21.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense primarily attributable to additional equity award grants, and an $10.4 million increase in salaries and related expenses attributable to an increase in our research and development headcount;
•increases of $14.7 million and $6.4 million in ETV:IDS and eIF2B program external expenses, respectively, reflecting the progress of these programs in clinical trials during 2021;
•increases of $20.1 million and $4.1 million in TV platform and other program specific external expenses, and other (non-program specific) external research and development expenses, respectively, reflecting the progress in our TV platform PTV:PGRN and ATV:TREM2 programs as well our continued investment in developing a robust pipeline; and
•$2.9 million of increased other unallocated research and development expenses, primarily due to a $1.6 million increase in lab consumable expenses and $1.5 million of increases in general IT and infrastructure costs associated with supporting a growing workforce.
These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $15.9 million in the LRRK2 program external expenses primarily due to completion of the phase 1 and 1b trials of BIIB122/DNL151 and an $11.0 million increase in cost sharing reimbursements from collaboration partners, which are recognized as an offset to research and development expenses.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses were $79.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $60.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $18.8 million was primarily attributable to the following:
•$16.9 million of increased personnel-related expenses, driven by higher general and administrative headcount and stock-based compensation expense associated with additional equity award grants;
•$2.9 million of increased other general costs, primarily attributable to insurance, tax and IT related expenses; and
• $0.5 million of increased facilities related expenses, including depreciation expense.
These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $1.5 million in legal and other professional services expenses due to costs incurred in 2020 associated with the execution of the Biogen Collaboration Agreement.
Interest and other income, net. Interest and other income, net was $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $4.6 million was primarily due to decreased income earned on our investments due to declining interest rates.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We fund our operations primarily with the proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, and payments received from our collaboration agreements with Takeda, Sanofi and Biogen.
In our January 2020 follow-on offering, we sold 9.0 million shares of common stock (inclusive of shares sold pursuant to an overallotment option granted to the underwriters in connection with the offering) through an underwritten public offering at a price of $23.00 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $193.9 million.
Pursuant to our collaboration agreements with Takeda, Sanofi and Biogen, through December 31, 2021 we have received upfront, option and milestone payments of $81.0 million, $150.0 million, and $560.0 million, respectively. Pursuant to our collaboration agreements with Biogen and Sanofi, we have also received $14.5 million and $11.4 million of cost sharing reimbursements and reimbursements for performance of Retained Activities, respectively, through December 31, 2021.
Further, under associated stock purchase agreements with Takeda and Biogen, through December 31, 2021 we have received $110.0 million and $465.0 million, respectively, for the sale and issuance of shares of our common stock to collaboration partners.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities in the amount of $1.3 billion.
Future Funding Requirements and Commitments
To date, we have not generated any product revenue. We do not expect to generate any product revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates, and we do not know when, or if, either will occur.
We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we expand our research and development activities and continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved products. Further, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we continue to incur additional costs associated with supporting our growing operations. We are subject to all of the risks typically related to the development of new product candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of revenue from the commercialization of our product candidates or from our existing collaboration agreements, or future agreements with other third parties, if ever, we expect to finance our future cash needs through public or private equity or debt financings. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders, increased fixed payment obligations and the existence of securities with rights that may be senior to those of our common stock. If we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations and potentially impair our competitiveness, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Additionally, any future collaborations we enter into with third parties may provide capital in the near term but limit our potential cash flow and revenue in the future. Any of the foregoing could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
We have incurred significant net losses in every year since our inception until the year ended December 31, 2021, including net losses $290.6 million and $197.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019, respectively. We had net income of $71.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of revenue recognized associated with our collaboration arrangement with Biogen. We have also experienced negative cash flow from operations in every year since our inception, excluding the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, in which we received significant cash inflows from collaboration partners. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $645.0 million. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we conduct and expand our research and development activities. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to enable us to fund our projected operations through at least the 12 months following the filing date of this Form 10-K, including our existing commitments as outlined below. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. In the longer term, we anticipate that we will need substantial additional resources to fund our operations and meet future commitments.
Our existing commitments primarily relate to our obligations under existing lease agreements and the DMSA with Lonza Sales AG ("Lonza") for the development and manufacture of biologic products. As of December 31, 2021, operating lease liabilities were $64.0 million. Under the SLC lease which has not yet commenced, we have future undiscounted lease payments totaling approximately $12.5 million. Under the DMSA with Lonza, we had total non-refundable purchase commitments of $28.3 million as of December 31, 2021, with certain amounts subject to cost sharing with Takeda. Further, in the normal course of business, we enter into various firm purchase commitments primarily related to research and development activities. We had contractual obligations under other development and manufacturing agreements of $11.5 million as of December 31, 2021, with certain amounts subject to cost sharing with Takeda. In addition, we had firm purchase commitments related to manufacturing equipment for the SLC Facility of $8.0 million and other commitments of $1.7 million as of December 31, 2021. While the lease obligations span multiple years, the vast majority of the purchase commitments with Lonza and other obligations are due within 12 months. These commitments are more fully described in Note 9, "Commitments and Contingencies" to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our future funding requirements, including changes to and new commitments, will depend on many factors, including:
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
•the number and scope of preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•the progress of the development efforts of third parties with whom we have entered into license and collaboration agreements;
•our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and to establish new research and development, license or collaboration arrangements;
•our ability and success in securing manufacturing relationships with third parties or in establishing and operating a manufacturing facility;
•the costs involved in prosecuting, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims;
•the cost and timing of regulatory approvals;
•our efforts to enhance operational, financial and information management systems and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates; and
•the costs and ongoing investments to in-license and/or acquire additional technologies.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Net Cash Used In Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $211.4 million, which consisted of a net loss of $290.6 million, adjusted by non-cash items primarily related to stock-based compensation, net amortization of premiums on marketable securities and depreciation. Cash used in operating activities was also driven by changes in our operating assets and liabilities.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $21.6 million, which primarily consisted of $1,422.9 million of purchases of marketable securities partially offset by $1,409.8 million in proceeds from the maturity of marketable securities.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $19.3 million, which consisted entirely of the proceeds from the exercise of options to purchase common stock and issuance of shares pursuant to our employee stock purchase plan ("ESPP").
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenues recognized and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies are described in detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. We believe that the following accounting estimates involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty which could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue associated with our collaboration arrangements, which may require us to exercise considerable judgment in estimating revenue to be recognized, including judgments made on day one accounting and judgments associated with the amount of revenue to be recognized over time as performance obligations are satisfied.
Significant judgment is required to apply the authoritative accounting guidance at the outset of a collaboration arrangement, and over time, as detailed below:
•Identification of performance obligations - there is judgment involved in identifying the promised goods or services in the collaboration agreement, determining whether these are distinct in the context of the contract, and determining if these represent a performance obligation to a customer. These determinations are highly subjective and can differ between arrangement based on specific contractual terms. The identified performance obligations will impact most significantly the timing of revenue recognition, and is a point-in-time assessment performed at the outset of a collaboration arrangement.
•Measurement of the transaction price - determining the transaction price includes varying levels of judgment. Where amounts are fixed and paid, such as upfront payments, estimation is not required. However, other elements of the transaction price do require estimation or assumptions by management. The calculation of a share issuance premium requires the use of a valuation model for purposes of determining the fair value of the shares for financial reporting purposes, with any resulting premium impacting the transaction price. An assumption needs to be made regarding whether future variable consideration, such as milestone payments, are constrained, which also requires management judgment. The measurement of transaction price impacts the measurement of revenue, and is performed both at the outset of a collaboration arrangement and at each reporting period. To date, we have not recognized any adjustments to revenue as a result of an adjustment to variable consideration constraint.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations - there is significant judgment required to allocate the transaction price to performance obligations. Generally, this is done by estimating the standalone selling price of identified performance obligations, and allocating on a relative value basis. The estimate of standalone selling price includes several assumptions that cannot be observed, which may include forecasted revenue (for products not yet on the market), development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. The standalone selling price of performance obligations can be very sensitive to many of these underlying assumptions, which are based on management estimates since they cannot be observed. This is a point-in-time assessment performed at the outset of a collaboration arrangement.
•Recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation - determining the timing of revenue recognition includes varying levels of judgment. For revenue types recognized at a point in time, such as functional IP, there can be some judgment as to when the performance obligation has been satisfied. For revenue recognized over time, this is often based on an underlying measure deemed to approximate the progress towards satisfaction of performance obligations. These underlying measures, such as costs incurred to date compared with total forecasted costs for a service, may include inherent estimates, which in turn can impact the timing of revenue recognition. The satisfaction of performance obligations assessment is performed at each reporting period. To date, there have been no material true ups to revenue as a result of changes in the satisfaction of performance obligations.
Research and Development Expenses
A significant portion of our research and development expenses in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss are external costs, which we track on a program-specific basis once a program has commenced a late-stage IND-enabling study. These research and development expenses include the conduct of preclinical studies and clinical trials, contract manufacturing activities and consulting services. The measurement of these research and development expenses can impact the measurement of research and development expenses in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss, and of prepaid assets and accrued liabilities on the balance sheet.
The level of judgment required to estimate research and development expenses varies based on the nature of the services being performed and the underlying support obtained. We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, incomplete or inaccurate data from vendors could impact our understanding of the status and timing of services performed which could result in us reporting expenses that are too high or too low in any particular period.
We do not need to make significant estimates where costs incurred are supported by invoices or reports of costs incurred are obtained from a vendor that is directly performing the underlying services, such as a consultant or contract manufacturing organization. In some cases, however, expense is recorded using an underlying assumption of the progress to completion of specific activities. For example, costs may be recognized based on the passage of time for activities that span reporting periods. If the provision of services is not linear then this assumption could impact the amount of expense recognized. For other activities, such as for certain clinical trials, expense is recorded based on information obtained from vendors as an intermediary to those performing the underlying services, such as contract research organizations. These estimates are inherently more judgmental since the quality and availability of the underlying data may vary. To date, there have been no material true ups from estimated to actual external research and development expenses. However, we expect that the level of judgment in estimating research and development expenses may increase over time as we enter later stage, more extensive, clinical trials.
Research and development expenses also include reimbursements owed or owing to a collaboration partner to satisfy cost sharing requirements. These reimbursement amounts are estimated based, in part, on data received from our collaboration partner, which may include a certain level of estimation or judgments made by that partner. They also reflect our estimates of research and development expense as discussed above. As such, a change in estimates or judgments by either our partner or us can result in a change to a reimbursement amount. To date, there have been no material true ups from estimated to actual reimbursements owed or owing.
Leases
Management exercises judgment in applying the requirements of ASC 842, including the determination as to whether certain contracts contain a lease, the type of lease in an arrangement, whether there are separate lease components, the lease consideration, and the commencement date of the lease. Further, there is significant judgment in determining the discount rate to use in estimating the lease right of use ("ROU") asset and lease liability. The discount rate is estimated using the rate implicit in the lease, if known, or alternatively is based on an estimate of our incremental borrowing rate on the date of lease commencement. A change in these assumptions could result in changes in the timing and measurement of rent expense, ROU asset and lease liability. To date, there have been no material changes to estimates relating to lease arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.