ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. See the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the section entitled “Risk Factors” or elsewhere in this Report. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we”, “us”, “our”, “Danimer”, “Danimer Scientific”, and the “Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Danimer and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Introductory Note
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations describes the business historically operated by Meredian Holdings Group and its subsidiaries (“Legacy Danimer”) under the “Danimer Scientific” name as an independent enterprise prior to December 29, 2020.
On December 29, 2020, the registrant, Live Oak Acquisition Corp. (“Live Oak”), merged with and into Legacy Danimer, with Legacy Danimer surviving as the surviving company (“Business Combination”) and as a wholly owned subsidiary of Live Oak, and changed its name from Live Oak Acquisition Corp. to Danimer Scientific, Inc. (“Danimer”). Live Oak Acquisition Corp. (“Live Oak”) was incorporated in the State of Delaware on May 24, 2019 as a special purpose acquisition company formed for the purpose of effecting a business combination with one or more businesses. Live Oak completed its initial public offering in May 2020.
On August 11, 2021, we closed the acquisition of Novomer, Inc. (“Novomer”) in exchange for $153.9 million in cash, gross of cash acquired, subject to certain customary adjustments as set forth in the merger agreement. Novomer's financial results are included in those of the Company from that date forward. In 2020, Novomer generated no revenue and incurred a net loss of $9.1 million. Novomer utilizes feedstocks as an input into its proprietary thermal catalytic conversion process to produce a unique type of PHA or p(3HP) or otherwise referred to under its brand name as Rinnovo.
Overview
We are a performance polymer company specializing in bioplastic replacement for traditional petroleum-based plastics. We bring together innovative technologies to deliver biodegradable bioplastic materials to global consumer product companies. We believe that we are the only commercial company in the bioplastics market to combine the production of a base polymer along with the reactive extrusion capacity in order to give customers a “drop-in” replacement for a wide variety of petroleum-based plastics. We derive our revenue from product sales of PLA- and PHA-based resins as well as from services such as R&D and tolling.
PHA-based Resins: We are a leading producer of polyhydroxyalkanoate (“PHA”), a biodegradable plastic alternative, which we sell under the proprietary Nodax brand name, for use in a wide variety of plastic applications including straws and food containers, among other things. We make Nodax through a fermentation process where bacteria consume vegetable oil and make PHA within their cell walls as energy reserves. We harvest the PHA from the bacteria, then purify and filter the bioplastic before forming the PHA into pellets, which we combine with other inputs using a reactive extrusion process to manufacture formulated finished product. PHAs are a complete replacement for petroleum-based plastics where the convertors do not have to purchase new equipment to switch to the new biodegradable plastic. Utilizing PHA as a base resin significantly expands the number of potential applications for bioplastics in the industry and enables us to produce resin that is not just compostable, but also fully biodegradable.
We recently began making PHA on a commercial scale. In December 2018, we acquired a fermentation facility in Winchester, Kentucky (“Kentucky Facility”). We embarked on a two-phase commissioning strategy for the Kentucky Facility. Phase II construction is underway with production expected to commence in the second quarter of 2022, which will expand the capacity of the plant by 45 million pounds of finished product, bringing total plant capacity up to 65 million pounds of finished product per year. We have invested approximately $114 million of the approximate budgeted $128 million, in the Phase II expansion through December 31, 2021, excluding pre-engineering costs, capitalized interest and internal labor and overhead.
In November 2021, we broke ground for the construction of a PHA plant in Bainbridge, Georgia ("Greenfield Facility") that would require a capital investment of approximately $500 million to $612 million with a planned annual production capacity of approximately 125 million pounds of finished product. Through December 31, 2021, we have invested approximately $77 million in the Greenfield Facility, excluding capitalized interest and internal labor. We may add additional capacity to the Greenfield Facility at a future date.
We currently anticipate spending between $100 million to $180 million on the Rinnovo plant. Once the Rinnovo plant is completed and after making some additional investments in extrusion capacity, the Danimer network is expected to have production capacity of approximately 330 million pounds of PHA-based finished product resins when blended with other inputs. Danimer also expects to have approximately 60 million pounds of Rinnovo remaining to sell on a standalone basis or in formulations that don't include Nodax.
PLA-based Resins: Since 2004, we have been producing proprietary plastics using a natural plastic called polylactic acid (“PLA”) as a base resin. PLA has limited functionality in its unformulated, or “neat,” form. We purchase PLA and formulate it into bioplastic resins by leveraging the expertise of our chemists and our proprietary reactive extrusion process. Our formulated PLA products allow many companies to begin to use renewable and compostable plastics to meet their customers’ growing sustainability needs. We were the first company in the world to create a bioplastic suitable for coating disposable paper cups to withstand the temperatures of hot liquids such as coffee. We have expanded our product portfolio and now supply customers globally.
Research and Development and Other Services: Our technology team partners with global consumer product companies to develop custom biopolymer formulations for specific applications. R&D contracts are designed to develop a formulated resin using PHA, PLA and other biopolymers that can be run efficiently on existing conversion equipment. We expect successful R&D contracts to culminate in supply agreements with the customers. Our R&D services not only provide revenue but also a pipeline of future products.
In addition to producing our own products, we also toll manufacture for customers that need the unique extruder or reactor setup we employ for new or scale-up production. Our specialty tolling services primarily involve processing customer-owned raw materials to assist them in addressing their extrusion capacity constraints or manufacturing challenges.
Comparability of Financial Information
Our results of operations may not be comparable between periods as a result of the Business Combination and the acquisition of Novomer.
As a result of the Business Combination, we are an SEC-registered and NYSE-listed company, which will require us to continue to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Report titled “Risk Factors.”
Factors Impacting Our Revenue
We derive our revenue from product sales of PHA- and PLA-based resins as well as from services such as R&D and tolling.
Our product revenue is significantly impacted by our ability to continue to successfully scale the Kentucky Facility for commercial production of PHA. The completion of Phase II of the Kentucky Facility will significantly increase our capacity to produce PHA, which is in high demand by our customers. Using our PHAs as base resin significantly expands the number of potential applications for bioplastics and also enables us to produce a resin that is not just compostable, but also fully biodegradable. Since we just recently introduced our PHA on a commercial scale, our product revenues are also impacted by the timing and success of customer trials as well as product degradation testing and certifications. Our product revenue from PLA-based resins is primarily impacted by the effective launch of new product offerings in new markets by our customers as well as the ability of our suppliers to continue to grow their production capacity of neat PLA. Finally, our product revenue is impacted by our ability to deliver biopolymer formulations that can be efficiently run on customer conversion equipment and meet customer application specifications and requirements.
We have a fairly low number of customers. In 2021, we had two customers that each accounted for more than 10% of total revenue and collectively represented 35% of total revenue. In 2020, we had three such customers that collectively represented 58% of total revenue.
Our service revenue is primarily impacted by the timing of, and execution against, customer contracts. Research and development services generally involve milestone-based contracts to develop PHA-based solutions designed to a customer’s specifications. Upon the completion of research and development contracts, customers generally have the option to enter into long-term supply agreements with us for the developed product solutions. Our ability to grow our service revenue depends on our ability to achieve a track record of developing successful biopolymer formulations for our customers and our ability to effectively transition those customer formulations to commercial scale production.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Expenses
Costs of revenue
Cost of revenue is comprised of costs of goods sold and direct costs associated with research and development service projects. Costs of goods sold consists of raw materials and ingredients, labor costs including stock-based compensation for production staff, related production overhead, rent and depreciation costs. Costs associated with research and development service contracts include labor costs, related overhead costs and outside consulting and testing fees incurred in direct relation to the specific service contract.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense consists of salaries, marketing expense, corporate administration expenses, stock-based compensation not allocated to research and development or costs of revenue personnel, and elements of depreciation, rent and facility expenses that are not directly attributable to direct costs of production or associated with research and development activities.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense includes salaries, stock-based compensation, third-party consulting and testing fees, and rent and related facility expenses directly attributable to research and development activities not associated with revenue generating service projects.
Impacts Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 to be a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. In response, government authorities have issued an evolving set of mandates, including requirements to shelter-in-place, curtail business operations, restrict travel and avoid physical interaction. These mandates and the continued spread of COVID-19 have disrupted normal business activities in many segments of the global economy, resulting in weakened economic conditions. Government mandates have been lifted by certain public authorities and economic conditions have improved in certain sectors of the economy. Certain regions of the world have experienced increasing numbers of COVID-19 cases, however, and if this continues and if public authorities intensify efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19, normal business activity may be further disrupted and economic conditions could weaken.
Our ability to continue to operate without any significant negative impacts will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. We have endeavored to follow actions recommended by governments and health authorities to protect our employees, with particular measures in place for those working in our manufacturing and laboratory facilities. We have been able to broadly maintain our operations, and we intend to continue to work with our stakeholders (including customers, employees, suppliers and local communities) to responsibly address this global pandemic. However, uncertainty resulting from the global pandemic could result in an unforeseen disruption to our supply chain (for example a closure of a key manufacturing or distribution facility or the inability of a key material or transportation supplier to source and transport materials) that could impact our operations.
Although our revenue has continued to grow during the ongoing global pandemic, we believe that some of our customers have deferred decision making and commitments regarding future orders and new contracts. The global pandemic has also resulted in elevated shipping costs as well as delays in performing trials with new customers and obtaining certification for new products. During this period and especially prior to the merger, we have delayed certain capital expenditures in order to conserve financial resources, resulting in a slower than expected scale up of the Kentucky Facility. We have not observed any material impairments of our assets or a significant change in the fair value of assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
For additional information on risk factors that could impact our results, please refer to “Risk Factors” located elsewhere in this Report.
Current Developments
During our fiscal year, we made further inroads in our mission to create biodegradable consumer packaging and other products which address the global plastics waste crisis, building on our team’s many accomplishments since we became a public company in late 2020 by:
•Acquiring and integrating Novomer;
•Continuing Phase II of the expansion of our Kentucky Facility on track for completion by Q2 2022;
•Negotiating development and supply agreements with Mars and Total Corbion PLA;
•Breaking ground on the Greenfield Facility; and
•Issuing $240 million of convertible notes to assist with funding capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported periods. The more critical accounting estimates include estimates related to revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, leases and business combinations. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results, which are described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from product sales and services in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine which are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We derive our revenues from: 1) product sales of compostable resins; and 2) research and development (R&D) services related to developing customized formulations of biodegradable resins based on PHA as well as tolling revenues.
We generally produce and sell finished products and we typically recognize revenue for these sales upon shipment. Due to the highly specialized nature of our products, returns are infrequent, and therefore we do not estimate amounts for sales returns and allowances. We offer a standard quality assurance warranty related to the fitness of our finished goods. There are no forms of variable consideration such as discounts, rebates, or volume discounts that we estimate to reduce our transaction price.
R&D service revenues generally involve milestone-based contracts under which we work with a customer to develop a PHA-based specific solution designed to the customer’s specifications, which may involve a single or multiple performance obligations. When an R&D contract has multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations utilizing a cost-plus approach to estimate the stand-alone selling price, which contemplates the level of effort to satisfy the performance obligations, and then allocate the transaction price to each of the performance obligations based on the relative percentage of the stand-alone selling price. We recognize revenue for these R&D services over time with progress based on personnel hours incurred to date as a percentage of total estimated personnel hours for each performance obligation identified within the contract. Upon completion of the R&D services, the customers have an option to enter into long-term supply agreements with us for the product(s) that were developed within the respective contracts. We concluded these customer options were marketing offers, not separate performance obligations, since the options did not provide a material right to any of our customers.
Stock-based Compensation
We have granted stock-based awards to employees with vesting requirements based on duration of service only, a combination of market-based and service-based conditions, and a combination of performance-based and service-based conditions. We recognize expense associated with service-based only condition awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recognize expense associated with awards with market-based or performance-based vesting conditions on a straight-line basis over the longest of the explicit, implicit or derived service period term of the award.
We use a Black-Scholes option pricing model to value stock option awards and we value for restricted stock awards without a market-based component at the price of our common stock. For awards with a market-based component, we use a Monte Carlo simulation. Instruments that may be settled in cash are recorded as liabilities and are revalued each period. All other instruments qualify as equity and are valued only at the grant date. For more information about our methods of valuation, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We record the effects of forfeitures as they occur.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases, and we determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. We record right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for operating leases based on the present value of the future lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most of the leases do not provide a readily determinable rate implicit in the lease, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date, such as rates recently offered to us by lenders on proposed borrowings, in determining the present value of future payments. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease, typically at our own discretion. We evaluate the renewal options at commencement and if they are reasonably certain of exercise, we include the renewal period in the lease term.
Business Combinations
We recognize assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated acquisition date fair values, with the excess of purchase price over the estimated fair values of identifiable net assets recorded as goodwill. Assigning fair values may require us to make significant estimates and assumptions regarding the fair value of identifiable intangible assets, property, plant and equipment, or other assets or liabilities. We may refine these estimates if necessary over a period not to exceed one year by taking into consideration new information that, if known at the acquisition date, would have affected the fair values recognized for assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Significant estimates and assumptions are used in estimating the value of acquired identifiable intangible assets, including estimating future cash flows based on forecasted revenues and EBITDA margins that we expect to generate following the acquisition and applying an appropriate discount rate to estimate a present value of those cash flows and determining their useful lives. These assumptions are forward-looking and their realization will be affected by future economic and market conditions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recently issued accounting standards applicable to us is included in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Consolidated Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue in 2021 increased 24% as compared to 2020, driven by a year-over-year increase in product revenue of 25%. Shipment volume in 2021 as compared to 2020 increased 17% and our weighted average selling price increased 6% for the same periods. This increase in product revenue was attributable to an increase in PHA-based product sales of $16.3 million, which was partially offset by a decrease in PLA-based product sales of $6.2 million. This increase in PHA-based product sales was the result of the continued increase of production capacity at our Kentucky Facility. The decrease in PLA-based product sales was primarily the result of some of our PLA customers deciding to increase their inventory levels in 2020 to protect against potential supply chain disruptions that might arise due to the spread of the COVID-19 virus. Once these higher inventory levels were achieved, certain of these customers slowed their orders beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020 and continuing for much of 2021. The 2021 increase in service revenue as compared to 2020 relates primarily to increased revenue from research and development contracts as we continue to address customer demand for new applications by expanding our capacity in this area by adding personnel and equipment.
We had two customers that accounted for 35% of total revenue during 2021, as compared to three customers that accounted for 58% of total revenue during 2020.
Cost of revenue and gross profit
Cost of revenue in 2021 increased 61% compared to 2020. The increase in cost of revenue is primarily a result of the cost of PHA-based products representing a significantly larger portion of our total cost of revenue during 2021 than in 2020. The average cost per pound of PHA-based products sold in 2021 was significantly higher than that of PLA-based products due to (1) increasing depreciation costs as we placed additional PHA production capacity in service and (2) elevated per-unit fixed-cost absorption at our Kentucky Facility as we ran these new assets at less than full capacity while scaling up production. Included in the increase in cost of revenue was a $4.4 million increase in depreciation expense and a $0.5 million increase in rent expense. We anticipate that our per-unit fixed-cost absorption will improve as rent, depreciation and other fixed costs become a smaller portion of our overall cost of revenue, as PHA production output at the Kentucky Facility continues to increase.
Operating expense
The increase in selling, general and administrative expense in 2021 as compared to 2020 was due primarily to an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $45.5 million, which was primarily related to equity awards that were granted in conjunction with the Business Combination. Also contributing to this increase were $3.2 million in legal fees incurred to support our transition to becoming a publicly-traded company, our acquisition of Novomer in August 2021 and our defense against ongoing litigation; $2.6 million in other Novomer deal-related expenses; an increase of $1.8 million in accounting and auditing fees representing costs incurred to address the financial reporting requirements of becoming a public company; a $2.4 million increase in property and other insurance costs associated with our growing asset base; increases in compensation and benefits related to hiring additional finance and administrative staff; and incremental operating expenses arising from the inclusion of Novomer in our results starting in mid-August 2021. The increase in research and development expense year over year was primarily attributed to increases in stock-based compensation expense of $6.8 million primarily related to equity awards granted in conjunction with the Business Combination, $3.7 million of incremental R&D expenses attributable to Novomer's operations (inclusive of depreciation and amortization), and increased compensation and benefits costs of $1.9 million related to additional headcount in the research and development areas.
Gain on remeasurement of private warrants
The gains on remeasurement of private warrants primarily reflect “mark-to-market” adjustments reflecting the change in the price of our common stock during each year. The 2020 gain is based on the change in the price of our common stock between the Business Combination date of December 29, 2020 and December 31, 2020.
Interest, net
Net interest expense in 2021 decreased by $1.3 million as compared to 2020. Interest expense decreased primarily due to the payoff of the 2019 Term Loan in January 2021, the settlement of convertible notes into equity in December 2020, and the extinguishment of certain loans issued in connection with the New Market Tax Credit program. This decrease was partially offset by capitalized interest declining to $0.6 million in 2021 from $3.7 million in 2020. The interest capitalization primarily relates to the purchase, modification and installation of machinery and equipment at the Kentucky Facility and declined due to a reduction in debt balances when comparing the annual periods.
Gain on forgiveness of debt and loss on extinguishment of debt
During 2021, we recognized a loss of $2.6 million due to the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs and prepayments and other fees related to the voluntary pay off of our 2019 Term Loan balance, which was partially offset by the $1.8 million gain recognized from the forgiveness of our PPP Loan. During 2020, we recognized a gain of $5.3 million on the extinguishment of New Markets Tax Credit (“NMTC”) loans, as further described in Note 9 of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income taxes
In 2021, we recorded significant deferred tax liabilities in connection with the acquisition of Novomer. As a result, we expect to realize certain of our deferred tax assets to offset these liabilities and we have released the valuation allowance associated with these deferred tax assets. This release of valuation allowance has been recorded as a tax benefit of $13.2 million in the current period. Other than the release of the valuation allowance related to the Novomer acquisition, we continued to maintain a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets due to the uncertainty surrounding realization of such assets. There have been no significant changes in estimated uncertain tax benefits as of December 31, 2021. In 2020, we had no income tax expense or benefit since we were maintaining a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets. Our effective tax rates differed from the federal statutory rate of 21% due to our net loss position and maintaining a full valuation allowance, other than as noted in connection with the acquisition of Novomer in the current period.
Net loss
The increase in net loss in 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to the stock-based compensation expenses and the lower gross profit as discussed above, partially offset by the larger gain on remeasurement of the private warrants and the 2021 income tax benefit of $13.2 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Management’s Discussion and Analysis comparing the results for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in our Form 10-K/A for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are equity issuances and debt financings. We had accumulated deficits of $118.9 million and $58.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had $286.5 million in cash and cash equivalents and working capital of $296.9 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $377.6 million in cash and cash equivalents and working capital of $351.9 million. While we believe we have developed an ongoing source of revenue that will be sufficient to cover our ongoing operating costs, we are currently experiencing a period of significant capital expenditures resulting from the ongoing expansion and construction of our manufacturing and production facilities.
Excluding pre-engineering costs, capitalized interest and internal labor and overhead, we have invested $113.6 million in the Phase II expansion through December 31, 2021. In total, we expect to invest approximately $128 million for the Phase II expansion by the time it is completed. We broke ground on our Greenfield Facility construction ahead of schedule in November 2021 and started placing orders for long-lead time equipment items to mitigate the impacts of ongoing inflation and delivery delays that may result from global supply chain challenges. As of December 31, 2021, we have invested $77.1 million of capital for the Greenfield Facility. The completion of the Greenfield Facility is contingent upon receiving additional financing. We believe we have adequate liquidity to fund our operations for the next twelve months.
2021 Debt Financings
3.25% Convertible Senior Notes
On December 21, 2021, we issued $240 million principal amount 3.250% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (“Notes”) and governed by an indenture (“Indenture”).
The Notes are our senior, unsecured obligations and are (i) equal in right of payment with our existing and future senior, unsecured indebtedness; (ii) senior in right of payment to our existing and future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated to the Notes; (iii) effectively subordinated to our existing and future secured indebtedness, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing that indebtedness; and (iv) structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables.
The Notes accrue interest at a rate of 3.250% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, beginning on June 15, 2022. The Notes will mature on December 15, 2026. Before June 15, 2026, noteholders have the right to convert their Notes only upon the occurrence of certain events. Starting on June 15, 2026, noteholders may elect to convert their Notes at any time until the close of business on December 11, 2026. We will settle conversions by paying or delivering, as applicable, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. The initial conversion rate is 92.7085 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes, or approximately $10.79 per share of common stock. The conversion rate and conversion price will be subject to customary adjustments upon the occurrence of certain events. In addition, if certain corporate events that constitute a “Make-Whole Fundamental Change” (as defined in the Indenture) occur, then the conversion rate will, in certain circumstances, be increased for a specified period of time.
The Notes will be redeemable at our option between December 19, 2024, and October 20, 2026, but only if certain liquidity conditions are satisfied and the last reported sale price per share of our common stock exceeds 130% of the conversion price on (i) each of at least 20 trading days during the 30 consecutive trading days ending on the trading day before the date we send the related redemption notice; and (ii) the trading day immediately before the date we send such notice. However, we may not redeem less than all of the outstanding notes unless at least $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of notes are outstanding and not called for redemption as of the time we send the related redemption notice. The redemption price will be a cash amount equal to the principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed, plus any accrued interest. In addition, calling any Note for redemption will constitute a Make-Whole Fundamental Change with respect to that Note, in which case the conversion rate applicable to the conversion of that Note will be increased in certain circumstances.
Capped Calls
Also in December 2021, in connection with the Notes, we purchased capped calls (“Capped Calls”) with certain well-capitalized financial institutions for $35 million. The Capped Calls were structured to partially offset the increase in the outstanding number of shares of our common stock should we settle the Notes in shares, or to reduce the net cash outlay required should we settle the Notes in cash. The Capped Calls are call options that permit us, at our option, to require the counterparties to deliver to us shares of our common stock.
The number of shares to be delivered upon such exercise is dependent on the market value of our common stock at the time of exercise, subject to a cap initially equal to $16.92, and an initial strike price of $10.79 per share. The cap and strike price are subject to adjustment in response to specified changes in our capitalization such as stock splits. Considering these unadjusted figures and assuming a cash settlement of the principal amount of the Notes upon a conversion, if we settle the incremental value of the Notes upon conversion with shares when the market price (as measured according to the terms of the Capped Call) of our common stock is between $10.79 and $16.92, we will be able to call shares equal to the number of incremental shares issuable under the Notes. If such stock price is less than that, then the Capped Calls are “out of the money” and we would not exercise them. To the extent such stock price is greater than $16.92, we would be unable to call enough shares under the Capped Calls to entirely offset the number of incremental shares to be issued by us. We may net-settle the Capped Calls and receive cash instead of shares, and the Capped Calls have an outside expiration date of April 12, 2027.
2020 Debt Financings
In January and August of 2020, we issued convertible notes for an aggregate principal amount of $2.7 million. During 2020, these notes were converted to 195,069 shares of Legacy Danimer stock, which was then converted to 1,686,507 shares of our common stock on December 29, 2020.
In April 2020, we received $1.8 million in funds under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP Loan”). In connection with the Business Combination, proceeds at closing were deposited into an escrow account to fully fund repayment of this loan. During 2021, our PPP Loan was forgiven and we received the escrow balance, net of associated fees, of $1.8 million and recognized a gain of $1.8 million. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
2019 Debt Financings
In March 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (“2019 Term Loan”) for a $30 million term loan maturing on October 13, 2023. On January 29, 2021, we terminated the 2019 Term Loan by paying the outstanding principal amount of $27.0 million, a prepayment fee of $0.5 million and $0.2 million in accrued interest.
In March 2019, we entered into a subordinated credit agreement (“Subordinated Term Loan”) for $10 million in term loans. The term loans mature on February 13, 2024 and require monthly interest only payments with the outstanding principal balance due at maturity. After an amendment on March 18, 2021, the base interest rate is the LIBOR plus 2%. The Subordinated Term Loan provides for “springing” financial covenants including leverage ratio, fixed charge coverage ratio and adjusted EBITDA covenants that apply only if Danimer Scientific Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries have less than $10 million of unrestricted cash on deposits and imposes a maximum capital expenditures limit. Our ability to prepay the loan is restricted until after July 1, 2022.
In April and November 2019, we entered into financing arrangements under the NMTC program with various unrelated third-party financial institutions (individually and collectively referred to as “Investors”) in the amounts of $9.0 million and $12.0 million, respectively. Proceeds of these NMTC notes were primarily used to purchase and install new equipment at our facilities in Bainbridge, Georgia, and Winchester, Kentucky. We make interest-only payments on a quarterly basis with interest calculated annually at 1.96% on the $9.0 million note and under the same terms at a rate of 1.06% on the $12.0 million note. As further described in Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, these arrangements also include a put/call feature which becomes enforceable at the end of the seven-year compliance periods whereby we may be obligated or entitled to repurchase the Investor’s interests in each of the Investment Funds for a nominal amount or fair value. We believe the Investors will exercise their put options at the end of the compliance periods for each of the transactions for nominal amounts, which would result in the extinguishment of these NMTC notes payable and a corresponding gain.
2021 Equity Issuances
At December 31, 2020, there were 16,000,000 outstanding warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. Each warrant entitled the holder to purchase one share of our common stock at a price of $11.50. During 2021, warrant holders exercised 12,033,169 warrants. Net of fees, we collected $138.2 million in connection with these exercises.
2020 Equity Issuances
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 516,763 shares of Legacy Danimer common stock for $32.5 million, net of issuance costs. In addition, 184,587 Legacy Danimer employee and nonemployee stock options were exercised for aggregate proceeds of $5.5 million. In connection with the Business Combination, we realized net proceeds after transaction costs of approximately $381 million.
Cash Flows for 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $63.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $13.8 million during the comparable period for 2020. The period-to-period change was primarily attributable to the decline in gross profit related to the scale up of the Kentucky Facility, an increase in operating expenses between the periods, and a $21.7 million increase in cash used to fund changes in working capital.
Cash flows from investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $336.2 million in investing activities which compares to $38.3 million used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to spending $151.2 million, net of cash acquired, for the acquisition of Novomer, as well as spending $185.4 million on purchases of property, plant and equipment in 2021 as compared to $38.3 million in 2020. The increase in purchases of property, plant and equipment was related to capital expenditures incurred in conjunction with the Phase II expansion of the production capacity of our Kentucky Facility and beginning construction of the Greenfield Facility. Through December 31, 2021, we incurred $113.6 million of approximately $128 million planned for the Phase II expansion project and $77.1 million of the $500 million to $612 million planned for the Greenfield Facility.
Cash flows from financing activities
For 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $306.2 million, which consisted primarily of:
•Proceeds of $240.2 million from the issuance of the Notes, offset by $35.0 million used to purchase capped call options
•Proceeds of $138.2 million from exercise of our publicly-traded warrants
•Principal payments on long-term debt of $27.2 million, primarily driven by the voluntary repayment of the 2019 Term Loan in the amount of $27 million
•Payment of debt issuance costs, primarily related to the Notes, of $10.4 million.
For 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $422.7 million, which consisted primarily of:
•Proceeds of $382.1 million from the Business Combination and PIPE offering, net of cash transaction costs
•Proceeds of $32.5 million from sales of common stock, net of issuance costs
•Proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $5.5 million
•Proceeds of $4.5 million from long-term debt
Material Cash Requirements
We enter into a variety of contractual obligations in addition to capital expenditures as part of our normal operations. As of December 31, 2021, we have (i) debt obligations related to our $240.0 million Convertible Notes which mature in 2026 and other non-NMTC debt obligations of $10.9 million, which include cash principal and interest payments through 2026, (ii) operating and finance lease obligations that total $58.1 million in cash payments through 2038, and (iii) purchases related to our capital projects for engineering services, construction services, construction materials and equipment purchases of approximately $72.5 million which we will incur during 2022 and 2023. We expect to fund these cash requirements from cash on hand.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2021, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Currently we do not engage in off-balance sheet financing arrangements.