Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 7, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to as our initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and, since our initial public offering, our activity has been limited to identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, our initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $2,163,886, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $2,695,564, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $17,214, change in fair value of convertible promissory note - related party totaling $169,797 and change in warrant liability fair value of $344,667.
For the period from October 7, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $53,709, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $53,709.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
Until the consummation of our initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of founder shares by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
On January 28, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 28,750,000 units, including the issuance of 3,750,000 units as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per unit, generating total gross proceeds of $287,500,000. Simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of an aggregate of 5,100,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor and Loop Capital at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $7,650,000.
Following our initial public offering and the private placement, a total of $287,500,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $16,309,358 in transaction costs, consisting of $5,750,000 in cash underwriting fees, $10,062,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $496,858 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,598,308. Net loss of $2,163,886 was affected by change in fair value of warrant liability of $344,667, change in fair value of convertible promissory note - related party totaling $169,797, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $17,214, executive compensation of $330,000 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $767,256 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $287,517,214. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (excluding deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held outside the trust account of $855,321. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On September 28, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note to our sponsor, whereby our sponsor has agreed to loan up to $1,000,000 to us for working capital needs. The Sponsor Working Capital Loan accrues no interest on the unpaid principal balance. The Sponsor Working Capital Loan is due on the earlier of (i) the date on which we consummate our initial business combination and (ii) the date that our winding up is effective. At the discretion of our sponsor, the Sponsor Working Capital Loan may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, we had an outstanding balance of $650,000 under the Sponsor Working Capital Loan.
To complete our initial business combination, we may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, our officers or directors or third parties. Other than the Sponsor Working Capital Loan described above, we cannot provide assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through one year from the date of the financial statements if our initial business combination is not consummated. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing to complete our initial business combination because the transaction requires more cash than is available from the proceeds held in the trust account or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Other than the Sponsor Working Capital Loan described above, we do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities. We had agreed, commencing on January 26, 2021, to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space and secretarial and administrative services until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation. On May 25, 2021, we agreed with our sponsor to cease such agreement. Our sponsor is obligated to pay $30,000 per month to Mark Wiltamuth, our Chief Financial Officer, for his services prior to the consummation of our initial business combination until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation, subject to the terms of an agreement between our sponsor and Mr. Wiltamuth that was entered into after the consummation of our initial public offering.
The underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit sold in our initial public offering, or $10,062,500 in the aggregate. Subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement, (i) the deferred fee was placed in the trust account and will be released to the underwriters only upon the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Net income (loss) Per Common Stock Shares
We apply the two-class method in calculating net loss per common stock share. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption amount approximates fair value. The Class feature to redeem at fair value means that there is effectively only one class of stock. Changes in fair value are not considered a dividend of the purposes of the numerator in the earnings per share calculation. Net loss per common stock share is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the Class A common stock and the Class B common stock by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted loss per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants sold in our initial public offering and the private placement since the exercise of such warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. The warrants are exercisable for 14,683,333 shares of Class A common stock in the aggregate.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including common stock shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 28,750,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants
We account for the public warrants and the private placement warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with ASC Topic 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statements of operations in the period of change.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.