Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and our Consolidated Financial Statements (including the Notes thereto) in Item 8 of this report.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and the Predecessor periods from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for Predecessor years 2020 compared to 2019, please refer to Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 10, 2021.
	We provide contract drilling services to the energy industry around the globe with a fleet of 12 offshore drilling rigs, consisting of four drillships and eight semisubmersible rigs as of the date of this report. The Ocean Valor, which we reported as held for sale at December 31, 2021, was sold in February 2022.
Bankruptcy Filing
As previously disclosed, on the Petition Date, the Debtors voluntarily commenced the Chapter 11 Cases seeking relief under Chapter 11 in the Bankruptcy Court. On January 22, 2021, the Debtors entered into the PSA, among the Debtors, certain holders of the Company’s then-existing Senior Notes and certain holders of the RCF Claims under the Company’s then-existing $950.0 million syndicated revolving credit facility. Concurrently, the Debtors entered into the Backstop Agreement with certain holders of Senior Notes and entered into the Commitment Letter (as defined in the PSA) with certain holders of RCF Claims to provide exit financing upon emergence from bankruptcy.
The Debtors filed a joint Chapter 11 plan of reorganization with the Bankruptcy Court on January 22, 2021, which was subsequently amended on February 24, 2021 and February 26, 2021, which we refer to as the Plan. On March 23, 2021, the Debtors filed the plan supplement for the Plan with the Bankruptcy Court, which was subsequently amended on April 6, 2021 and April 22, 2021, which we refer to as the Plan Supplement.
On April 8, 2021, the Bankruptcy Court entered the Confirmation Order confirming the Plan. On April 23, 2021, which we refer to as the Effective Date, all conditions precedent to the Plan were satisfied, the Plan became effective in accordance with its terms, and the Debtors emerged from Chapter 11 reorganization.
See “Business - Reorganization and Chapter 11 Proceedings” in Item 1 of this report, “- Liquidity and Capital Resources” and Note 2 “Chapter 11 Proceedings” and Note 11 “Prepetition Revolving Credit Facility, Senior Notes and Exit Debt” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
Fresh Start Accounting
Upon emergence from bankruptcy, we met the criteria for and were required to adopt fresh start accounting in accordance with ASC 852, which on the Effective Date resulted in a new entity, the Successor, for financial reporting purposes, with no beginning retained earnings or deficit as of the fresh start reporting date. The criteria requiring fresh start accounting are: (i) the holders of the then-existing voting shares of the Predecessor (or legacy entity prior to the Effective Date) received less than 50 percent of the new voting shares of the Successor outstanding upon emergence from bankruptcy, and (ii) the reorganization value of the Company’s assets immediately prior to confirmation of the Plan was less than the total of all post-petition liabilities and allowed claims.
Fresh start accounting requires that new fair values be established for the Company’s assets, liabilities, and equity as of the date of emergence from bankruptcy on April 23, 2021. The Effective Date fair values of the Successor’s assets and liabilities differ materially from their recorded values as reflected on the historical balance sheets of the Predecessor. In addition, as a result of the application of fresh start accounting and the effects of the implementation of the Plan, the financial statements for the period after April 23, 2021 will not be comparable with the financial statements prior to and including April 23, 2021. References to “Successor” refer to the Company and its financial position and results of operations after the Effective Date (or from April 24, 2021 to December 31, 2021). References
to “Predecessor” refer to the Company and its financial position and results of operations on or before the Effective Date (or from January 1, 2021 to April 23, 2021).
See Note 3 “Fresh Start Accounting” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
Exploration of Strategic Alternatives
On August 3, 2021, we announced that our Board had appointed an independent committee, supported by management, to explore strategic alternatives to maximize shareholder value. These alternatives may include, among other things, continuing as a standalone public company, pursuing asset acquisitions or entering into a business combination with a strategic partner. In connection with the review, Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC has been retained as financial advisor and Milbank LLP has been retained as legal advisor. We have not set a formal timetable for this exploration, nor have we made any decisions related to strategic alternatives at this time. There is no assurance that the process will result in a transaction or any other specific outcome. Although certain transactions have been considered, the Board has not approved a specific action.
Market Overview
Commodity prices have risen since the beginning of 2021, and, in February 2022, the price for Brent crude oil had exceeded the $100-per-barrel level. Current oil and gas prices have been favorably impacted by an increase in demand as the world economies emerge from COVID-19 related shutdowns combined with a growing economy. As a result, demand has risen faster than supply resulting in a rise in commodity prices. In addition, commitments by OPEC+ to maintain its conservative supply program have bolstered the increase in commodity prices, as well as market concerns over oil supply disruptions caused by the conflict in Ukraine. Analysts predict that the market tightness will extend into 2022.
As a result of improved commodity prices, and increased capital spending by our clients, demand for contract drilling services has improved from previous lows. Consequently, the offshore drilling industry has seen contracting activity and dayrates increase in 2021 and continue to do so into 2022, most notably in the deepwater segment of the GOM. However, certain markets, from both a geographical and rig-type perspective, lag in the recovery. Many new contracts remain relatively short in duration but forecasts of total demand, as measured in rig-years, have improved.
With floater utilization of approximately 73% in January 2022, based on industry reports, we remain cautiously optimistic that the offshore drilling market will continue to improve in the foreseeable future, predicated on continued strength in the demand for hydrocarbons. Though demand is expected to improve, rig supply is also expected to increase, assuming there is no further scrapping of rigs. Currently, there are 24 rigs under construction that may be delivered over the coming years; of the rigs under construction only four currently have future drilling contracts. Notwithstanding the potential increase in supply, however, the fundamentals for the offshore drilling market appear to be improving.
	See “- Contract Drilling Backlog” for future commitments of our rigs during 2022 through 2024.
Contract Drilling Backlog
Contract drilling backlog, as presented below, includes only firm commitments (typically represented by signed contracts) and is calculated by multiplying the contracted operating dayrate by the firm contract period. Our calculation also assumes full utilization of our drilling equipment for the contract period (excluding scheduled shipyard and survey days); however, the amount of actual revenue to be earned and the actual periods during which revenues will be earned will be different than the amounts and periods shown in the tables below due to various factors. Utilization rates, which generally approach 92-98% during contracted periods, can be adversely impacted by downtime due to various operating factors including weather conditions and unscheduled downtime for repairs and maintenance, as well as COVID-19 related delays. Contract drilling backlog excludes revenues for mobilization, demobilization, contract preparation and customer reimbursables. No revenue is generally earned during periods of downtime for regulatory surveys. Changes in our contract drilling backlog between periods are generally a function of the performance of work on term contracts, as well as the extension or modification of existing term contracts and the execution of additional
contracts. In addition, under certain circumstances, our customers may seek to terminate or renegotiate our contracts, which could adversely affect our reported backlog.
See “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business and Operations - We can provide no assurance that our drilling contracts will not be terminated early or that our current backlog of contract drilling revenue ultimately will be realized” in Item 1A of this report.
The backlog information presented below does not, nor is it intended to, align with the disclosures related to revenue expected to be recognized in the future related to unsatisfied performance obligations, which are presented in Note 4 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Contract drilling backlog includes only future dayrate revenue as described above, while the disclosure in Note 4 excludes dayrate revenue and only reflects expected future revenue for mobilization, demobilization and capital modifications to our rigs, which are related to non-distinct promises within our signed contracts.
The following table reflects our contract drilling backlog attributable to future operations as of January 1, 2022 (based on information available at that time), October 1, 2021 (the date reported in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021), and January 1, 2021 (the date reported in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020) (in millions).
(1)Includes contract backlog of $95.0 million attributable to a customer drilling contract secured for a rig managed under the MMSA. We entered into the drilling contract directly with the customer and will receive and recognize revenue under the terms of the contract. However, pursuant to the terms of the MMSA and the Charter with the rig owner, we will only realize a gross margin equivalent to our management and marketing fee. See “Business - Rig Management and Marketing Services” in Item 1 of this report and Note 4 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
(2)Contract drilling backlog as of October 1, 2021 and January 1, 2021 excludes future commitment amounts totaling approximately $43.0 million and $75.0 million, respectively, payable by a customer in the form of a guarantee of gross margin to be earned on future contracts or by direct payment, pursuant to terms of an existing contract. As of January 1, 2022, this customer had met such commitment to us.
The following table reflects the amounts of our contract drilling backlog by year as of January 1, 2022 (in millions).
(1)Includes contract backlog of $81.0 million and $14.0 million in 2022 and 2023, respectively, attributable to a customer drilling contract secured for a rig managed under the MMSA. We entered into the drilling contract directly with the customer and will receive and recognize revenue under the terms of the contract. However, pursuant to the terms of the MMSA and the Charter with the rig owner, we will only realize a gross margin equivalent to our management and marketing fee.
The following table reflects the percentage of rig days committed by year as of January 1, 2022. The percentage of rig days committed is calculated as the ratio of total days committed under contracts, as well as scheduled shipyard, survey and mobilization days for all rigs in our fleet, to total available days (number of rigs, including cold-stacked rigs, multiplied by the number of days in a particular year).
(1)As of January 1, 2022, includes approximately 165 rig days currently known and scheduled for contract preparation, mobilization of rigs, surveys and extended repair and maintenance projects during 2022.
Important Factors That May Impact Our Operating Results, Financial Condition or Cash Flows
Operating Income. Our operating income is primarily a function of contract drilling revenue earned less contract drilling expenses incurred or recognized. The two most significant variables affecting our contract drilling revenue are the dayrates earned and utilization rates achieved by our rigs, each of which is a function of rig supply and demand in the marketplace. These factors are not entirely within our control and are difficult to predict. We generally recognize revenue from dayrate drilling contracts as services are performed. Consequently, when a rig is idle, no dayrate is earned and revenue will decrease as a result.
Revenue is affected by the acquisition or disposal of rigs, rig mobilizations, required surveys and shipyard projects. In connection with certain drilling contracts, we may receive fees for the mobilization and demobilization of equipment. In addition, some of our drilling contracts require downtime before the start of the contract to prepare the rig to meet customer requirements for which we may or may not be compensated. We recognize these fees ratably as services are performed over the initial term of the related drilling contracts. We defer mobilization and contract preparation fees received (on either a lump-sum or dayrate basis), as well as direct and incremental costs associated with the mobilization of equipment and contract preparation activities, and amortize each, on a straight-line basis, over the term of the related drilling contracts. As noted above, demobilization revenue expected to be received upon contract completion is estimated and is also recognized ratably over the initial term of the contract.
Operating income also fluctuates due to varying levels of contract drilling expenses. Our operating expenses represent all direct and indirect costs associated with the operation and maintenance of our drilling equipment, which generally are not affected by changes in dayrates and short-term reductions in utilization. For instance, if a rig is to be idle for a short period of time, few decreases in operating expenses may actually occur since the rig is typically maintained in a prepared or warm-stacked state with a full crew. In addition, when a rig is idle, we are responsible for certain operating expenses such as rig fuel and supply boat costs, which are typically costs of our customer when a rig is under contract. However, if a rig is expected to be idle for an extended period of time, we may reduce the size of a rig’s crew and take steps to “cold stack” the rig, which lowers expenses and partially offsets the impact on operating income. The cost of cold stacking a rig can vary depending on the type of rig. The cost of cold stacking a drillship, for example, is typically substantially higher than the cost of cold stacking an older floater rig.
The principal components of our operating expenses include direct and indirect costs of labor and benefits, repairs and maintenance, freight, regulatory inspections, boat and helicopter rentals and insurance. Labor and repair and maintenance costs represent the most significant components of our operating expenses. In general, our labor costs increase primarily due to higher salary levels, rig staffing requirements and costs associated with labor regulations in the geographic regions in which our rigs operate. In addition, the costs associated with training employees can be significant. Costs to repair and maintain our equipment fluctuate depending upon the type of activity the drilling unit is performing, as well as the age and condition of the equipment and the regions in which our rigs are working. See “- Contractual Cash Obligations - Pressure Control by the Hour®.”
COVID-19 Pandemic. The most immediate impact and risks to our business as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate the spread of the virus have been to the safety of our personnel, as well as travel restrictions that have challenged the ability to move personnel, equipment, supplies and service personnel to-and-from our drilling rigs. In some instances, we have asked our rig crews to quarantine in-country before offshore rotations, as well as to remain in country after their offshore rotation, resulting in incremental costs for salaries and other employee-related expenses such as meals and lodging. Our employee travel costs have also increased due to decreased passenger capacity on carriers, requiring additional trips to move personnel. In some cases, we incur freight surcharges to bring equipment and supplies to our rigs. We have also incurred additional costs to deep-clean facilities, for medical personnel and to purchase medical supplies and personal protective equipment.
With respect to protecting our crews and, thus, our rig operations, our COVID-19 protocols are based on the regions in which our rigs operate and the requirements of our customers for which they operate. Such protocols may include some or all of the following:
•vaccination of all U.S.-based offshore employees and U.S.-based onshore employees who travel to any of our global offshore locations against COVID-19;
•testing of all personnel prior to an offshore rotation or travel from the U.S. to an international location
•self-isolation of our crew with only immediate family members prior to reporting for crew change;
•decreased crew change frequency to minimize the frequency of travel and turnover of crew;
•twice daily temperature checks;
•eliminated large group meetings;
•reduced seating capacity in galley for social distancing;
•eliminated self-servicing of food;
•increased frequency of disinfectant cleaning in communal areas on the rig; and
•reduced number of personnel in elevators to a maximum of four.
We incurred incremental costs of approximately $8.9 million, $3.9 million and $12.5 million related to the COVID-19 pandemic during the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and the Predecessor periods from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. We expect to incur similar types of costs during 2022 but cannot predict the future financial impact of our response to the COVID-19 pandemic nor its duration in this fluid environment. As such, costs may be more than projected, perhaps by a material amount.
Regulatory Surveys and Planned Downtime. Our operating income is negatively impacted when we perform certain regulatory inspections, which we refer to as a special survey, that are due every five years for most of our rigs. The inspection interval for our North Sea rigs is two-and-one-half years. Operating revenue decreases because these special surveys are generally performed during scheduled downtime in a shipyard. Often other vessel maintenance and improvement activities are also performed concurrently with the survey. Survey costs, which generally include mobilization of the vessel into the shipyard, drydocking, support services while in shipyard and the associated survey or inspection costs necessary to maintain class certifications, are deferred and amortized over the survey interval on a straight-line basis. Other costs incurred at the time of the recertification drydocking, which are not related to the recertification of the vessel, are expensed as incurred. Costs for vessel improvements which either extend the vessel’s useful life or increase the vessel's functionality are capitalized and depreciated. The number of rigs undergoing a special survey will vary from year to year, as well as from quarter to quarter.
During 2022, we expect to spend approximately 165 days of planned downtime, including approximately (i) an aggregate 45 days for mobilization and contract preparation activities for the Ocean BlackHawk’s upcoming contract in Senegal; (ii) 75 days for repairs that are currently underway on the Ocean Endeavor; (iii) 15 days for the mobilization of the Ocean Apex between contracts and (iv) 30 days for the demobilization of the Ocean Onyx after completion of its current contract. In addition, due to events occurring in January 2022, we expect to spend approximately 110 days for the mobilization, repair and special survey of the Ocean Patriot. We can provide no assurance as to the exact timing and/or duration of downtime associated with these or other projects. See “ - Contract Drilling Backlog.”
Physical Damage and Marine Liability Insurance. We are self-insured for physical damage to rigs and equipment caused by named windstorms in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico, as defined by the relevant insurance policy. If a named windstorm in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico causes significant damage to our rigs or equipment, it could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Under our current insurance policy, we carry physical damage insurance for certain losses other than those caused by named windstorms in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico for which our deductible for physical damage is $10.0 million per occurrence. In addition, we currently carry loss-of-hire insurance on certain rigs to cover lost cash flow when a rig is unable to work, but have not purchased loss-of-hire insurance for our entire fleet.
In addition, we carry marine liability insurance covering certain legal liabilities, including coverage for certain personal injury claims, and generally covering liabilities arising out of or relating to pollution and/or environmental risk. We believe that the policy limit for our marine liability insurance is within the range that is customary for companies of our size in the offshore drilling industry and is appropriate for our business. Under these policies, our deductibles for marine liability coverage are $5.0 million for the first occurrence and vary in amounts ranging between
$5.0 million and, if aggregate claims exceed certain thresholds, up to $100.0 million for each subsequent occurrence, depending on the nature, severity and frequency of claims that might arise during the policy year.
Impact of Changes in Tax Laws or Their Interpretation. We operate through our various subsidiaries in a number of jurisdictions throughout the world. As a result, we are subject to highly complex tax laws, treaties and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we operate, which may change and are subject to interpretation. Changes in laws, treaties and regulations and the interpretation of such laws, treaties and regulations may put us at risk for future tax assessments and liabilities which could be substantial and could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are included in Note 1 “General Information” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Judgments, assumptions and estimates by our management are inherent in the preparation of our financial statements and the application of our significant accounting policies. We believe that our most critical accounting estimates are as follows:
Fresh Start Accounting. Upon emergence from bankruptcy, we met the criteria for and were required to adopt fresh start accounting in accordance with ASC 852, which on the Effective Date resulted in a new entity, the Successor, for financial reporting purposes, with no beginning retained earnings or deficit as of the fresh start reporting date. Fresh start accounting requires that new fair values be established for the Company’s assets, liabilities, and equity as of the date of emergence from bankruptcy on April 23, 2021. The Company's reorganization value approximates the fair value of the Successor’s total assets and the amount a willing buyer would pay for the assets immediately after restructuring. Under fresh start accounting, the Company allocated the reorganization value to its individual assets based on their estimated fair values (except for deferred income taxes) in conformity with FASB ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations, and FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement. The amount of deferred taxes was determined in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (or ASC 740).
Under the application of fresh start accounting and with the assistance of valuation experts, we conducted an analysis of the Consolidated Balance Sheet to determine if any of the Company’s net assets would require a fair value adjustment as of the Effective Date. The results of our analysis indicated that our principal assets, which include drilling and other property and equipment; warehouse stock and fuel inventory; leases; long-term debt and warrants would require a fair value adjustment on the Effective Date. The rest of the Company’s net assets were determined to have carrying values that approximated fair value on the Effective Date with the exception of certain contract assets and liabilities which were written off. Deferred tax assets and uncertain tax positions were determined in accordance with ASC 740 after considering the tax effects of the reorganization and the newly established fair values of the Successor.
See Note 3 “Fresh Start Accounting” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
Property, Plant and Equipment. We carry our drilling and other property and equipment at cost, less accumulated depreciation. Maintenance and routine repairs are charged to income currently while replacements and betterments that upgrade or increase the functionality of our existing equipment and that significantly extend the useful life of an existing asset, are capitalized. Significant judgments, assumptions and estimates may be required in determining whether or not such replacements and betterments meet the criteria for capitalization and in determining useful lives and salvage values of such assets. Changes in these judgments, assumptions and estimates could produce results that differ from those reported. During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and the Predecessor periods from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020, we capitalized $22.0 million, $59.9 million and $137.4 million, respectively, in replacements and betterments of our drilling fleet.
We evaluate our property and equipment for impairment whenever changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable (such as, but not limited to, a change in the economic useful life of a rig, cold stacking a rig, the expectation of cold stacking a rig in the near future, a decision to retire or scrap a rig, or excess spending over budget on a newbuild, construction project, reactivation or major rig upgrade). We utilize an undiscounted probability-weighted cash flow analysis in testing an asset for potential impairment. Our assumptions and estimates underlying this analysis include the following:
•dayrate by rig;
•utilization rate by rig if active, warm-stacked or cold-stacked (expressed as the actual percentage of time per year that the rig would be used at certain dayrates);
•the per day operating cost for each rig if active, warm-stacked or cold-stacked;
•the estimated annual cost for rig replacements and/or enhancement programs;
•the estimated maintenance, inspection or other reactivation costs associated with a rig returning to work;
•the remaining economic useful life of a rig;
•salvage value for each rig; and
•estimated proceeds that may be received on disposition of each rig.
Based on these assumptions, we develop a matrix for each rig under evaluation using multiple utilization/dayrate scenarios, to each of which we assign a probability of occurrence. We arrive at a projected probability-weighted cash flow for each rig based on the respective matrix and compare such amount to the carrying value of the asset to assess recoverability.
The underlying assumptions and assigned probabilities of occurrence for utilization and dayrate scenarios are developed using a methodology that examines historical data for each rig, which considers the rig’s age, rated water depth and other attributes and then assesses its future marketability in light of the current and projected market environment at the time of assessment. Other assumptions, such as operating, maintenance, inspection and reactivation costs, are estimated using historical data adjusted for known developments, cost projections for re-entry of rigs into the market and future events that are anticipated by management at the time of the assessment.
Management’s assumptions are necessarily subjective and are an inherent part of our asset impairment evaluation, and the use of different assumptions could produce results that differ from those reported. Our methodology generally involves the use of significant unobservable inputs, representative of a Level 3 fair value measurement, which may include assumptions related to future dayrate revenue, costs and rig utilization, quotes from rig brokers, the long-term future performance of our rigs and future market conditions. Management’s assumptions involve uncertainties about future demand for our services, dayrates, expenses and other future events, and management’s expectations may not be indicative of future outcomes. Significant unanticipated changes to these assumptions could materially alter our analysis in testing an asset for potential impairment. For example, changes in market conditions that exist at the measurement date or that are projected by management could affect our key assumptions. Other events or circumstances that could affect our assumptions may include, but are not limited to, a further sustained decline in oil and gas prices, cancelations of our drilling contracts or contracts of our competitors, contract modifications, costs to comply with new governmental regulations, capital expenditures required due to advances in offshore drilling technology, growth in the global oversupply of oil and geopolitical events, such as lifting sanctions on oil-producing nations. Should actual market conditions in the future vary significantly from market conditions used in our projections, our assessment of impairment would likely be different.
When an impairment is indicated, we have historically estimated the fair value of the impaired rig using an income approach, whereby the fair value of the rig is estimated based on a calculation of the rig’s future net cash flow (on a probability-weighted basis) over its remaining estimated economic useful life, using similar inputs and assumptions as described above, and discounted based on our weighted average cost of capital. These cash flow projections utilized significant unobservable inputs, including management’s assumptions related to estimated dayrate revenue, rig utilization and estimated capital expenditures, repair and regulatory survey costs, as well as estimated proceeds that may be received on ultimate disposition of the rig.
	During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we reviewed the marketability, age and physical condition of certain of our rigs in conjunction with other factors specific to the geographic markets in which our rigs are capable of operating and determined, based on circumstances that arose in the fourth quarter of 2021, which we believe to be other than temporary, that the economic useful lives of certain of the rigs were materially different than that determined at the Effective Date. Based on the revised useful lives, we determined that the carrying value of two semisubmersible rigs was impaired. We recognized an aggregate impairment loss of $132.4 million to write down these rigs to their estimated fair value. During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23 2021, we recognized an impairment loss of $197.0 million for one rig for which we had concerns regarding future opportunities. During 2020, we recorded an aggregate impairment charge of $842.0 million related to four drilling rigs. We did not incur an impairment loss in 2019. See “- Results of Operations - Impairment of Assets” and Note 5 “Asset Impairments” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes in accordance with accounting standards that require the recognition of the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and an asset and liability approach in recognizing the amount of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been currently recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. In each of our tax jurisdictions we recognize a current tax liability or asset for the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year and a deferred tax asset or liability for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance, if necessary, which is determined by the amount of any tax benefits that, based on available evidence, are not expected to be realized under a “more likely than not” approach. We make judgments regarding future events and related estimates especially as they pertain to the forecasting of our effective tax rate, the potential realization of deferred tax assets such as net operating loss carryforwards, utilization of foreign tax credits, and exposure to the disallowance of items deducted on tax returns upon audit.
In several of the international locations in which we operate, certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries enter into agreements with other of our wholly-owned subsidiaries to provide specialized services and equipment in support of our foreign operations. We apply a transfer pricing methodology to determine the arm’s length amount to be charged for providing the services and equipment and utilize outside consultants to assist us in the development of such transfer pricing methodologies. In most cases, there are alternative transfer pricing methodologies that could be applied to these transactions and, if applied, could result in different chargeable amounts.
Results of Operations
Our operating results for contract drilling services are dependent on three primary metrics or key performance indicators: revenue-earning, or R-E, days, rig utilization and average daily revenue. The following table presents these three key performance indicators and other comparative data relating to our revenues and operating expenses (in thousands, except days, daily amounts and percentages).
(1)An R-E day is defined as a 24-hour period during which a rig earns a dayrate after commencement of operations and excludes mobilization, demobilization and contract preparation days.
(2)Utilization is calculated as the ratio of total R-E days divided by the total calendar days in the period for all specified rigs in our fleet (including cold-stacked rigs).
(3)Average daily revenue is defined as total contract drilling revenue for all of the specified rigs in our fleet per R-E day.
Contract Drilling Revenue. We earned contract drilling revenue of $465.3 million for the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, attributable to 2,250 R-E days and average daily revenue of $206,800. Total utilization for the period was 74%, reflecting planned downtime for the Ocean Courage and Ocean BlackRhino for contract preparation work (132 days), downtime for the Ocean Endeavor and Ocean Patriot for inspections and
repairs (85 days) and downtime attributable to stacked rigs (504 days). The decline in average daily revenue compared to the Predecessor periods reflects lower dayrates earned under new contracts that commenced in 2021 compared to the rigs’ previous contracts, combined with reduced amortization of deferred revenue due to the write-off of previously deferred balances at the Effective Date in connection with fresh start accounting. During the period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we recognized $1.5 million of contract drilling revenue pursuant to the MMSA that commenced in May 2021, for which we also recognized gross reimbursable revenue and expenses of $43.8 million.
During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021, we earned contract drilling revenue of $153.4 million attributable to 724 R-E days and average daily revenue of $211,800. Total utilization for the period was 53%, primarily due to planned downtime for contract preparation work for three rigs and the stacking of other rigs between contracts. The Ocean Onyx commenced a new contract in February 2021 after its reactivation, contributing 61 R-E days to the period. The decrease in average daily revenue compared to 2020 was primarily related to the Ocean BlackLion starting a new contract in the latter part of 2020 at a lower dayrate than the rig’s previous contract and a decreased dayrate earned by the Ocean BlackHawk as a result of renegotiating its long-term contract in mid-2020 in exchange for additional term.
Contract drilling revenue for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2020 was $692.8 million attributable to 2,936 R-E days and average daily revenue of $227,000. Total utilization for the period was 59%, reflecting an aggregate 1,098 days of downtime for contracted rigs awaiting and preparing for their upcoming contracts and an aggregate 825 days of downtime attributable to stacked rigs, including the now cold-stacked Ocean Valiant, which completed its most recent contract in early May 2020. Contract drilling revenue for 2020 also included amortization of deferred revenue of $23.2 million and the $26.3 million of revenue recognized pursuant to a gross margin commitment from a customer.
Contract Drilling Expense, Excluding Depreciation. During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, contract drilling expense, excluding depreciation, was $364.5 million, comprised primarily of payroll and benefits costs ($158.6 million), rig repairs and maintenance ($66.5 million), shorebase costs and overhead ($36.3 million), equipment rentals ($39.4 million), catering ($11.4 million), freight and transportation ($8.3 million), travel ($7.9 million), insurance ($7.8 million), inspections ($7.3 million), fuel ($5.2 million), amortization of deferred contract preparation and mobilization costs ($1.5 million) and other operating costs in the aggregate ($14.3 million). The reduction in amortized costs compared to the Predecessor periods presented was due to the write off of previously deferred expenses as a result of fresh start accounting. Prior to fresh start accounting, such deferred amounts would have been amortized into expense over the respective contract term; therefore, amortization of such costs in the Successor period relate solely to costs incurred after the Effective Date. Additionally, reduced equipment rental cost compared to the Predecessor periods reflects the impact of a lease modification for our blowout preventer and related well control equipment (or Well Control Equipment) leases on our drillships. Due to a modification of the lease agreements on the Effective Date and change in lease classification, the leases are now considered finance leases, which resulted in the absence of rent expense of approximately $18.2 million for the period.
Contract drilling expense, excluding depreciation, was $181.6 million for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021, comprised primarily of payroll and benefits costs ($68.4 million), rig repairs and maintenance ($32.8 million), equipment rentals ($24.4 million), shorebase costs and overhead ($15.9 million), amortization of deferred contract preparation and mobilization costs ($9.9 million), catering ($5.1 million), inspections ($3.9 million), freight and transportation ($3.4 million), insurance ($3.1 million) and other operating costs in the aggregate ($14.7 million).
Contract drilling expense, excluding depreciation, for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $618.6 million and was comprised primarily of payroll and benefits costs ($255.0 million), rig repairs and maintenance ($103.3 million), equipment rentals ($82.8 million), shorebase costs and overhead ($60.6 million), amortization of deferred contract preparation and mobilization costs ($24.4 million), catering ($18.9 million), inspections ($11.6 million), insurance ($10.9 million), freight and transportation ($10.8 million), fuel ($9.6 million), travel ($9.3 million) and other operating costs in the aggregate ($21.4 million).
Depreciation Expense. Depreciation expense for the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and Predecessor periods from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020 was $68.5 million, $92.8 million and $320.1 million, respectively. The decline in depreciation was primarily due to
the fair value remeasurement of our rigs and equipment from the application of fresh start accounting on the Effective Date.
General and Administrative Expense. During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we incurred general and administrative costs of $53.5 million which consisted of payroll and benefits-related costs ($29.9 million), professional and legal expenses ($17.6 million) and other administrative costs ($6.0 million). Payroll costs for the Successor period included $8.0 million of severance benefits for certain executives who left the Company on or after the Effective Date. Professional and legal costs for the Successor period included costs associated with a stockholder complaint that arose after the Effective Date and legal advisors engaged to assist an independent committee appointed by our Board to explore strategic alternatives to maximize shareholder value.
During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 to April 23, 2021, we recognized general and administrative expenses of $15.0 million comprised of costs related to payroll and benefits ($10.5 million), professional and legal services ($3.0 million) and other administrative costs ($1.5 million).
We incurred general and administrative costs of $56.9 million during the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of payroll and benefits costs ($40.9 million), professional and legal expenses ($11.7 million) and other administrative costs ($4.3 million).
Impairment of Assets. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we reviewed the marketability, age and physical condition of certain of our rigs in conjunction with other factors specific to the geographic markets in which our rigs are capable of operating and determined, based on circumstances that arose in the fourth quarter of 2021, which we believe to be other than temporary, that the economic useful lives of certain of the rigs in our fleet were materially different than that determined at the Effective Date. Based on the revised useful lives, we determined that the carrying value of two semisubmersible rigs was impaired. We recognized an aggregate impairment loss of $132.4 million to write down these rigs to their estimated fair value.
During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23 2021, we recognized an impairment loss of $197.0 million for one rig for which we had concerns regarding future opportunities. During 2020, we recorded an aggregate impairment charge of $842.0 million related to four drilling rigs. See Note 5 “Impairment of Assets” and Note 9 “Financial Instruments and Fair Value Disclosures” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
Restructuring and Separation Costs. Prior to the Petition Date in 2020, we incurred $7.4 million in legal and other professional advisor fees in connection with the consideration of restructuring alternatives, including the preparation for filing of the Chapter 11 Cases and related matters. Also, during the second quarter of 2020, we initiated a plan to reduce the number of employees in our world-wide organization in an effort to restructure our business operations and lower operating costs. As a result of this initiative, we incurred costs of $10.3 million during 2020, primarily for severance and related costs associated with a reduction in personnel in our corporate offices, warehouse facilities and certain of our international shorebase locations. See Note 15 “Restructuring and Separation Costs” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Gain on Disposition of Assets. During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 to April 23, 2021, we sold two previously impaired semisubmersible rigs, the Ocean America and Ocean Rover, for an aggregate net pre-tax gain of $4.4 million. During 2020, we recognized an aggregate pre-tax gain of $7.4 million on the disposal of assets, which included pre-tax gains on the sale of our corporate headquarters office building in Houston, Texas ($3.7 million) and the previously impaired Ocean Confidence ($3.5 million).
Interest Expense. During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we recognized interest expense of $18.4 million related to new debt incurred on or after the Effective Date and incremental interest expense of $7.8 million related to our Well Control Equipment finance leases.
Upon commencing the Chapter 11 Cases on April 26, 2020, we ceased accruing interest expense on the Senior Notes and borrowings under the RCF. However, due to provisions in the PSA signed in January 2021, we resumed recognizing interest on our outstanding borrowings under the RCF and accrued interest expense of $34.8 million for
the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021, 2021 through April 23, 2021, inclusive of a $23.4 million catch-up adjustment for the period from April 26, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
During 2020, we recognized interest expense relating to the Senior Notes and RCF of $37.0 million and $5.6 million, respectively, for the period prior to our Chapter 11 Petition Date.
Reorganization Items, net. During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we recognized $8.1 million of professional fees directly related to the Chapter 11 Cases.
During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021, we recognized $1.6 billion in expenses and other net losses directly related to the Chapter 11 Cases, consisting of fresh start valuation adjustments ($2.7 billion), professional fees ($51.1 million), the accrual of a backstop commitment premium related to our First Lien Notes (as defined below) ($10.4 million) and the write-off of a predecessor directors and officers tail insurance policy ($6.9 million). These expenses were partially offset by a net gain on settlement of liabilities subject to compromise ($1.1 billion).
During 2020, we recognized $76.9 million in expenses and other net losses directly related to the Chapter 11 Cases, primarily consisting of incremental professional fees incurred ($53.5 million) and the write-off of debt issuance costs associated with our Senior Notes ($27.6 million), partially offset by net gains related to vendor settlements and purchase order cancellations ($4.2 million). See Note 2 “Chapter 11 Proceedings” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Other, Net. During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we recognized a $10.8 million settlement related to a patent infringement indemnity claim against the supplier of our four drillships.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit. We recorded income tax expense of $1.7 million (negative 0.9% effective tax rate) for the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, an income tax benefit of $39.4 million (2% effective tax rate) for the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and an income tax benefit of $21.2 million (1.7% effective tax rate) for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2020.
During the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, the negative effective tax rate reflects changes in the domestic and international jurisdictional mix of our pre-tax income and loss, which are consequences of realigning substantially all of our assets and operations under a foreign subsidiary.
During the Predecessor period from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021, our tax benefit was primarily attributable to the adoption of fresh start accounting.
The effective tax rate of 1.7% for the Predecessor year ended December 31, 2020 includes $9.7 million due to a partial release of a previously recognized valuation allowance and tax rate change as a result of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (or CARES Act). The CARES Act was signed into law by the President of the United States on March 27, 2020 and allowed for a carryback of net operating losses generated in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to each of the five preceding taxable years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Chapter 11 Emergence
On the Effective Date, in connection with the effectiveness of, and pursuant to the terms of, the Plan and the Confirmation Order:
•the Company’s common stock outstanding immediately before the Effective Date was canceled;
•the new organizational documents of the reorganized entity became effective, authorizing the issuance of shares of common stock representing 100% of the equity interests in the reorganized entity (or the New Diamond Common Shares);
•70.0 million New Diamond Common Shares were transferred pro rata to holders of Senior Notes Claims (as defined in the Plan) in exchange for the cancellation of the Senior Notes, aggregating $2.0 billion plus unpaid and accrued interest of $44.9 million;
•30.0 million New Diamond Common Shares were transferred pro rata to holders of Senior Notes Claims in exchange for providing $114.7 million of new-money commitments to the Debtors pursuant to the Rights Offerings, the Private Placement, and the Backstop Commitments (each as defined in the Backstop Agreement);
•7.5 million five-year warrants with no Black Scholes protection, with an exercise price of $29.22 per warrant, which are exercisable into 7% of the New Diamond Common Shares measured at the time of exercise, subject to dilution by the MIP Equity Shares (as defined in the Plan), were issued to holders of Predecessor common stock in the amounts, and on the terms, set forth in the Plan and the Plan Supplement;
•approximately $279.6 million was paid in cash and rollover of prepetition RCF borrowings into new debt of $200.0 million on a dollar-for-dollar basis to settle the RCF claims; and
•all other secured, other priority or general unsecured claims, except to the extent that such holder agreed to a less favorable treatment, were settled by payment in full in cash.
See Note 2 “Chapter 11 Proceedings” and Note 11 “Prepetition Revolving Credit Facility, Senior Notes and Exit Debt” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
New Debt at Emergence
On the Effective Date, pursuant to the terms of the Plan, the Company and its subsidiary Diamond Foreign Asset Company entered into the following debt instruments:
•a senior secured revolving credit agreement (or the Exit Revolving Credit Agreement), which provides for a $400.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility, with a $100.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit thereunder (or the Exit RCF), maturing on April 22, 2026;
•a senior secured term loan credit agreement, which provides for a $100.0 million senior secured term loan credit facility, which is scheduled to mature on April 22, 2027 under which $100.0 million was drawn on the Effective Date (or the Exit Term Loan);
•an indenture, pursuant to which approximately $85.3 million in aggregate principal amount of 9.00%/11.00%/13.00% Senior Secured First Lien PIK Toggle Notes due 2027 (or First Lien Notes) maturing on April 22, 2027 were issued on the Effective Date; and
•approximately $39.7 million in the form of delayed draw note commitments that may be issued as additional First Lien Notes after the Effective Date, none of which had been issued as of December 31, 2021.
Our emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases allowed us to significantly reduce our level of indebtedness. The availability of borrowings under the Exit RCF is subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, including restrictions on borrowings if certain conditions are met. See Note 11 “Prepetition Revolving Credit Facility, Senior Notes and Exit Debt - Exit Revolving Credit Agreement” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
See also “- Contractual Cash Obligations” for our short-term and long-term cash requirements related to post-emergence debt.
At March 1, 2022, we had borrowings of $103.5 million outstanding under the Exit RCF, including $3.5 million deemed incurred in satisfaction of certain upfront fees payable to the lenders under the prepetition RCF (or PIK Loans). We also had utilized $6.1 million of the Exit RCF for the issuance of a letter of credit. The PIK Loans do not reduce the amount of available commitments under the Exit RCF, and if repaid or prepaid may not be reborrowed. As of March 1, 2022, approximately $293.9 million was available for borrowings or the issuance of letters of credit under the Exit RCF, subject to its terms and conditions.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash Flows and Capital Expenditures
For the Successor period April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021, our operating activities provided cash flow of $18.9 million. Cash receipts for contract drilling services ($586.0 million) for the period and funds from the return of certain collateral deposits ($6.0 million) offset cash expenditures for contract drilling, shorebase support, general and administrative costs and cash income taxes paid ($537.7 million) and payments to professionals in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases ($35.4 million). Cash outlays for capital expenditures and finance lease obligations during the period aggregated $42.8 million and $9.8 million, respectively. During the Successor period, we reduced outstanding borrowings under the Exit RCF by a net $20.0 million.
For the Predecessor period January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021, we used $100.1 million for our operating activities. Cash expenditures for contract drilling, shorebase support and general and administrative costs ($240.5 million), payments to professionals in connection with the Chapter 11 Cases ($37.6 million), and net cash income taxes paid ($3.4 million) offset cash receipts for contract drilling services ($181.4 million) for the period. Cash outlays for capital expenditures aggregated $49.1 million for the Predecessor period.
For the Predecessor year 2020, our operating activities provided net cash of $8.4 million. Cash expenditures for contract drilling, shorebase support and general and administrative costs of $826.7 million exceeded cash receipts from contract drilling services of $822.2 million. Operating cash flow for the Predecessor year 2020 also included net tax refunds of $31.2 million, primarily in the U.S. tax jurisdiction, partially offset by cash collateral deposits that we made in support of certain outstanding surety and other bonds and letters of credit ($18.3 million). Other sources of cash during the year were borrowings under the RCF ($436.0 million) and proceeds from the sales of the Ocean Confidence ($4.6 million), our corporate headquarters office building in Houston, Texas ($7.5 million) and Trinidad bonds ($5.9 million). Cash paid for capital expenditures in 2020 was $189.5 million.
As set forth in the Plan, on the Effective Date, we net settled $242.0 million outstanding under the RCF in cash and issued $75.0 million of First Lien Notes. See Note 2 “Chapter 11 Proceedings” and Note 11 “Prepetition Revolving Credit Facility, Senior Notes and Exit Debt” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report.
Upgrades and Other Capital Expenditures
We have historically invested a significant portion of our cash flows in the enhancement of our drilling fleet and our ongoing rig equipment replacement and capital maintenance programs. The amount of cash required to meet our capital commitments is determined by evaluating the need to upgrade our rigs to meet specific customer requirements and our rig equipment enhancement, maintenance and replacement programs. We make periodic assessments of our capital spending programs based on current and expected industry conditions and our cash flow forecast. As of the date of this report, we expect cash capital expenditures for 2022 to be approximately $40.0 million to $50.0 million pursuant to our capital maintenance programs and an additional $15.0 million in survey-related capital expenditures.
Credit Ratings
Following the commencement of our Chapter 11 Cases, Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and S&P Global Ratings lowered our credit ratings to default status. They subsequently withdrew our issued credit ratings and outlook and have discontinued their rating coverage of the Company.
Contractual Cash Obligations
The following table sets forth our contractual cash obligations at December 31, 2021 (in thousands).
(1)The above table excludes $47.2 million of total net unrecognized tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions that could result in a future cash payment as of December 31, 2021. Due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with the liabilities recognized in these balances, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities.
(2)Contractual obligations related to our Exit Term Loan are presented in the table above assuming an interest rate consistent with the rate applied to the principal as of December 31, 2021.
(3)Contractual obligations related to our First Lien Notes are presented in the table above assuming a cash interest payment option and include the commitment premium for the undrawn First Lien Notes based on the December 31, 2021 balance.
(4)Contractual obligations under our Exit RCF are presented in the table above assuming that the outstanding amount at December 31, 2021 remains drawn until the maturity of the Exit Revolving Credit Agreement and that interest accrues at the same rate applied to such borrowings as of December 31, 2021.
(5)Contractual obligations related to our Well Control Equipment services agreement include a commitment to purchase consumable and capital spare parts owned and controlled by the vendor at the end of the service arrangement for a purchase price based on current list prices not to exceed $37.0 million. The table above assumes that such items are purchased at the ceiling price at the end of the agreement in 2026, however the actual amount may vary as the volume and prices of spares to be purchased are not yet known. See “- Pressure Control by the Hour®.”
(6)These contractual obligations are related to finance leases for our Well Control Equipment and our operating leases for corporate and shorebase offices, office and information technology equipment, employee housing, vehicles, onshore storage yards and certain rig equipment and tools. Our contractual obligations under our finance lease obligations include payments related to the exercise of a purchase option for the Well Control Equipment at the end of the original lease term. See Note 13 “Leases and Lease Commitments” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Pressure Control by the Hour®. In 2016, we entered into a ten-year agreement with a subsidiary of Baker Hughes Company (formerly known as Baker Hughes, a GE company) (or Baker Hughes) to provide services with respect to Well Control Equipment on our four drillships. Such services include management of maintenance, certification and reliability with respect to such equipment. In connection with the contractual services agreement, we sold the Well Control Equipment on our drillships to a Baker Hughes subsidiary and are leasing it back over separate finance leases for approximately $26.0 million per year in the aggregate. Collectively, we refer to the contractual services agreement and corresponding finance lease agreements with the Baker Hughes affiliate as the PCbtH program. See Note 12 “Commitments and Contingencies” and Note 13 “Leases and Lease Commitments” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.
Except for our contractual requirements under the PCbtH program discussed above, we had no other purchase obligations for major rig upgrades or any other significant obligations at December 31, 2021, except for those related to our direct rig operations, which arise during the normal course of business.
Other Commercial Commitments - Letters of Credit
We were contingently liable as of December 31, 2021 in the amount of $23.1 million under certain tax, performance, supersedeas, value-added-tax related (or VAT) and customs bonds and letters of credit. Agreements relating to approximately $17.0 million of customs, tax, VAT and supersedeas bonds can require collateral at any time, while the remaining agreements, aggregating $6.1 million, cannot require collateral except in events of default. At December 31, 2021, we had made aggregate collateral deposits of $17.5 million with respect to other bonds and letters of credit. These deposits are recorded in “Other assets” in the Successor Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2021. The table below provides a list of these obligations in U.S. dollar equivalents by year of expiration (in thousands).
Other
Operations Outside the U.S. Our operations outside the U.S. accounted for approximately 41%, 55%, 54% and 47% of our total consolidated revenues for the Successor period from April 24, 2021 through December 31, 2021 and the Predecessor periods from January 1, 2021 through April 23, 2021 and the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See “Risk Factors - Regulatory and Legal Risks - Significant portions of our operations are conducted outside the U.S. and involve additional risks not associated with U.S. domestic operations” in Item 1A of this report.
Currency Risk. Some of our subsidiaries conduct a portion of their operations in the local currency of the country where they conduct operations, resulting in foreign currency exposure. Currency environments in which we currently have or previously had significant business operations include Australia, Brazil, Egypt, Malaysia, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago and the U.K., creating exposure to certain monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. These assets and liabilities are revalued based on currency exchange rates at the end of the reporting period.
To reduce our currency exchange risk, we may, if possible, arrange for a portion of our international contracts to be payable to us in local currency in amounts equal to our estimated operating costs payable in local currency, with the balance of the contract payable in U.S. dollars. The revaluation of liabilities denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar related to foreign income taxes, including deferred tax assets and liabilities and uncertain tax positions, is reported as a component of “Income tax (expense) benefit” in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
We or our representatives may, from time to time, either in this report, in periodic press releases or otherwise, make or incorporate by reference certain written or oral statements that are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. All statements other than statements of historical fact are, or may be deemed to be, forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include, without limitation, any statement that may project, indicate or imply future results, events, performance or achievements, and may contain or be identified by the words “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “predict,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “should,” “could,” “may,” “might,” “will,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely result,” “project,” “forecast,” “budget” and similar expressions. In addition, any statement concerning future financial performance (including, without limitation, future revenues, earnings or growth rates), ongoing business strategies or prospects, and possible actions taken by or against us are also forward-looking statements as so defined. Statements made by us in this report that contain forward-looking statements may include, but are not limited to, information concerning our possible or assumed future results of operations and statements about the following subjects:
•the effects of the Chapter 11 Cases on our operations, including our relationships with employees, regulatory authorities, customers, suppliers, banks, insurance companies and other third parties, and agreements;
•strategic alternatives to maximize shareholder value, potential actions our Board may or may not take in connection therewith, the process and timetable for such exploration and any future public comments regarding such matters;
•market conditions and the effect of such conditions on our future results of operations;
•sources and uses of and requirements for financial resources and sources of liquidity;
•customer spending programs;
•business plans or financial condition of our customers, including with respect to or as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•duration and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including new variants of the virus, lockdowns, re-openings and any other related actions taken by businesses and governments on the offshore drilling industry and our business, operations, supply chain and personnel, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity;
•expectations regarding our plans and strategies, including plans, effects and other matters relating to the COVID-19 pandemic;
•contractual obligations and future contract negotiations;
•interest rate and foreign exchange risk and the transition away from LIBOR;
•operations outside the United States;
•geopolitical events and risks;
•business strategy;
•growth opportunities;
•competitive position including, without limitation, competitive rigs entering the market;
•expected financial position and liquidity;
•cash flows and contract backlog;
•idling drilling rigs or reactivating stacked rigs;
•outcomes of litigation and legal proceedings;
•declaration and payment of dividends;
•financing plans;
•market outlook;
•commodity prices;
•tax planning and effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the CARES Act;
•changes in tax laws and policies or adverse outcomes resulting from examination of our tax returns;
•debt levels and the impact of changes in the credit markets;
•budgets for capital and other expenditures;
•contractual obligations related to our Well Control Equipment services agreement and potential exercise of the purchase option at the end of the original lease term;
•the MMSA with an offshore drilling company and future management and marketing services thereunder;
•timing and duration of required regulatory inspections for our drilling rigs and other planned downtime;
•process and timing for acquiring regulatory permits and approvals for our drilling operations;
•timing and cost of completion of capital projects;
•delivery dates and drilling contracts related to capital projects;
•plans and objectives of management;
•scrapping retired rigs;
•asset impairments and impairment evaluations;
•assets held for sale;
•our internal controls and internal control over financial reporting;
•performance of contracts;
•compliance with applicable laws; and
•availability, limits and adequacy of insurance or indemnification.
These types of statements are based on current expectations about future events and inherently are subject to a variety of assumptions, risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected, projected or expressed in forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, among others, the following:
•those described under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A;
•risks that our assumptions and analyses in the Plan are incorrect;
•the potential adverse effects of the Chapter 11 Cases on our liquidity, results of operations, access to capital resources or business prospects;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including new variants of the virus, or future epidemics or pandemics on our business, including the potential for worker absenteeism, facility closures, work slowdowns or stoppages, supply chain disruptions, additional costs and liabilities, delays, our ability to recover costs under contracts, insurance challenges, and potential impacts on access to capital, markets and the fair value of our assets;
•general economic and business conditions and trends, including recessions, inflation, and adverse changes in the level of international trade activity;
•the recent downturn in our industry and the continuing effects thereof;
•worldwide supply and demand for oil and natural gas;
•changes in foreign and domestic oil and gas exploration, development and production activity;
•oil and natural gas price fluctuations and related market expectations;
•the ability of OPEC+ to set and maintain production levels and pricing, and the level of production in non-OPEC+ countries;
•policies of various governments regarding exploration and development of oil and gas reserves;
•inability to obtain contracts for our rigs that do not have contracts;
•inability to reactivate cold-stacked rigs;
•cancellation or renegotiation of contracts included in our reported contract backlog;
•advances in exploration and development technology;
•the worldwide political and military environment, including, for example, in oil-producing regions and locations where our rigs are operating or are in shipyards;
•casualty losses;
•operating hazards inherent in drilling for oil and gas offshore;
•the risk of physical damage to rigs and equipment caused by named windstorms in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico;
•industry fleet capacity;
•market conditions in the offshore contract drilling industry, including, without limitation, dayrates and utilization levels;
•competition;
•changes in foreign, political, social and economic conditions;
•risks of international operations, compliance with foreign laws and taxation policies and seizure, expropriation, nationalization, deprivation, malicious damage or other loss of possession or use of equipment and assets;
•risks of potential contractual liabilities pursuant to our various drilling contracts in effect from time to time;
•customer or supplier bankruptcy, liquidation or other financial difficulties;
•the ability of customers and suppliers to meet their obligations to us and our subsidiaries;
•collection of receivables;
•foreign exchange and currency fluctuations and regulations, and the inability to repatriate income or capital;
•risks of war, military operations, other armed hostilities, sabotage, piracy, cyber-attack, terrorist acts and embargoes, including the conflict in Ukraine;
•changes in offshore drilling technology, which could require significant capital expenditures in order to maintain competitiveness;
•reallocation of drilling budgets away from offshore drilling in favor of other priorities such as renewable energy or other land-based projects;
•regulatory initiatives and compliance with governmental regulations including, without limitation, regulations pertaining to climate change, greenhouse gases, carbon emissions or energy use;
•compliance with and liability under environmental laws and regulations;
•uncertainties surrounding deepwater permitting and exploration and development activities;
•potential changes in accounting policies by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, SEC, or regulatory agencies for our industry which may cause us to revise our financial accounting and/or disclosures in the future, and which may change the way analysts measure our business or financial performance;
•development and increasing adoption of alternative fuels;
•customer preferences;
•risks of litigation, tax audits and contingencies and the impact of compliance with judicial rulings and jury verdicts;
•cost, availability, limits and adequacy of insurance;
•invalidity of assumptions used in the design of our controls and procedures and the risk that material weaknesses may arise in the future;
•business opportunities that may be presented to and pursued or rejected by us;
•the results of financing efforts;
•adequacy and availability of our sources of liquidity;
•risks resulting from our indebtedness;
•public health threats;
•negative publicity; and
•impairments of assets.
The risks and uncertainties included here are not exhaustive. Other sections of this report and our other filings with the SEC include additional factors that could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial performance. Given these risks and uncertainties, investors should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements included in this report speak only as of the date of this report. We expressly disclaim any obligation or undertaking to release publicly any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statement to reflect any change in our expectations or beliefs with regard to the statement or any change in events, conditions or circumstances on which any forward-looking statement is based. In addition, in certain places in this report, we refer to reports of third parties that purport to describe trends or developments in energy production or drilling and exploration activity. While we believe that each of these reports is reliable, we have not independently verified the information included in such reports. We specifically disclaim any responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of such information and undertake no obligation to update such information.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that have had or are expected to have an effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements, see Note 1 “General Information - Changes in Accounting Principles” to our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report.