ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our outlook, key trends and uncertainties, our plans and strategy for our business, and our performance and future success, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” For more information regarding key factors affecting our performance, see “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance” below.
Overview
DigitalOcean is a leading cloud computing platform offering on-demand infrastructure and platform tools for developers, start-ups and small and medium-sized businesses, or SMBs. We were founded with the guiding principle that the transformative benefits of the cloud should be easy to leverage, broadly accessible, reliable and affordable. Our platform simplifies cloud computing, enabling our customers to rapidly accelerate innovation and increase their productivity and agility. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 609,000 individual and business customers using our platform to build, deploy and scale software applications. Our users include software engineers, researchers, data
scientists, system administrators, students and hobbyists. Our customers use our platform across numerous industry verticals and for a wide range of use cases, such as web and mobile applications, website hosting, e-commerce, media and gaming, personal web projects, and managed services, among many others. We believe that our focus on simplicity, community, open source and customer support are the four key differentiators of our business, driving a broad range of customers around the world to build their applications on our platform.
Improving the developer experience and increasing developer productivity are core to our mission. Our developer cloud platform was designed with simplicity in mind to ensure that software developers can spend less time managing their infrastructure and more time turning their ideas into innovative applications to grow their businesses. Simplicity guides how we design and enhance our easy-to-use-interface, the core capabilities we offer our customers and our approach to predictable and transparent pricing for our solutions. We offer mission-critical infrastructure solutions across compute, storage and networking, and we also enable developers to extend the native capabilities of our cloud with fully managed application, container and database offerings. In just minutes, developers can set up thousands of virtual machines, secure their projects, enable performance monitoring and scale up and down as needed. Our pricing is consumption-based and billed monthly in arrears, making it easy for our customers to track usage on an ongoing basis and optimize their deployments.
We generate revenue from the usage of our cloud computing platform by our customers, including but not limited to compute, storage and networking services. We recognize revenue based on the customer utilization of these resources. Our pricing is consumption-based and billed monthly in arrears, making it easy for our customers to track usage on an ongoing basis and optimize their deployments. The pricing for each of our products is available on our website. For example, the standard price for a Droplet is $5.00 per month, and our Managed Database product is available starting at $15.00 per month.
We have historically generated almost all of our revenue from our efficient self-service marketing model, which enables customers to get started on our platform very quickly and without the need for assistance. We focus heavily on enabling a self-service, low-friction model that makes it easy for users to try, adopt and use our products. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our sales and marketing expense was approximately 12%, 11% and 12% of our revenue, respectively. The efficiency of our go-to-market model and our focus on the needs of the individual and SMB markets have enabled us to drive organic growth and establish a truly global customer base across a broad range of industries.
We had approximately 609,000 customers as of December 31, 2021, up from approximately 573,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 543,000 as of December 31, 2019. We have a growing number of customers with higher spending levels, and these larger customers are expanding their business with us at a faster rate than our overall customer base. We had approximately 99,000 customers paying more than $50 per month as of December 31, 2021, up from approximately 80,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 68,000 as of December 31, 2019. Total customer growth was approximately 6% from 2020 to 2021, while growth in customers paying more than $50 per month was 24% from 2020 to 2021.
Our customers are spread across over 185 countries, and approximately two-thirds of our revenue has historically come from customers located outside the United States. In 2021, 38% of our revenue was generated from North America, 30% from Europe, 22% from Asia and 10% from the rest of the world. Revenue from customers paying more than $50 per month as a percentage of total revenue grew from 74% in 2019 to 78% in 2020 to 82% in 2021.
Our average revenue per customer, or ARPU, has increased significantly, from $40.16 in 2019 to $47.78 in 2020 to $59.96 in 2021. We had no material customer concentration as our top 25 customers made up approximately 10%, 9%, and 10% of our revenue in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We have experienced strong and predictable growth in recent periods. Our annual run-rate revenue, or ARR, as of December 31, 2021 was $490 million, up from $357 million as of December 31, 2020 and $285 million as of December 31, 2019. ARR as of the end of each month represents total revenue for that month multiplied by 12.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Increasing Importance of Cloud Computing and Developers
Our future success depends in large part on the continuing adoption of cloud computing, proliferation of cloud-native start-ups and SMBs and the increasing importance of developers, all of which are driving the adoption of our developer cloud platform. We believe our market opportunity is large and that these factors will continue to drive our growth. We plan to continue to invest significantly in scaling across many organizational functions in order to grow our operations both domestically and internationally to capitalize on these trends.
Growing our Customer Base
We believe there is a substantial opportunity to further expand our customer base, and our future growth depends, in large part, on our ability to increase the number of customers using our cloud computing platform. We have historically attracted customers by offering a low-friction, self-service cloud platform combined with a highly-efficient self-service marketing model. We are investing in strategies that we believe will continue to drive new customer adoption, especially among SMB customers, such as implementing new marketing initiatives that further optimize our self-service revenue funnel and expanding our go-to market teams in select international locations. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including our success in recruiting and expanding our sales and marketing organization and competitive dynamics in our target markets.
Increasing Usage by Our Existing Customers
Our customer base of approximately 609,000 customers represents a significant opportunity for further consumption of our services. There are substantial opportunities to expand revenue within our large customer base through increased usage of our platform as our customers grow their businesses, adoption of additional product offerings and targeted sales initiatives focused on our larger customers. Our consumption-based pricing model makes it frictionless for customers to increase their usage of our platform as they require more compute and storage as they grow and scale. We have also expanded the breadth of our platform offerings and will continue to do so as we have experienced strong adoption of recently developed products. To accelerate this growth across our larger customers, we complement our self-service marketing model with internal go-to-market teams that are specifically focused on expanding our business with our larger customers. Our ability to increase the usage of our platform by existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our platform and product offerings, competition, pricing and overall changes in our customers’ spending levels.
Enhancing Our Platform and Product Offerings
We believe the market opportunity for serving developers, start-ups and SMBs is very large and goes far beyond providing the core IaaS services of compute, storage and networking. We have a history of, and will continue to invest significantly in, developing and delivering innovative products, features and functionality targeted at our core customer base. In addition, while we have not been focused on acquisition opportunities to drive our growth, we may pursue both strategic partnerships and acquisitions that we believe will be complementary to our business, accelerate customer acquisition, increase usage of our platform and/or expand our product offerings in our core markets. Our results of operations may fluctuate as we make these investments to drive usage and take advantage of our expansive market opportunity.
Key Business Metrics
We utilize the key metrics set forth below to help us evaluate our business and growth, identify trends, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating these key metrics, and other companies may not calculate similarly titled metrics in a consistent manner, which may hinder comparability.
Customers
We believe that the number of customers is an important indicator of the growth of our business and future revenue opportunity. We define a customer at the end of any period as a person or entity who has incurred usage in the period and, as a result, has generated an invoice of greater than $0 for that period. We treat each customer that generates an invoice as a unique customer, and a single organization with multiple divisions, segments or subsidiaries may be counted as multiple customers if they separately signed up on our platform.
The number and growth of our larger customers is of particular importance to us as these customers represent a significant majority of our revenue and revenue growth, and they are more representative of the SMB customers that grow on our platform and use multiple products. We define customers paying more than $50 per month as customers having generated an invoice of greater than $50 for that period.
ARPU
We believe that our average revenue per customer, which we refer to as ARPU, is a strong indication of our ability to land new customers with higher spending levels and expand usage of our platform by our existing customers. We calculate ARPU on a monthly basis as our total revenue in that period divided by the number of customers determined as of the last day of that period. For a quarterly or annual period, ARPU is determined as the weighted average monthly ARPU over such three or 12-month period.
ARR
Given the renewable nature of our business, we view annual run-rate revenue as an important indicator of our current progress towards meeting our revenue targets and projected growth rate going forward. We calculate ARR at a point in time by multiplying the latest monthly period’s revenue by 12.
Net Dollar Retention Rate
Our ability to maintain long-term revenue growth and achieve profitability is dependent on our ability to retain and grow revenue from our existing customers. We have a history of retaining customers for multiple years and in many cases increasing their spend with us over time. To help us measure our performance in this area, we monitor our net dollar retention rate. We calculate net dollar retention rate monthly by starting with the revenue from the cohort of all customers during the corresponding month 12 months prior, or the Prior Period Revenue. We then calculate the revenue from these same customers as of the current month, or the Current Period Revenue, including any expansion and net of any contraction or attrition from these customers over the last 12 months. The calculation also includes revenue from customers that generated revenue before, but not in, the corresponding month 12 months prior, but subsequently generated revenue in the current month and are therefore reflected in the Current Period Revenue. We include this group of re-engaged customers in this calculation because our customers frequently use our platform for projects that stop and start over time. We then divide the total Current Period Revenue by the total Prior Period Revenue to arrive at the net dollar retention rate for the relevant month. For a quarterly or annual period, the net dollar retention rate is determined as the average monthly net dollar retention rates over such three or 12-month period.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We provide cloud computing services, including but not limited to compute, storage and networking, to our customers. We recognize revenue based on the customer utilization of these resources. Customer contracts are primarily month-to-month and do not include any minimum guaranteed quantities or fees. Fees are billed monthly, and payment is typically due upon invoicing. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for credits and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
We may offer sales incentives in the form of promotional and referral credits and grant credits to encourage customers to use our services. These types of promotional and referral credits typically expire in two months or less if not used. For credits earned with a purchase, they are recorded as contract liabilities when earned and recognized at the earlier of redemption or expiration. The majority of credits are redeemed in the month they are earned.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of fees related to operating in third-party co-location facilities, personnel expenses for those directly supporting our data centers and non-personnel costs, including amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs and depreciation of our data center equipment. Third-party co-location facility costs include data center rental fees, power costs, maintenance fees, network and bandwidth. Personnel expenses include salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation.
We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our infrastructure to support our product portfolio and scalability of our customer base. The level, timing and relative investment in our infrastructure could affect our cost of revenue in the future.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation. Research and development expenses also include amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs for research and development activities, which are amortized over three years, and professional services, as well as costs related to our efforts to add new features to our existing offerings, develop new offerings, and ensure the security, performance, and reliability of our global cloud platform. We expect research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in our platform and product offerings.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of our sales, marketing and customer support employees including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation. Sales and marketing expenses also include costs for marketing programs, advertising and professional service fees. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we enhance our product offerings and implement new marketing strategies.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs of our human resources, legal, finance, and other administrative functions including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation. General and administrative expenses also include bad debt expense, software, payment processing fees, business insurance, depreciation and amortization expenses, rent and facilities costs, and other administrative costs. We expect to incur significant additional legal, accounting and other expenses to support our operations as a public company, including costs associated with our compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We also expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense consists primarily of interest expense on our existing credit facility, amortization of convertible debt issuance costs, and third-party equipment financing; loss on extinguishment of debt; and gains or losses on foreign currency exchange.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred assets will not be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
___________________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
Stock-based compensation for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included compensation of $18.3 million and $12.1 million, respectively, related to secondary sales of common stock by certain current and former employees, which is primarily included in General and administrative. There were no such expenses recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021. See “Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020-Operating Expenses” and “Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019-Operating Expenses” below.
The following table sets forth our results of operations as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented:
___________________
* Less than 1% of revenue
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased $110.2 million, or 35%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a 25% increase in ARPU to $59.96 from $47.78 and an increase of approximately 36,000 customers to approximately 609,000. The increase in ARPU was primarily driven by continued adoption of our products by our customers leading to higher average usage on our platform.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $25.1 million, or 17%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher co-location costs and depreciation of our network equipment to support the growth in our business.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $40.7 million, or 54%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher personnel costs and stock-based compensation.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $17.4 million, or 52%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in advertising costs, stock-based compensation, and personnel costs.
General and administrative expenses increased $22.4 million, or 28%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher stock-based compensation and personnel costs, as well as higher payment processing fees and business insurance.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense decreased $19.9 million, or 74%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to lower interest expense due to the payoff of our debt under our existing credit facility and notes payable in the first quarter of 2021 and the $12.8 million unrealized loss on the revaluation of warrants for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax expense increased $0.4 million, or 43%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase of income in foreign jurisdictions.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased $63.6 million, or 25%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a 19% increase in ARPU to $47.78 from $40.16 and an increase of approximately 30,000 customers to approximately 573,000. The increase in ARPU was primarily driven by a $15.0 million increase in revenue from new products, and the increase in customers was driven by continued strong customer acquisition and retention.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $23.3 million, or 19%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher co-location costs, bandwidth expenses and depreciation of our network equipment to support the growth in our business, as well as additional ancillary data center equipment needs.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $15.0 million, or 25%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher personnel costs to support our growing operations, as well as stock-based compensation including secondary sales of our common stock.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $2.1 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in personnel costs to support our growing operations, partially offset by a decrease in advertising and other promotional costs.
General and administrative expenses increased $9.0 million, or 13%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to stock-based compensation including secondary sales of our common stock, an increase in personnel costs to support our growing operations and an increase in software expenses, partially offset by a decrease in travel and entertainment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other (Income) Expense
Other (income) expense increased $17.2 million, or 177%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in interest expense as a result of increased borrowings under our existing credit facility and a $12.8 million unrealized loss on the revaluation of warrants.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased $0.1 million, or 15%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase of income in foreign jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have funded our operations since inception primarily with cash flow generated by operations, private offerings of our securities, borrowings under our existing credit facility and capital expenditure financings. In March 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 16,500,000 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $47.00 per share resulting in aggregate net proceeds to us of $723.0 million after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flow from operations and availability under our Credit Facility (as defined below) and Convertible Notes (as defined below) will be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements and our outstanding contractual commitments for at least the next 12 months.
In February and March 2020, we entered into and subsequently amended a second amended and restated credit agreement with KeyBank National Association as administrative agent. In November 2021, we further amended such credit agreement, or as amended, the Credit Facility, to revise certain covenants that restricted the incurrence of indebtedness to permit the issuance of the convertible notes discussed below. Our Credit Facility has total draw down capacity of $320.0 million, with a $150.0 million revolver, or the Revolving Credit Facility, and a $170.0 million term loan. Our Credit Facility will mature on February 13, 2025. As of December 31, 2021, our total available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility was $150.0 million.
Our Credit Facility is secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all of our assets. Our Credit Facility contains certain financial and operational covenants, including a maximum ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated EBITDA of 4.50x with step-downs over time and a maximum debt service coverage ratio of 3.00x. Consolidated total debt and consolidated EBITDA, which are non-GAAP measures used for this covenant, are calculated in accordance with the definitions set forth in the Credit Facility. In this context, these measures are used solely to provide information on the extent to which we are in compliance with these financial covenants and may not be comparable to consolidated total debt and consolidated EBITDA used by other companies or any other non-GAAP measures we present elsewhere in this prospectus. We were in compliance with all covenants under our Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021.
In November 2021, we issued $1.50 billion aggregate principal amount of 0% Convertible Senior Notes due December 1, 2026, or the Convertible Notes, in a private offering, for net proceeds of $1.46 billion, after deducting underwriting fees, expenses and commissions. The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations and do not bear regular interest, and the principal amount of the Convertible Notes does not accrete. The Convertible Notes will mature on December 1, 2026 unless earlier converted, redeemed, or repurchased. In connection with this issuance and to minimize the impact of potential economic dilution upon conversion of the Convertible Notes, we repurchased and subsequently retired 2,940,929 shares of common stock at $119.01 per share, for a total cost of $350.0 million.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from sales to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel costs, data center co-location expenses, marketing expenses, payment processing fees, bandwidth and connectivity, server maintenance and software licensing fees.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $133.1 million, $58.1 million and $39.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for which the increases in each year were primarily driven by an increase in cash collections from higher revenues offset by an increase in cash expenses from personnel related costs.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $113.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $115.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by decreases in capitalization of internal-use software development costs and capital expenditures for property and equipment, partially offset by cash paid for acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired.
Net cash used in investing activities was $115.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $87.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by increases in capital expenditures for property and equipment, partially offset by decreases in capitalization of internal-use software development costs, purchase of intangible assets and cash paid for acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $1,593.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to net proceeds from our Convertible Notes issuance of $1,462.2 million and IPO of $723.0 million (including $1.4 million paid in fiscal year 2020), partially offset by repayments on the Credit Facility and notes payable of $263.2 million and repurchase of our common stock of $350 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $124.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $75.2 million in net proceeds from. borrowings under the Credit Facility, the proceeds of which were used to repay the previous credit facility, $49.8 million from our Series C preferred stock offering, and $14.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our stock plan, partially offset by $17.9 million in repayment of notes payable and capital leases associated with financed equipment purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $49.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to $59.5 million in borrowings under the 2018 revolving credit facility and $11.5 million of proceeds from third-party equipment financings, partially offset by $22.8 million in repayment of notes payable associated with financed equipment purchases.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Other than our long-term debt obligations, operating lease commitments and purchase obligations as disclosed in Note 6, 7 and Note 8, respectively, of the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we had no material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, and ASC 340-40, Contract Costs, effective January 1, 2019, using the modified retrospective method of adoption. ASC 606 was applied only to contracts that are not completed at the date of initial application. The adoption of ASC 606 did not result in any significant changes to the amount and timing of revenue recognition in prior, current or future periods. Therefore, there was no cumulative adjustment as a result of adoption. The reported results for fiscal year 2019 onwards reflect the application of ASC 606.
We account for revenue using the following steps:
1. Identify the contract with a customer
We consider the terms and conditions of the contract and our customary business practices in identifying our contracts under ASC 606. We determine we have a contract with a customer when the customer agrees to the terms of service, we can identify each party’s rights regarding the services to be transferred, we can identify the payment terms for
the services, we have determined the customer has the ability and intent to pay and the contract has commercial substance. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience or, in the case of a new customer, we apply security checks and validate their payment method.
2. Identify the performance obligations in the contract
Our performance obligation is to provide our cloud-based infrastructure for customers to use at the customers’ election. The availability of services is free of charge, and therefore we have no performance obligation until the customer elects to use the services.
3. Determine the transaction price
The transaction price is calculated based on the customer’s usage for the month at an hourly rate that is published on the Company’s website. None of our contracts contain a significant financing component.
4. Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract
The transaction price is calculated based on actual monthly usage and pricing that is published on the Company’s website. This is considered a single performance obligation, and thus the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation.
5. Recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation
We provide cloud computing services, including but not limited to compute, storage and networking, to our customers. We recognize revenue based on the customer utilization of these resources. Customer contracts are primarily month-to-month and do not include any minimum guaranteed quantities or fees. Fees are billed monthly, and payment is typically due upon invoicing. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for credits and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Our global cloud platform is supported by various third parties. We considered the principal versus agent guidance in ASC 606 and concluded that we are the principal for all services provided to its customers.
We may offer sales incentives in the form of promotional and referral credits and grant credits to encourage customers to use our services. These types of promotional and referral credits typically expire in two months or less if not used. For credits earned with a purchase, they are recorded as contract liabilities when earned and recognized at the earlier of redemption or expiration. The majority of credits are redeemed in the month they are earned.
Timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. We record a receivable when revenue is recognized prior to invoicing. Any payments received in advance of billing are a contract liability, which is recorded as Deferred revenue within Total current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable primarily represents revenue recognized that was not invoiced at the balance sheet date and is primarily collected in the following month. We maintain the allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses expected to result from the inability of some customers to make payments as they become due. We continuously monitor collections and payments from our customers and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based on historical loss patterns, the number of days that customer invoices are past due and an evaluation of the potential risk of loss associated with specific accounts. When management becomes aware of circumstances that may further decrease the likelihood of collection, it records a specific allowance against amounts due, which reduces the receivable to the amount that management reasonably believes will be collected. We record changes in our estimate to the allowance for doubtful accounts through bad debt expense and relieve the allowance after the potential for recovery is considered remote. While such credit losses have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates that we have in the past.
Stock-Based Compensation
ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”) requires that share-based compensation expense be measured and recognized at an amount equal to the fair value of share-based payments granted under compensation arrangements. The fair value of each restricted stock award or stock option awards that only contains a time-based vesting condition is equal to the market value of our common stock on the date of grant. For the award that contains a market condition, we estimate the fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model whereby the fair value of the award is
fixed at grant date and amortized over the longer of the remaining performance or service period. The Monte Carlo Simulation valuation model incorporates the following assumptions: expected stock price volatility, the expected life of the awards, a risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. Significant judgment is required in determining the expected volatility of our common stock. Due to the limited history of trading of our common stock, we determined expected volatility based on a peer group of publicly traded companies.
Internal-Use Software Costs
We capitalize costs to develop software for internal use when both the preliminary project stage is complete and management has authorized further funding for the project based on a determination that it is both probable that the project will be completed and used to perform the function intended. Costs related to preliminary project activities and post implementation activities are expensed as incurred. Capitalized costs include external consulting fees, payroll and payroll-related costs, and stock-based compensation for employees in our development teams who are directly associated with, and who devote time to, our internal-use software projects during the application development stage. Once an application has reached the development stage, qualifying internal and external costs are capitalized until the application is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Capitalized qualifying costs are amortized on a straight-line basis when the software is ready for its intended use over an estimated useful life, which is generally three years. We evaluate the useful lives of these assets on an annual basis and test for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets.
We exercise judgment in determining the point at which various projects may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined under the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Therefore, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP, we provide investors with non-GAAP financial measures including: (i) adjusted gross profit and adjusted gross margin; (ii) non-GAAP income from operations and non-GAAP operating margin; (iii) adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin; (iv) non-GAAP net income (loss) and non-GAAP diluted net income (loss) per share; and (v) free cash flow and free cash flow margin. These measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. In particular, free cash flow is not a substitute for cash used in operating activities. Additionally, the utility of free cash flow as a measure of our financial performance and liquidity is further limited as it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for a given period. Our calculations of each of these measures may differ from the calculations of measures with the same or similar titles by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider each of these non-GAAP financial measures alongside other financial performance measures, including the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP and our other GAAP results. A reconciliation of each of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is set forth below.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin
We believe adjusted gross profit and adjusted gross margin, when taken together with our GAAP financial results, provides a meaningful assessment of our performance, and is useful for the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts.
We define adjusted gross profit as gross profit exclusive of stock-based compensation, amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs and depreciation of our data center equipment included within Cost of revenue. We exclude stock-based compensation, which is a non-cash item, because we do not consider it indicative of our core operating performance. We exclude depreciation and amortization, which primarily relates to our investments in our data center servers that are long lived assets with an economic life of five years, because it may not reflect our current or future cash spending levels to support our business. While we intend to spend a significant amount on capital expenditures on an absolute basis in the coming years, our capital expenditures as a percentage of revenue has declined significantly and will continue to decline. We define adjusted gross margin as a percentage of adjusted gross profit to revenue.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Gross profit, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted gross profit, for each of the periods presented:
Non-GAAP Income from Operations and Non-GAAP Operating Margin
We define non-GAAP income from operations as Loss from operations excluding stock-based compensation. We define non-GAAP operating margin as non-GAAP income from operations as a percentage of revenue. We use Non-GAAP income from operations to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Non-GAAP income from operations facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, helps provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Loss from operations, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, to Non-GAAP income (loss) from operations, for each of the periods presented:
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We define adjusted EBITDA as net loss attributable to common stockholders, adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, interest expense, income tax expense, loss on extinguishment of debt, restructuring and severance expense, asset impairment, revaluation of warrants, acquisition related costs, a release of a VAT reserve and other charges. We believe that adjusted EBITDA, when taken together with our GAAP financial results, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating performance and facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. In particular, we believe that the use of adjusted EBITDA is helpful to our investors as it is a measure used by management in assessing the health of our business, determining incentive compensation, evaluating our operating performance, and for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
Our calculation of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin may differ from the calculations of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin by other companies and therefore comparability may be limited. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin alongside other financial performance measures, including our net loss attributable to common stockholders and other GAAP results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Net loss attributable to common stockholders, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods presented:
___________________
(1)Consists primarily of expenses related to changes in our senior leadership, sales and infrastructure teams.
(2)Consists of internal-use software impairment charges related to software that is no longer being used.
(3)Resolution of certain tax matters in certain jurisdictions with relevant authorities.
(4)Consists primarily of third-party consulting costs to enhance our finance function.
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) and Non-GAAP Diluted Net Income (Loss) Per Share
We define non-GAAP net income (loss) as Net loss attributable to common stockholders, excluding stock-based compensation, amortization of acquired intangibles, acquisition related costs, and a release of a VAT reserve. We define non-GAAP diluted net income (loss) per share as non-GAAP net income (loss) divided by the weighted-average shares including the dilutive effects of our convertible preferred stock, warrants, stock options, RSUs, PRSUs and Convertible Notes.
We believe non-GAAP net income (loss) per share provides our management and investors consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations, as this metric generally eliminates the effects of unusual or non-recurring items from period to period for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
___________________
(1)Resolution of certain tax matters in certain jurisdictions with relevant authorities.
(2)The income tax effects of non-GAAP adjustments are calculated based on the applicable statutory tax rate for the relevant jurisdiction, except for those items which are non-taxable or subject to valuation allowances for which the tax expense (benefit) was calculated at 0%. The tax benefit for amortization is calculated in a similar manner as the tax effects of the non-GAAP adjustments.
(3)Basic weighted-average shares was used to compute both basic and diluted non-GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders per share for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Free Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow Margin
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as Net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, capitalized internal-use software costs and purchase of intangible assets. Free cash flow margin is calculated as free cash flow divided by total revenue. We believe that free cash flow and free cash flow margin are useful indicators of liquidity that provide information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated from our core operations that, after the purchases of property and equipment, can be used for strategic initiatives, including investing in our business and selectively pursuing acquisitions and strategic investments. We further believe that historical and future trends in free cash flow and free cash flow margin, even if negative, provide useful information about the amount of Net cash provided by operating activities that is available (or not available) to be used for strategic initiatives. For example, if free cash flow is negative, we may need to access cash reserves or other sources of capital to invest in strategic initiatives. One limitation of free cash flow and free cash flow margin is that they do not reflect our future contractual commitments. Additionally, free cash flow does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for a given period.
The following table presents our cash flows for the periods presented and a reconciliation of free cash flow and free cash flow margin to Net cash provided by operating activities the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in
accordance with GAAP: