ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(All dollar amounts included herein are presented in thousands, except as otherwise noted)
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the combined consolidated financial statements and corresponding notes, elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Any forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Any forward-looking statements are subject to a number of important factors, including those factors discussed under “Risk Factors” and “Special Note on Forward-Looking Statements,” that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in such forward-looking statements.
Overview
Douglas Elliman Inc. is a holding company and is engaged principally in two business segments:
Real Estate Brokerage: the residential real estate brokerage services through our subsidiary Douglas Elliman Realty, which operates the largest residential brokerage company in the New York metropolitan area and also conducts residential real estate brokerage operations in Florida, California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Colorado, New Jersey and Texas.
Corporate and other: the operations of our holding company as well as our investment business that invests in select PropTech opportunities through our New Valley Ventures subsidiary.
See Item 1. “Business” for detailed overview and description of our principal operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from our management’s perspective. Our MD&A is organized as follows:
COVID-19 Pandemic and Current Business and Industry Trends. This section discusses the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and the steps we have taken to address such effects, including current business and industry trends.
Spin-off and Basis of Presentation. This section provides a general description of the spin-off, which occurred on December 29, 2021 and separated our business of Vector Group.
Business Overview. This section provides a general description of our business, as well as other matters that we believe are important in understanding our results of operations and financial condition and in anticipating future trends.
Critical Accounting Estimates. This section includes a discussion of accounting estimates considered to be important to our financial condition and results of operations and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in their application. In addition, our significant accounting estimates, including our critical accounting estimates, are discussed in the notes to our audited combined consolidated annual financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations. This section provides an analysis of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Certain discussions of the changes in our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources from the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 have been omitted from this Form 10-K, but may be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Registration Statement on Form S-1, initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 7, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources. This section provides a discussion of our financial condition and liquidity, an analysis of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as certain contractual obligations and off-balance sheet arrangements that existed at December 31, 2021.
COVID-19 Pandemic and Current Business and Industry Trends
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and disrupt normal activities in many segments of the U.S. economy even as COVID-19 vaccines have been and continue to be administered. Many uncertainties continue to surround the pandemic, including risks associated with the timing and extent of vaccine administration and the impact of COVID-19 variants, the
duration of the pandemic and the length of immunity. The following provides a summary of our actions since COVID-19 was declared a pandemic in March 2020.
We are one of the largest residential real estate brokers in the New York City market and approximately 46% of our brokerage revenues were derived from the New York City market in 2018 and 2019. Published reports and data indicate that the New York metropolitan area was initially impacted more than any other area in the United States. Consequently, various governmental agencies in the New York metropolitan area and in other markets where we operate instituted quarantines, “pause” orders, “shelter-in-place” rules, restrictions on travel and restrictions on the types of businesses that could operate. These restrictions adversely impacted our ability to conduct business during the year ended December 31, 2020 and, in particular from March 2020 to October 2020. For example, our agents were restricted from performing in-person showings of properties or conducting open houses in most of our markets from March 2020 to June 2020. We experienced a severe decline in closed sales volume in New York City from March 2020 to October 2020. As a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the New York City market, and combined with the increased demand for existing homes in other areas of the U.S., the percentage of our brokerage revenues from the New York City market declined from approximately 46% in 2019 to approximately 34% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Beginning in April 2020, as a response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we made significant operating adjustments, including a reduction of brokerage personnel of approximately 25% and reductions of other administrative expenses, as well as a reduction, deferral or elimination of certain office lease expenses. As markets have reopened and our revenues have significantly increased, our expenses have increased in 2021 from the comparable 2020 periods. These increases were primarily the result of increased personnel expenses (associated with both discretionary compensation as well as the reinstatement of salary levels) and advertising expenses (associated with increased listing volume) in 2021.
A strong recovery in markets complementary to New York City, including Long Island, Westchester County, the Hamptons, Connecticut, Palm Beach, Miami, Los Angeles, and Aspen began late in the second quarter of 2020, following a period of sharp decline in existing home transactions that began in the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the COVID-19 crisis. In 2021, we experienced a recovery in New York City as well.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we believe sustained high levels of demand in the markets in which we operate have been supported by beneficial consumer trends such as relaxation of social distancing measures and office re-openings coupled with further adoption of remote work trends, which we believe enhance consumers’ propensity to relocate to attractive tax and weather destinations, coupled with a favorable mortgage rate environment. In addition, continued high demand and low housing inventory levels in the markets in which we operate have driven increased average existing home prices throughout such markets in 2021. We anticipate that our markets, and in particular, New York City, will continue to improve from 2020 levels with average existing home prices increasing and existing homes transaction growth remaining strong in 2022.
There remain significant uncertainties regarding whether the beneficial consumer trends discussed above, partially offset by low housing inventory levels and rising mortgage interest rates, will be maintained, and whether such trends will continue to have a positive effect on our results of operations, financial position and cash flow, as well as significant uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact of COVID-19 variants, the duration of the pandemic and the length of immunity. See “Risk Factors.”
Spin-off and Basis of Presentation
We are a Delaware corporation and were incorporated in 2021 in connection with the separation of Douglas Elliman from Vector Group Ltd. (“Vector Group”), as an independent, publicly-traded company, listed on the New York Stock Exchange (the “Spin-off”). On December 29, 2021, Vector Group completed the Spin-off of the common stock of Douglas Elliman to its stockholders (including Vector Group common stock underlying outstanding stock option awards and restricted stock awards). Each holder of Vector Group common stock received one share of Douglas Elliman’s common stock for every two shares of Vector Group common stock (including Vector Group common stock underlying outstanding stock option awards and restricted stock awards) held of record as of the close of business, New York City time, on December 20, 2021.
Our combined consolidated financial statements (the “combined consolidated financial statements”) were prepared on a stand-alone basis derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Vector Group. These financial statements reflect the combined historical results of our operations, financial position and cash flows in accordance with GAAP and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 1-B, Allocation of Expenses and Related Disclosure in Financial Statements of Subsidiaries, Divisions or Lesser Business Components of Another Entity. References to GAAP issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) are to the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, also referred to as the “Codification” or “ASC.”
Historically, separate financial statements have not been prepared for Douglas Elliman, and we have not operated as a stand-alone business from Vector Group. The combined consolidated financial statements include certain assets and liabilities that have historically been held by Vector Group or by other Vector Group subsidiaries but are specifically identifiable or otherwise
attributable to us. All significant intercompany transactions and balances between Vector Group and us were previously included as components of Vector Group’s net investment in Douglas Elliman in the combined consolidated financial statements, as they were considered effectively settled upon effectiveness of the Spin-off. The combined consolidated financial statements are presented as if our businesses had been combined for all periods presented. The assets and liabilities in the combined consolidated financial statements have been reflected on a historical cost basis, as immediately prior to the Spin-off all of the assets and liabilities presented were wholly owned by Vector Group and were transferred to us at carry-over basis.
The combined consolidated statements of operations include allocations for certain support functions that are provided on a centralized basis and not historically recorded at the business unit level by Vector Group, such as expenses related to executive management, finance, legal, human resources, government affairs, information technology, and venue operations, among others. Certain corporate and operational support functions were charged to Douglas Elliman and were reflected in order to properly burden all business units comprising Vector Group’s historical operations. These expenses were allocated to us on the basis of direct usage when identifiable, with the remainder allocated on a percentage basis using estimates calculated by Vector Group’s management. These expenses were recorded as general and administrative expenses.
Management believes the assumptions underlying the combined consolidated financial statements, including the assumptions regarding allocating general corporate expenses, are reasonable. Nevertheless, the combined consolidated financial statements do not include all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred by us and do not reflect our combined results of operations, financial position and cash flows had we been a stand-alone company during the periods presented. Actual costs that would have been incurred if we had been a stand-alone company will depend on multiple factors, including organizational structure and strategic decisions made in various areas, including information technology and infrastructure. We are unable to quantify the amounts that it would have recorded during the historical periods on a stand-alone basis as it is not practicable to do so.
Business Overview
With a leading luxury brand and a comprehensive suite of technology-enabled real estate services and investments, we are well positioned to capitalize on opportunities in the large and growing U.S. residential real estate market. Since the beginning of 2020, U.S. homeowner equity has grown 17.6% to $23.6 trillion. Further, new and existing home sales in the U.S. are forecast to grow to approximately 7.5 million units in 2022, compared to approximately 7.0 million, 6.5 million and 6.0 million units in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association - MBA Mortgage Finance Forecast. We believe increased homeowner equity and growth in home sales are benefiting from several factors including low mortgage interest rates (which have risen in 2022), historically low inventory, and increased mobility resulting from COVID-19. This expanding market presents opportunities for significant commission income with national commission rates averaging approximately 5.8% according to HomeLight’s real estate transaction data of thousands of home sales, while our actual commission rates have ranged between 5.27% in 2017 and 4.97% in 2021 due to our sales mix, which consists of higher-priced homes. Despite various “agentless” models such as “iBuying,” approximately 87% of buyers purchased their home through a real estate agent or broker and 90% of sellers were assisted by a real estate agent when selling their home between July 2020 and June 2021, according to the National Association of Realtors (or NAR), highlighting the central role agents continue to play in real estate transactions. Agents are able to generate significant repeat business from clients and referrals, with 68% of home sellers and 75% of home buyers in 2021 choosing to work with an agent they had used in the past or through a referral, according to NAR. Repeat business, as well the ability to provide ancillary services, allows agents to extend their client relationships and generate significant lifetime value.
Since its inception in 1911, Douglas Elliman has challenged the status quo of the real estate industry. We were founded on Douglas L. Elliman’s vision that New Yorkers would shift their preference for traditional homes to favor luxury apartments that were both sold and managed by comprehensive real estate companies. More than a century later, the Douglas Elliman brand is still associated with service, luxury and forward thinking - our markets are primarily international finance and technology hubs that are densely populated and offer housing inventory at premium price points. The average transaction value of a home we sold in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.58 million - significantly higher than our principal competitors. Douglas Elliman is one of the largest residential brokerage companies in the New York metropolitan area, which includes New York City, Long Island, Westchester and the Hamptons, and the sixth largest in the U.S. We also offer, including through our subsidiaries and ventures, ancillary services, such as property management, title and escrow.
Today, we are building on our record of innovation. Douglas Elliman is focused on digitizing, integrating and simplifying real estate activities for agents and elevating their clients’ experiences. We are bringing innovative, technology-driven PropTech solutions to Douglas Elliman by adopting new PropTech solutions for agents and their clients and also investing in select PropTech opportunities through New Valley Ventures. Our model is to source and use best-of-breed products and services that we believe will increase our efficiency. In addition to entering into business relationships with PropTech companies, as described further below, we are committed to creating over time a portfolio of PropTech companies that, through our business and investment relationship, have access to our agents and their clients, as well as our know-how and experience, to grow their own businesses, while benefiting our operations. This keeps Douglas Elliman and our agents on the cutting edge of the industry with new solutions and services that can be integrated into our technology foundation, while also remaining asset-light.
Furthermore, we maintain upside potential in the success of our PropTech partners in which we invest through minority stakes in their capital structures.
We have a track record of generating profitable growth. For the year ended December 31, 2020, despite the unprecedented impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on many of our markets, we had total revenues of $773,987, net loss of $46,372 and Adjusted EBITDA of $22,055. Our management responded to the profound impact of the COVID-19 pandemic by adjusting Douglas Elliman’s expense structure and introducing additional technology to improve the efficiency of our agents. Consequently, as markets reopened and vaccinations for COVID-19 became available, Douglas Elliman’s business rapidly improved and, for the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenues were $1,353,138, representing a 75% increase from the prior year period, our net income was $98,838 and our Adjusted EBITDA was $110,659. We are experiencing strong momentum in many of our markets and we believe we are well positioned to continue capitalizing on the attractive market opportunity. Douglas Elliman’s gross transaction value increased from $29,100,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $51,200,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The number of Principal Agents was 5,189 as of December 31, 2021, an increase from 4,996 as of December 31, 2020. During this period of growth, we have maintained stable agent retention. See “Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for information regarding our non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
We believe our comprehensive suite of real estate solutions, our industry-leading brand name, and our talented team of employees and agents set us apart in the industry. We will pursue profitable growth opportunities through the expansion of our footprint, investments in cutting-edge PropTech companies through New Valley Ventures, continued recruitment of best-in-class talent, acquisitions (acqui-hires) and operational efficiencies. We will employ a disciplined capital allocation strategy aimed at generating sustainable long-term value for our stockholders.
Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our financial results, we use the following business metrics to evaluate our business and identify trends affecting our business. To evaluate our operating performance, we also use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin and financial measures for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Non-GAAP Financial Measures”), which are financial measures not prepared in accordance with GAAP
Key Business Metrics
_____________________________
(1)We calculate total transactions by taking the sum of all transactions closed in which our agent represented the buyer or seller in the purchase or sale of a home (excluding rental transactions). We include a single transaction twice when one or more of our agents represent both the buyer and seller in any given transaction.
(2)Gross transaction value is the sum of all closing sale prices for homes transacted by our agents (excluding rental transactions). We include the value of a single transaction twice when our agents serve both the home buyer and home seller in the transaction.
(3)Average transaction value per transaction is calculated as gross transaction value divided by total transactions.
(4)The number of Principal Agents is determined as of the last day of the specified period. We use the number of Principal Agents, in combination with our other key business metrics such as total transactions and gross transaction value, as a measure of agent productivity.
(5)Includes the Principal Agents acquired in connection with increased ownership from 1% to 50% in Douglas Elliman Texas in August 2021.
(6)Annual Retention is calculated as the quotient of (x) the prior year revenue generated by agents retained divided by (y) the prior year revenue generated by all agents. We use Annual Retention as a measure of agent stability.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that represents our net income adjusted for depreciation and amortization, investment income, net, stock-based compensation expense, benefit from income taxes, and other items. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by revenue.
We believe that Non-GAAP Financial Measures are important measures that supplement analysis of our results of operations and enhance an understanding of our operating performance. We believe Non-GAAP Financial Measures provide a useful measure of operating results unaffected by non-recurring items, differences in capital structures and ages of related assets among otherwise comparable companies. Management uses Non-GAAP Financial Measures as measures to review and assess operating performance of our business, and management and investors should review both the overall performance (GAAP net income) and the operating performance (Non-GAAP Financial Measures) of our business. While management considers Non-GAAP Financial Measures to be important, they should be considered in addition to, but not as substitutes for or superior to, other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as operating income, and net income. In addition, Non-GAAP Financial Measures are susceptible to varying calculations and our measurement of Non-GAAP Financial Measures may not be comparable to those of other companies.
Reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures have been provided in the table below.
Computation of Adjusted EBITDA
_____________________________
(a)Represents equity in losses (earnings) recognized from the Company’s investment in an equity method investment that is accounted for under the equity method and is not consolidated in the Company’s financial results.
(b)Represents restructuring related to Douglas Elliman Realty, LLC’s realignment of administrative support functions, office locations and business model.
(c)Represents non-cash intangible asset impairment charges related to the goodwill and trademark of Douglas Elliman Realty, LLC.
(d)“Adjusted EBITDA”, as used throughout this prospectus, refers to adjusted EBITDA attributed to Douglas Elliman Inc.
Critical Accounting Estimates
General. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses. Significant estimates subject to material changes in the near term include revenue recognition, impairment charges, valuation of intangible assets, deferred tax liabilities, and valuation of investments, including other-than-temporary impairments to such investments. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer and excludes any sales incentives. Revenue is recognized when (a) an enforceable contract with a customer exists, that has commercial substance, and collection of substantially all consideration for services is probable; and (b) the performance obligations to the customer are satisfied either over time or at a point in time.
Real estate commissions earned by our Real Estate brokerage businesses are recognized as revenue when the real estate sale is completed or lease agreement is executed, which is the point in time that the performance obligation is satisfied. Any commission and other payments received in advance are deferred until the satisfaction of the performance obligation. Corresponding agent commission expenses, including any advance commission or other direct expense payments, are deferred and recognized as cost of sales concurrently with related revenues.
Contracts in our development marketing business provide us with the exclusive right to sell units in a subject property for a commission fee per unit sold calculated as a percentage of the sales price of each unit. Accordingly, a performance obligation exists for each unit in the Development Marketing property under contract, and a portion of the total contract transaction price is allocated to and recognized at the time each unit is sold.
Under development marketing service arrangements, dedicated staff are required for a subject property and these costs are typically reimbursed from the customer through advance payments that are recoupable from future commission earnings. Advance payments received and associated direct costs paid are deferred, allocated to each unit in the subject property, and recognized at the time of the completed sale of each unit.
Development marketing service arrangements also include direct fulfillment costs incurred in advance of the satisfaction of the performance obligation. We capitalize costs incurred in fulfilling a contract with a customer if the fulfillment costs 1) relate directly to an existing contract or anticipated contract, 2) generate or enhance resources that will be used to satisfy performance obligations in the future, and 3) are expected to be recovered. These costs are amortized over the estimated customer relationship period which is the contract term. We use an amortization method that is consistent with the pattern of transfer of goods or services to its customers by allocating these costs to each unit in the subject property and expensing these costs as each unit sold is closed over the contract.
Commission revenue is recognized at the time the performance obligation is met for our Real Estate commercial leasing contracts, which is when the lease agreement is executed, as there are no further performance obligations, including any amounts of future payments under extended payment terms.
Our Real Estate property management revenue arrangements consist of providing operational and administrative services to manage a subject property. Fees for these services are typically billed and collected monthly. Property management service fees are recognized as revenue over time using the output method as the performance obligations under the customer arrangement are satisfied each month. Our Real Estate title insurance commission fee revenue is earned when the sale of the title insurance is completed, which corresponds to the point in time when the underlying real estate sale transaction closes and the payment is received.
Accounting for Leases. Under Accounting Standards Committee (“ASC”) 842, we determine if an arrangement is a lease at contract inception. At lease commencement, we record and recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets for the lease liability amount and initial direct costs incurred, offset by lease incentives received. We record lease liabilities for the net present value of future lease payments over the lease term. The discount rate we use is generally our estimated incremental borrowing rate unless the lessor’s implicit rate is readily determinable. We calculate discount rates periodically to estimate the rate we would pay to borrow the funds necessary to obtain an asset of similar value, over a similar term, with a similar security. The lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. We recognize operating lease expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Operating leases are included in operating lease ROU assets and lease liabilities on the combined consolidated balance sheets.
Stock-Based Compensation. In connection with the Spin-off, we granted stock-based compensation to employees and recognized expense on such grants. Our stock-based compensation uses a fair-value-based method to recognize non-cash compensation expense for share-based transactions. Under the fair value recognition provisions, we recognize stock-based compensation net of an estimated forfeiture rate and only recognize compensation cost for those shares expected to vest on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award.
Current Expected Credit Losses. We are exposed to credit losses for various amounts due from real estate agents, which are included in other current assets on the combined consolidated balance sheets, net of an allowance for credit losses. We historically estimated our allowance for credit losses on receivables from agents based on an evaluation of aging, agent sales in pipeline, any security, specific exposures, and historical experience of collections from the individual agents. Based on our historical credit losses on receivables from agents, current and expected future market trends (such as the current and expected impact of COVID-19 on the real estate market), it was determined that the requirements of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13 did not result in a material impact on our allowance for credit losses as of January 1, 2020 of $6,132. We estimated that the credit losses for these receivables were $8,607 and $7,038 and at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Goodwill and Indefinite Life Assets. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment on an annual basis, or whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. We follow ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, and subsequent updates including ASU 2011-08, Testing Goodwill for Impairment and ASU 2017-14, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. The amendments permit entities to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value or choose to bypass the optional qualitative assessment, we would then assess recoverability by comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to our carrying amount; otherwise, no further impairment test would be required. The fair value of the intangible asset associated with the Douglas Elliman trademark is determined using a “relief from royalty payments” method. This approach involves two steps: (i) estimating reasonable royalty rates for its trademark associated with the Douglas Elliman trademark and (ii) applying these royalty rates to a net sales stream and discounting the resulting cash flows to determine fair value. This fair value is then compared with the carrying value of the trademark. As discussed in Note 9 to our combined consolidated financial statements, during the first quarter of 2020, we performed quantitative assessments of our goodwill and our trademark intangible asset in conjunction with our quarterly review for indicators of impairment. The quantitative assessments resulted in impairment charges to goodwill of $46,252 and to the trademark intangible asset of $12,000. We performed a qualitative assessment for the year ended December 31, 2021, which did not result in additional impairment charges related to our goodwill or trademark.
Income Taxes. The application of income tax law is inherently complex. Laws and regulations in this area are voluminous and are often ambiguous. As such, we are required to make many subjective assumptions and judgments regarding our income tax exposures. Interpretations of and guidance surrounding income tax laws and regulations change over time and, as a result, changes in our subjective assumptions and judgments may materially affect amounts recognized in our combined consolidated financial statements.
Our principal subsidiaries, Douglas Elliman Realty, LLC and New Valley Ventures LLC, are limited liability companies. The members of a limited liability company are taxed on their proportionate share of the respective limited liability company’s taxable income. Accordingly, prior to the Spin-off, no provision or liability for Federal income taxes was included in the financial statements, except for Douglas Elliman of California, Inc. which is taxed as a corporation and has net operating loss carryforwards, which have been fully reserved for with a valuation allowance, and DER Holdings II LLC, which is also taxed as a corporation. We are, however, subject to New York City Unincorporated Business Tax (“UBT”) and accordingly has recorded a provision for such UBT in its combined consolidated financial statements prior to the Spin-off.
However, after the Spin-off, we are taxed as a corporation for purposes of U.S. and state and local income taxes and have recorded an income tax provision at current income tax rates.
Results of Operations
The following discussion provides an assessment of our results of operations, capital resources and liquidity and should be read in conjunction with our combined consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
The primary components of our operating expenses, the changes in which are described in the following discussion of our results of operations, are defined below:
•Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of marketing and advertising expenses, compensation and other personnel-related costs for employees supporting sales, marketing, expansion and related functions, occupancy-related costs and agent acquisition incentives.
•Operations and support. Operations and support expense consists primarily of compensation and other personnel-related costs for employees supporting agents, third-party consulting and professional services costs (not included in
general and administrative or technology), fair value adjustments to contingent consideration for our acquisitions and other related expenses.
•General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation, stock-based compensation expense and other personnel-related costs for executive management and administrative employees, including finance and accounting, legal, human resources and communications, the occupancy costs for our headquarters and other offices supporting our administrative functions and, after the Spin-off (beginning in 2022), include transition services paid to our former parent, Vector Group, for the use of office space and employees, professional services fees for legal and finance, insurance expenses and talent acquisition expenses.
•Technology. Technology expense consists primarily of compensation and other personnel-related costs for employees in the product, engineering and technology functions, website hosting expenses, software licenses and equipment, third-party consulting costs, data licenses of PropTech and other related expenses associated with the implementation of our technology initiatives.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our combined consolidated statements of operations data for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
2021 Compared to 2020
Revenues. Our revenues increased by $579,151 (74.8%) in 2021 compared to 2020 from $773,987 to $1,353,138, which was primarily related to an increase of $558,665 in our commission and other brokerage income, which increased as a result of increased revenues from existing home sales caused by home-buying trends in our markets.
In 2020, and, in particular, the second quarter of 2020, we experienced a severe decline in closed sales volume in New York City. Therefore, as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the New York City market, and combined with the increased demand for existing-homes in other areas of the U.S., the percentage of our brokerage revenues from the New York City market declined from approximately 46% in 2019 to approximately 29% in 2020.
In particular, the New York City market improved in 2021 and this has continued in 2022. The percentage of our brokerage revenues from the New York City market increased from 28.7% in 2020 to 34.1% in 2021 and demonstrated continued strength in the residential real estate market, which has improved markedly from a sharp decline in transactions, primarily in the second quarter of 2020, due to factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Initially, in the second half of 2020, as our markets began reopening and vaccines for COVID-19 became available, and consistent with home buying trends in the U.S., our business improved significantly in markets complementary to New York City, including South Florida (Miami and Palm Beach), the New York City suburbs (Long Island, Westchester County and Connecticut), the Hamptons, Los Angeles, and
Aspen. In 2021, we experienced a recovery in New York City as well as continued momentum in our other markets. In 2021, our commission and other brokerage income generated from the sales of existing homes increased by $205,782 in New York City, $194,802 in the Southeast region, $79,115 in the West region, and $44,381 in the Northeast region, which excludes New York City, in each case compared to 2020. In addition, our revenues from Development Marketing increased by $34,585 in 2021 compared to 2020.
Operating Expenses. Our operating expenses in 2020 and 2021 were significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and, beginning in the second half of 2020, home buying trends. In the second quarter of 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we made operating adjustments that resulted in reduced expenses and, in 2021, home- buying trends, which began in the second half of 2020, resulted in significantly increased demand for existing homes and, thus, an increase in associated expenses. As our business improved with market re-opening, beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, we relinquished certain expense-reduction initiatives implemented during 2020. In addition, the increases in business also resulted in increased personnel expenses (associated with both discretionary compensation as well as the reinstatement of salary levels) and advertising expenses (associated with increased listing volume) in 2021.
Real Estate Agent Commissions. As a result of our growth in commissions and other brokerage income, our real estate agent commissions expense increased from $546,948 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $985,523 in 2021, or $438,575 (80.2%). Real estate agent commissions expense, as a percentage of revenues, increased from 70.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 72.8% for 2021 as a result of a higher percentage of revenues being generated in the Southeast (Florida) and Western (primarily California) regions, which traditionally pay higher commission rates than other regions.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expense increased from $64,097 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $77,174 for 2021. The increase was the result of increased demand for our active listings in 2021 (caused by home buying trends and reopened markets after the COVID-19 pandemic) as well as significant growth in revenues associated with increased demand for existing homes in our markets in 2021.
Operations and support. Operations and support expense increased from $49,895 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $71,641 for 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to the acquisition of our interest in Portfolio Escrow in the fourth quarter of 2020.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses increased from $76,134 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $92,798 in 2021. The increase in expenses was the result of the relinquishment of certain expense-reduction initiatives that were implemented during the second quarter of 2020 as our markets reopened and our revenues increased significantly. The increases in 2021 were offset by the favorable impact of our expense reductions that began in 2020 as we continue to more efficiently serve our agents and their clients.
Technology. Technology expenses increased slightly from $14,858 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $15,343 for 2021.
Operating income (loss). Operating income increased from a loss of $49,285 (negative 6.4% of revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020 to income of $102,098 (7.5% of revenues) in 2021. The increase is associated with the absence of a one-time non-cash impairment charge of $58,252 and restructuring charges of $3,382 in the 2020 period as well as increased revenues in 2021 and continued expense-reduction initiatives that began in the second quarter of 2020. The non-cash impairment related to the evaluation of potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the possibility of an economic recession, on our business. The restructuring charges were the result of realigning our administrative support functions, and office locations as well as adjusting our business model to more efficiently serve our agents and clients. While variable expenses, such as discretionary compensation expense and advertising expense, increased in 2021, we continue to analyze our expense structure for additional efficiencies.
Summary of PropTech Investments
As of December 31, 2021, New Valley Ventures had investments (at a carrying value) of approximately $8.1 million in PropTech companies. This amounts to approximately 1% of the value of Douglas Elliman’s total assets, which totaled approximately $595 million, as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 our PropTech investments include:
■Rechat: a lead-to-close fully-mobile technology dashboard for real estate agents including marketing, customer relationship management and transaction-management software. Douglas Elliman has a multi-year services agreement with Rechat for its agents, who are increasingly requesting and requiring superior access to technology and back-office support services. The Rechat technology is a key element of MyDouglas, Douglas Elliman’s primary agent portal designed to be our agents’ technology front door, and StudioPro, the cloud-based agent portal and marketing tool recently launched by Douglas Elliman that helps integrate all agent resources in one user-friendly suite.
■Purlin: an automated intelligence platform to aid in home buying, an agent “paid social media” integration in MyDouglas and Portfolio Escrow client and agent portals that also integrate with MyDouglas.
■Humming Homes: a tech-enabled home management service that is creating a new category of end-to-end home management. It has built a solution for single-family homeowners with a digital-first experience, offering a dedicated in-person home management team with a single point of contact and 24/7 support. The service employs data and insights to avoid reactive and expensive home maintenance issues. The investment will complement Douglas Elliman’s business in the Hamptons and align Humming Homes’ geographical growth with Douglas Elliman’s footprint in locations such as Aspen, Florida and Southern California.
■MoveEasy: a client- and customer-facing digital concierge service designed to assist clients and customers moving into and “setting up” their new homes, while offering additional services to maintain their homes. In partnership with residential real estate brokerages, MoveEasy is delivered in a white- labeled format that features the name and contact information of the selling agent.
■Fyxify: a tech-enabled platform that utilizes direct scheduling and operating technology to avoid the inefficiencies of home repairs (for example: calling around, mystery repair costs and wasting time).
■EVPassport: an entity that offers complete electronic vehicle charging solutions including hardware and software.
■Bilt: a leading loyalty program and co-branded credit card for renters to earn points on their rent payments. Douglas Elliman has joined the Bilt Rewards Alliance, a network of more than 2 million rental units across the country where renters can enroll in the loyalty program to earn points on rent paid. This platform enhances Douglas Elliman’s suite of offerings for both the renters and landlords it represents.
■Persefoni AI: a software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) platform built to enable enterprises of all sizes to accurately, dynamically, and regularly measure their carbon footprint across all operations.
■The Lab PropTech Fund: a fund advised or managed by a Miami-based firm that aims to invest in emerging technologies with a focus on residential real estate and construction services.
■MetaProp Venture Capital Fund: a fund advised or managed by a New York-based venture capital firm. This investment provides New Valley Ventures with exposure to opportunities in the emerging PropTech industry.
■Camber Creek Venture Capital Funds: two funds that invest in a diversified pipeline of new PropTech ventures. Camber Creek’s portfolio includes Notarize, a digitized notary service, and Curbio, a renovation firm designed to increase a property’s selling price.
Other than the four private funds listed above in which New Valley Ventures invests as a limited partner, all of these companies currently provide technology or services to Douglas Elliman. To date, we have not recognized revenue from these investments and do not anticipate recognizing revenue from these non-controlling PropTech investments. However, we target earning an attractive rate of return from the capital appreciation of our PropTech investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents increased by $122,164 and $27,634 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Restricted Cash, which is included in cash and cash equivalents, was $17,243 and $12,281 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash provided from operations was $127,826 and $31,865 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in 2021 related to increased operating income associated with increased home buying trends in 2021, which resulted in an improvement of our business as a result of markets reopening and COVID-19 vaccines became available.
Cash used in investing activities was $8,858 and $4,088 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. In 2021, cash used in investing activities was comprised of capital expenditures of $4,106, investments of $4,340 in the Company’s PropTech business, and $500 for the acquisition of the controlling interest in Douglas Elliman Texas. This was offset by $88 of distributions from equity-method investments. In 2020, cash used in investing activities was comprised of capital expenditures of $6,126 and the purchase of our Portfolio Escrow subsidiary of $722 and these amounts were partially offset by cash acquired from the purchase of the Portfolio Escrow subsidiary of $2,760.
Our investment philosophy is to maximize return on investments using a reasonable expectation for return when investing in equity-method investments and PropTech investments as well as making capital expenditures.
Cash provided by financing activities was $3,196 in 2021 and cash used in financing activities was $143 in 2020. In 2021, cash provided by financing activities comprised of net contributions from our former parent of $2,062 and contributions from non-controlling interest associated with Douglas Elliman Texas of $1,625. These amounts were offset by $361 for repayment of debt and earn-out payments, associated with acquisitions, of $130. In 2020, cash used in financing activities was comprised of the repayment of debt of $63 and earn-out payments of $80.
In March 2022, we paid a cash dividend of $0.05 per share. We contemplate continuing to pay a quarterly cash dividend of $0.05 per share, subject to approval of our Board of Directors, which would result in annual dividends of approximately $16,300. In order to meet the above liquidity requirements as well as other anticipated liquidity needs in the normal course of business, in addition to our cash from operations, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $211,623 as of December 31, 2021. Management currently anticipates that these amounts, as well as expected cash flows from our operations and proceeds from any financings to the extent available, should be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs over the next twelve months. We may acquire or seek to acquire additional operating businesses through merger, purchase of assets, stock acquisition or other means, or to make or seek to make other investments, which may limit our liquidity otherwise available.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have various agreements in which we may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect to certain matters. Generally, these indemnification clauses are included in contracts arising in the normal course of business under which we customarily agree to hold the other party harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations related to such matters as title to assets sold and licensed or certain intellectual property rights. Payment by us under such indemnification clauses is generally conditioned on the other party making a claim that is subject to challenge by us and dispute resolution procedures specified in the particular contract. Further, our obligations under these arrangements may be limited in terms of time and/or amount, and in some instances, we may have recourse against third parties for certain payments made by us. It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these indemnification agreements due to the conditional nature of our obligations and the unique facts of each particular agreement. Historically, payments made by us under these agreements have not been material. As of December 31, 2021, we were not aware of any indemnification agreements that would or are reasonably expected to have a current or future material adverse impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding approximately $2,476 of letters of credit, collateralized by certificates of deposit. The letters of credit have been issued as security deposits for leases of office space, to secure the performance of our subsidiaries under various insurance programs and to provide collateral for various subsidiary borrowing and capital lease arrangements.
Market Risk
We are exposed to market risks principally from fluctuations in interest rates and could be exposed to market risks from foreign currency exchange rates and equity prices in the future. We seek to minimize these risks through our regular operating and financing activities and our long-term investment strategy. Our market risk management procedures cover material market risks for our market risk sensitive financial instruments.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our combined consolidated financial statements for further information on New Accounting Pronouncements.
Legislation, Regulation, Taxation and Litigation
See Item 1. “Business”, Item 1A. “Risk Factors”, Item 3. “Legal Proceedings” and Note 13 to our combined consolidated financial statements, which contain a description of litigation.
SPECIAL NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
In addition to historical information included in this annual report on Form 10-K, this report contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities law. Forward-looking statements include information relating to our intent, belief or current expectations, primarily with respect to, but not limited to: economic outlook, capital expenditures, cost reduction, cash flows, operating performance, growth expectations, competition, legislation and regulations, litigation, and related industry developments (including trends affecting our business, financial condition and results of operations).
We identify forward-looking statements in this report by using words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may be,” “objective,” “opportunistically,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “prospects,” “seek,” and “will be” and similar words or phrases or their negatives.
Forward-looking statements involve important risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from our anticipated results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested by the forward-looking statements include, without limitation, the following:
•general economic and market conditions and any changes therein, due to acts of war and terrorism or otherwise,
•governmental regulations and policies,
•adverse changes in global, national, regional and local economic and market conditions, including those related to pandemics and health crises, such as the outbreak of COVID-19 and the impact of potential COVID-19 variants,
•the extent and timing of COVID-19 vaccine administration and the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic,
•our ability to effectively manage the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and any government-mandated or encouraged suspension of our business operations,
•the impacts of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, including the impact on the markets of our business,
•effects of industry competition,
•severe weather events or natural or man-made disasters, including increasing the severity or frequency of such events due to climate change or otherwise, or other catastrophic events may disrupt our business and have an unfavorable impact on home sale activity,
•the level of our expenses, including our corporate expenses as a stand-alone publicly-traded company,
•the tax-free treatment of the Distribution,
•our lack of operating history as a public company and costs associated with being an independent public company,
•potential dilution to holders of our common stock as a result of issuances of additional shares of common stock to fund our financial obligations and other financing activities,
•the failure of us or Vector Group to satisfy our obligations under the Transition Services Agreement or other agreements entered into in connection with the Spin-off; and
•the additional factors described under “Risk Factors” in this report.
Further information on the risks and uncertainties to our business include the risk factors discussed above under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Although we believe the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, there is a risk that these expectations will not be attained and that any deviations will be material. The forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made.