Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Macondray Capital Acquisition Corp. I. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on March 15, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger or mergers, amalgamation, share exchange, share purchase, asset acquisition, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Initial Business Combination”). Our sponsor is Macondray, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (our “Sponsor”).
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on June 30, 2021. On July 6, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Class A Ordinary Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $14.4 million, of which approximately $8.75 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Initial Private Placement”) of 6,666,667 warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant with the Sponsor and certain funds and accounts managed by subsidiaries of BlackRock Inc. (collectively, the “Anchor Investor”), generating gross proceeds of $10.0 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $252.5 million ($10.10 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any money market funds meeting certain conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S, government treasury obligations until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or (ii) the distribution of the funds in the Trust Account to our shareholders, as described below.
Subsequently, on August 5, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised the over-allotment option (the “Over-Allotment Option”), and the closing of the issuance and sale of the over-allotment units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) occurred on August 10, 2021. The issuance by us of the over-allotment units at a price of $10.00 per over-allotment unit resulted in total gross proceeds of $37,500,000. On August 10, 2021, simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the over-allotment units, we consummated the sale of an additional 525,000 warrants to the Sponsor and 225,000 warrants to the Anchor Investor (the “Over-Allotment Private Placement, and, together with the Initial Private Placement, the “Private Placements,” and each warrant issued in the Private Placements, a “Private Placement Warrant”), at a purchase price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $1,125,000.
If we are unable to complete an Initial Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering (or 21 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering if we have executed a definitive agreement for an Initial Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering but have not completed an Initial Business Combination within such 18 month period), or January 6, 2023 or April 6, 2023, as applicable (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the Class A Ordinary Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and which interest shall be net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Class A Ordinary Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete our Initial Business Combination within the Combination Period.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity for the period March 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 was for completion of the Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $8.1 million, which was primarily comprised change in fair value derivative warrant liabilities of $9.5 million partially offset by $0.9 million of warrant related expenses and general and administrative expenses of $0.7 million.
Our business activities since our Initial Public Offering have consisted solely of identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for an Initial Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $645,542 in cash. Net cash used in operating activities for the period from March 15, 2021 through December 31, 2021 was $1,228,590. Net cash used in investing activities was $290,375,000. Net cash provided by financing activities was $292,249,132.
Prior to the closing of our Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through a cash payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of Founder Shares (as defined below) and a loan of $300,000 (which was repaid on July 8, 2021) under a promissory note from our Sponsor. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial shareholders may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Initial Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these audited financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our audited financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” are the investments held in trust (Level 1), public warrants (Level 1) and Private Placement Warrants (Level 3). The Company determines fair value based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability in the principal or most advantageous market. When considering market participant assumptions in fair value measurements, the following fair value hierarchy distinguishes between observable and unobservable inputs, which are categorized in one of the following levels:
Level 1 Inputs: Unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or instruments in active markets.
Level 2 Inputs: Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active and model derived valuations whose inputs are observable or whose significant value drivers are observable.
Level 3 Inputs: Significant inputs into the valuation model are unobservable.
Warrant Instruments
The Company accounts for the public warrants and the Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placements in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” whereby under that provision the public warrants and the Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be
recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date in accordance with ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement” until the public warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. At inception the public warrants were valued using Monte Carlo Simulation Model and subsequently after they detached from the unit, they were valued based on quoted market price. The Private Placement Warrants were valued both at inception and subsequently using the Modified Black-Sholes Model. The valuation models utilize inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which the warrants can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period.
Net Income per Ordinary Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating income per ordinary share. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from income per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net income per ordinary share is the same as basic net income per ordinary share for the period presented.
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company's control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders' equity. The Company's Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered by the Company to be outside of the Company's control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in the amount of $290,375,000 are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders' equity section of the Company's balance sheet.
All of the Class A ordinary share sold as part of the Units in the IPO contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company's liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company's certificate of incorporation. In accordance with ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require ordinary share subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity.
If it is probable that the equity instrument will become redeemable, the Company has the option to either accrete changes in the redemption value over the period from the date of issuance (or from the date that it becomes probable that the instrument will become redeemable, if later) to the earliest redemption date of the instrument or to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying amount of the instrument to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, the Company recognized the remeasurement adjustment from initial carrying amount to redemption book value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable ordinary share resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging--Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”),” which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share
calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for the Company on January 1, 2022. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, result of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things: (1) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (2) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (3) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (4) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.