Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our Financial Statements, including the Notes thereto, and “Risk Factors” section included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. When used in this report or elsewhere by management from time to time, the words “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate,” “expect,” “potential,” “possibility,” and similar expressions are forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements contained herein are based on current expectations.
Forward-looking statements made in this report include, for example, statements about:
•
the clinical trial plans and timelines for larsucosterol (also known as DUR-928);
•
potential uses and benefits of larsucosterol to treat alcohol-associated hepatitis (also called alcoholic hepatitis or AH), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), or other conditions;
•
the results and timing of clinical trials, the ability to enroll patients in clinical trials in a timely and cost-effective manner;
•
the likelihood of future clinical trial results of larsucosterol being positive and/or similar to results from previous trials, the possible commencement of future clinical trials, enrollment rates and timing of announcements of the results from our clinical trials;
•
the possibility of filing for marketing approval for larsucosterol for the treatment of AH if the AHFIRM trial is successful and the likelihood of FDA or other regulatory bodies granting such marketing approval;
•
our intention to seek, and ability to enter into and maintain strategic alliances and collaborations;
•
the potential benefits and uses of our products, product candidates and technologies, including larsucosterol, POSIMIR, and our SABER and CLOUD technologies;
•
the potential milestone and royalty payments we may receive from Innocoll related to POSIMIR, earn-out payments we may receive from Indivior related to the commercialization of PERSERIS, and milestone, sub-license fees and royalty payments we may receive from Santen or Orient Pharma;
•
the progress of our third-party collaborations, including estimated milestones;
•
responsibilities of our third-party collaborators, including the responsibility to make cost reimbursement, milestone, royalty and other payments to us, and our expectations regarding our collaborators’ plans with respect to our products and product candidates and continued development and commercialization of our products and product candidates;
•
our responsibilities to our third-party collaborators, including our responsibilities to conduct research and development, clinical trials and/or manufacture excipients, products or product candidates;
•
market opportunities for product candidates in our product development pipeline;
•
potential regulatory filings for or approval of larsucosterol; the progress and results of our research and development programs and our evaluation of additional development programs;
•
requirements for us to purchase pre-clinical, clinical trial and commercial supplies of product candidates and/or products, as well as raw materials or active pharmaceutical ingredients from third parties, and the ability of third parties to provide us with our requirements for such supplies and raw materials;
•
conditions for obtaining regulatory approval of our product candidates;
•
submission and timing of applications for regulatory approval and timing of responses to our regulatory submissions;
•
the impact of FDA, EMA and other government regulation on our business;
•
our ability to obtain, assert and protect patents and other intellectual property rights, including intellectual property licensed to our collaborators, as well as avoiding the intellectual property rights of others;
•
products and companies that will compete with our products and the product candidates we develop and/or license to third-party collaborators;
•
the possibility we may commercialize our own products and build up our commercial, sales and marketing capabilities and other required infrastructure;
•
the possibility that we may develop additional manufacturing capabilities;
•
our employees, including the number of employees and the continued services of key management, technical and scientific personnel;
•
our future performance, including our anticipation that we will not derive meaningful revenues from our products and product candidates in development for at least the next twelve months, potential for future inventory write-offs and our expectations regarding our ability to achieve profitability;
•
sufficiency of our cash resources, anticipated capital requirements and capital expenditures, our ability to comply with covenants of our term loan, and our need or desire for additional financing, including potential sales under our shelf registration statement;
•
our expectations regarding research and development expenses, and selling, general and administrative expenses;
•
the composition of future revenues; and
•
accounting policies and estimates.
Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties. Actual events or results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. For a more detailed discussion of such forward looking statements and the potential risks and uncertainties that may impact upon their accuracy, see the “Risk Factors” section and “Overview” section of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. These forward-looking statements reflect our view only as of the date of this report. We undertake no obligations to update any forward-looking statements. You should also carefully consider the factors set forth in other reports or documents that we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
This discussion and analysis generally addresses 2021 and 2020 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 5, 2021.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company advancing novel and potentially lifesaving investigational therapies derived from our Epigenetic Regulator Program. Larsucosterol (also known as DUR-928), a new chemical entity in clinical development, is the lead candidate in our Epigenetic Regulator Program. An endogenous, orally bioavailable small molecule, larsucosterol has been shown in both in vitro and in vivo studies to play an important regulatory role in lipid metabolism, stress and inflammatory responses, and cell death and survival. Alcohol-associated hepatitis (AH) is a life-threatening acute liver condition with no approved therapeutics and a 28-day and 90-day historical mortality rate of 20%-26% and 29%-31%, respectively. After completing a Phase 2a trial where 100% of AH patients treated with larsucosterol survived the 28-day study period, we are now conducting a ~300-patient, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2b clinical trial called AHFIRM, in which we are evaluating larsucosterol’s life saving potential compared to placebo plus the current standard of care in patients with severe AH. If the AHFIRM trial is successful, it may support an NDA filing and we may decide to develop our own commercial, sales and marketing organization. We have also investigated larsucosterol in patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and are considering further development for this indication. In March 2021, a peer-reviewed research paper describing the binding sites and proposed mechanism of
action of larsucosterol was published in The Journal of Lipid Research. The publication shows that larsucosterol (referred to in the paper as 25HC3S) binds to and inhibits the activity of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) DNMT-1, 3a and 3b, epigenetic regulating enzymes that add methyl groups to DNA (a process called DNA methylation) and have been shown to be elevated in AH patients. As such, by inhibiting DNMT activity, larsucosterol inhibits DNA methylation, thereby regulating the expression of genes that modulate crucial cellular activities, including those associated with cell death, stress response, and lipid biosynthesis. These modulations may lead to improved cell survival, and reduced lipid accumulation and inflammation, as has been observed in various in vivo animal models and in results from our completed clinical trials in AH and NASH.
In addition to our Epigenetic Regulator Program, we developed a novel and proprietary post-surgical pain product called POSIMIR that utilizes our innovative SABER platform technology to enable continuous sustained delivery of bupivacaine, a non-opioid local analgesic, over 3 days in adults. In December 2021, we entered a license agreement with Innocoll Pharmaceuticals Limited, pursuant to which the Company granted to Innocoll an exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicensable right and license to develop, manufacture and commercialize POSIMIR in the United States. Under the agreement, DURECT will earn low to mid double-digit royalties from net sales of POSIMIR and is eligible to receive up to an additional $132 million in milestone payments.
As a result of the assignment of certain patent rights, DURECT also receives single digit sales-based earn-out payments from U.S. net sales of Indivior’s PERSERIS (risperidone) drug for schizophrenia and single-digit royalties from net sales of Orient Pharma’s Methydur Sustained Release Capsules (Methydur) for the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in Taiwan. We also manufacture and sell ALZET osmotic pumps used in laboratory research and have several early-stage development programs with corporate collaborators on terms which typically call for our collaborator to fund all or a substantial portion of future development costs and then pay us milestone payments based on specific development or commercial achievements plus royalties on product sales.
Collaborative Research and Development and Other Revenues
Collaborative research and development and other revenues consist of three broad categories: (a) the recognition of upfront license payments over the period of our continuing involvement with the third party, (b) the reimbursement of qualified research expenses by third parties and (c) milestone payments in connection with our collaborative agreements. During the last three years, we generated collaborative research and development revenues from collaborative agreements with Innocoll, Gilead, Santen and others.
Product Revenues
We also currently generate product revenue from the sale of two product lines:
•
ALZET® osmotic pumps which are used for animal research; and
•
certain key excipients that are included in Methydur and one excipient that is included in POSIMIR and in a marketed animal health product.
In December 2020, we completed the sale of our LACTEL Absorbable Polymers product line to Evonik Corporation. Under the terms of the Asset Purchase Agreement, Evonik paid us approximately $15.1 million, and also agreed to assume certain liabilities with respect to the transferred assets and assembled workforce. The LACTEL product line is reflected as a discontinued operation in our statements of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our financial information discussed in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations excludes the impact of the LACTEL product line.
Because we consider our core business to be developing and commercializing pharmaceuticals, we do not intend to significantly increase our investments in or efforts to sell or market any of our existing product lines. However, we expect that we will continue to make efforts to increase our revenues related to collaborative research and development by extending and expanding our current collaborations as well as entering into additional research and development agreements with third-party collaborators to develop product candidates based on our drug delivery technologies.
Operating Results
Since our inception in 1998, we have generally had a history of operating losses. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $526.0 million. Our net losses were $36.3 million and $582,000, and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These losses have resulted primarily from costs incurred to research and develop our product candidates and to a lesser extent, from selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations and product sales. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in 2022 compared to 2021 as we continue to incur research and development expenses related to larsucosterol. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in 2022 compared to 2021. Over the next twelve months, we anticipate a limited increase in revenues primarily from the launch of POSIMIR by our licensee, Innocoll. However, we expect to incur continuing losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. The most significant estimates and assumptions relate to revenue recognition, contract research liabilities, and stock-based compensation. Actual amounts could differ significantly from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Product Revenues, Net
We manufacture and sell ALZET osmotic pumps used in laboratory research, and manufacture and sell certain excipients for use as raw materials in certain products, including POSIMIR, an animal health product and Methydur.
Revenues from product sales are recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon shipment to the customer. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that we would have recognized is one year or less.
Trade Discounts and Allowances: We provide certain customers with discounts that are explicitly stated in our contracts and are recorded as a reduction of revenues in the period the related product revenues are recognized.
Product Returns: Consistent with industry practice, we generally offer customers a limited right of return for products that have been purchased from us. We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our customers and record this estimate as a reduction of revenues in the period the related product revenues is recognized. We currently estimate product return liabilities using our own historical sales information. We expect product returns to be minimal.
Collaborative Research and Development Revenues
We enter into license agreements under which we license certain rights to our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment to us of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front license fees; reimbursement of development costs incurred by us under approved work plans; development, regulatory, intellectual property and commercial milestone payments; payments for manufacturing supply services we provide ourselves or through our contract manufacturers; sales-based milestones and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Each of these payments results in collaborative research and development revenues, except for revenues from royalties or earn-out payments on net sales of licensed products, which are classified as other revenues.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of our agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance
obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. As part of the accounting for these arrangements containing multiple performance obligations, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We use key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include forecasted revenues, development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. We expect to recognize revenue for the variable consideration currently being constrained when it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaborative research and development revenues and net income (loss) in the period of adjustment.
Manufacturing Supply Services: Arrangements that include a promise for future supply of raw materials or drug product for either clinical development or commercial supply at the customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are accounted for as separate performance obligations. If we are entitled to additional payments when the customer exercises these options, any additional payments are recorded in collaborative research and development revenues when the customer obtains control of the goods, which is upon delivery.
Royalties and Earn-outs: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties or earn-outs, including milestone payments based on first commercial sale or the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty or earn-out has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized material royalty revenue resulting from our collaborative arrangements or material earn-out revenues from any of our patent purchase agreements.
Research and development revenue related to services performed under the collaborative arrangements with the Company’s third-party collaborators is recognized as the related research and development services are performed. These research payments received under each respective agreement are not refundable and are generally based on reimbursement of qualified expenses, as defined in the agreements. Research and development expenses under the collaborative research and development agreements generally approximate or exceed the revenue recognized under such agreements over the term of the respective agreements. Deferred revenue may result when the Company does not expend the required level of effort during a specific period in comparison to funds received under the respective agreement.
The Company receives payments from its customers based on development cost schedules established in each contract. Up-front payments are recorded as deferred revenue upon receipt or when due, and may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until the Company performs its obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when the Company’s right to consideration is unconditional. The Company does not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the customer and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the customer will be one year or less.
Prepaid and Accrued Contract Research Expenses
We incur significant costs associated with third party consultants and organizations for pre-clinical studies, clinical trials, contract manufacturing, validation, testing, regulatory advice and other research and development-related services. We are required to estimate periodically the cost of services rendered but unbilled based on management’s estimates of project status. If these good faith estimates are inaccurate, actual expenses incurred could materially differ from our estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
Employee stock-based compensation is estimated at the date of grant based on the employee stock award’s fair value using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and is recognized as expense ratably over the requisite period.
We estimate the volatility of our common stock at the date of grant based on the historical volatility of our common stock. We base the risk-free rate that we use in the Black-Scholes option valuation model on the implied yield in effect at the time of option grant on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with equivalent remaining terms. We have never paid any cash dividends on our common stock and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we use an expected dividend yield of zero in the Black-Scholes option valuation model. Upon the adoption of ASU 2016-09, we account for forfeitures as they occur and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that vest. We amortize the fair value of options granted on a straight-line basis. All options are amortized over the requisite service periods of the awards, which are generally the vesting periods. We may elect to use different assumptions under the Black-Scholes option valuation model in the future, which could materially affect our net income or loss and net income or loss per share.
Results of Operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Collaborative research and development and other revenues
We recognize revenues from collaborative research and development activities and service contracts. Collaborative research and development and other revenue primarily represents reimbursement
of qualified expenses related to collaborative agreements with various third parties to research, develop and commercialize potential products using our drug delivery technologies, and revenue from the recognition of upfront fees and milestone payments in connection with our collaborative or license agreements.
We expect our collaborative research and development and other revenues to fluctuate in future periods pending our efforts to enter into potential new collaborations, our existing third-party collaborators’ commitment to and progress in the research and development programs, and any royalty or earn-out revenue recognized from collaborators or counterparties. The collaborative research and development and other revenues associated with our major collaborators or counterparties are as follows (in thousands):
(1)
We signed a license agreement with Innocoll on December 21, 2021, pursuant to which Innocoll agreed to pay a nonrefundable upfront license fee of $4.0 million and $1.3 million primarily for the sale of manufacturing supplies and excipients. In December 2021, we recognized $4.1 million as collaborative research and development and other revenue and $1.1 million in product revenue upon the transfer of control of the license and the manufacturing supplies excipients, and equipment to Innocoll, we recognized $4.1 million as collaborative research and development and other revenue, $1.1 million as product revenue, and a reduction of $0.1 million in net equipment (see Note 2 Strategic Agreements - Agreement with Innocoll in the financial statements).
(2)
We signed a license agreement with Gilead on July 19, 2019. Amounts related to recognition of upfront fees and milestone payments were zero and $22.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We received a nonrefundable upfront license fee and a milestone payment totaling $35.0 million in 2019 which was being recognized as revenue as our obligation was being satisfied using the cost-to-cost input method (see Note 2 Strategic Agreements - Agreement with Gilead Sciences, Inc. in the financial statements). In June 2020, we received notice that Gilead was terminating the License Agreement and a related R&D agreement between Gilead and us. As a result, we recognized all our remaining deferred revenue as there were no remaining substantive performance obligations to be provided to Gilead by the Company as of the date when the termination notice was received. Amounts recognized as revenue during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 also included our reimbursable collaborative research and development services performed under our agreement with Gilead.
(3)
Includes: (a) amounts related to earn-out revenue from Indivior UK Limited (Indivior) with respect to PERSERIS net sales; (b) feasibility programs; (c) research and development activities funded by Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. (Santen) and (d) royalty revenue from OP Pharma with respect to Methydur net sales. Since 2018, we have been working with Santen on a limited set of research and development activities funded by Santen.
The decrease in collaborative research and development revenues in 2021 compared with 2020 was primarily due to lower revenue recognized from our agreement with Gilead, partially offset by higher revenue recognized from our agreements with Innocoll, Indivior, Santen and feasibility agreements with other companies.
Innocoll agreed to pay us a $4.0 million upfront fee and a payment of $1.3 million primarily for the sale of manufacturing supplies and excipients in connection with the license agreement signed in
December 2021. Through December 31, 2021, $5.2 million had been recognized as revenue as there were no remaining substantive performance obligations to be provided to Innocoll by the Company.
We received a $25.0 million upfront fee in connection with the license agreement signed with Gilead in July 2019 and in October 2019 we also received a $10 million milestone payment from Gilead. Through December 31, 2020, all of these amounts had been recognized as revenue as there were no remaining substantive performance obligations to be provided to Gilead by the Company as of the date when the termination notice was received.
We received a $2.0 million upfront fee in connection with the license agreement signed with Santen in December 2014. The $2.0 million upfront fee was being recognized as collaborative research and development revenue over the term of our continuing involvement with Santen. At December 31, 2021, $1.2 million of the $2.0 million upfront fee had been recognized as revenue.
As of March 3, 2022, we had potential milestones of up to $208.0 million that we may receive in the future under our collaborative arrangements, of which $23.0 million are development-based milestones, $10.0 million are patent-based milestones and $175.0 million are sales-based milestones. Within the category of development-based milestones, $2.0 million are related to early-stage clinical testing (defined as Phase 1 or 2 activities), $3.0 million are related to late-stage clinical testing (defined as Phase 3 activities), $3.0 million are related to regulatory filings and $15.0 million are related to regulatory approvals. No milestone payments were received between December 31, 2021 and March 3, 2022, and we do not anticipate receiving any of these milestone revenues other than $2.0 million of a sales-based milestone triggered by first commercial sale of POSIMIR by Innocoll within the next twelve months, if at all.
Product revenues
In December 2020, we completed the sale of our LACTEL Absorbable Polymers product line to Evonik Corporation. Revenue from the LACTEL product line, related cost of product revenues, associated research and development, and selling, general and administrative has been reclassified to discontinued operations for all periods presented.
A portion of our revenues is derived from product sales, which include our ALZET osmotic pump product line, and certain excipients that are included in POSIMIR, Methydur and in a marketed animal health product. Net product revenues were $7.6 million and $6.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The increase in product revenues in 2021 was primarily attributable to higher revenue from our ALZET osmotic pump product line as a result of higher units sold compared to 2020 and higher product revenue related to manufacturing supplies and excipients that are included in POSIMIR from the Innocoll license agreement entered in December 2021.
Cost of product revenues
Cost of product revenues was $2.0 million and $1.4 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cost of product revenues includes the cost of product revenue from our ALZET product line, and certain excipients that are included in POSIMIR, Methydur and a marketed animal health product.
The increase in cost of product revenues in 2021 was primarily attributable to higher cost of goods sold related to certain excipients and materials that are included in POSIMIR from the Innocoll license agreement entered in December 2021, partially offset by lower cost of goods sold related to our ALZET product line arising from lower manufacturing costs in 2021 compared to 2020.
Stock-based compensation expense related to cost of product revenues was $19,000 and $13,000, in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 10 and 9 manufacturing employees, respectively.
Research and development. Research and development expenses are primarily comprised of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and other compensation cost associated with research and development personnel, overhead and facility costs, preclinical and non-clinical development costs, clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing costs, contract services, and other outside costs. Research and development expenses were $31.8 million and $27.7 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Stock-based compensation expense recognized related to research and development personnel was $1.2 million,
and $981,000 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in 2022 compared to 2021 as we continue to incur research and development expenses related to larsucosterol.
Research and development expenses increased by $4.1 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily attributable to higher research and development costs associated with larsucosterol, POSIMIR, depot injectable and other research programs, partially offset by lower research and development costs associated with the Gilead program compared to 2020, as more fully discussed below.
Research and development expenses associated with our major development programs after the
removal of the effects of our sale of the LACTEL product line were as follows (in thousands):
(1)
See Note 2 Strategic Agreements in the financial statements for more details about our agreements with Gilead.
Larsucosterol
Our research and development expenses for larsucosterol increased to $25.1 million in 2021 from $21.3 million in 2020, primarily due to higher clinical trial related expenses and higher contract manufacturing expenses for this drug candidate compared with 2020.
We continue to assess the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business, including our larsucosterol Phase 2b trial in alcohol-associated hepatitis; COVID-19 may affect our ability to initiate and/or complete recruitment and data analysis for our clinical trials, including larsucosterol trials, in our planned timeframe.
POSIMIR
Our research and development expenses for POSIMIR increased to $4.2 million in 2021 from $3.7 million in 2020, primarily due to higher consulting expenses and higher contract manufacturing expenses for POSIMIR.
It is possible that the COVID-19 pandemic will adversely impact the timing of potential commercialization of POSIMIR which is now controlled by Innocoll.
Gilead Program
Our research and development expenses for the Gilead program decreased to $65,000 in 2021 from $1.0 million in 2020, primarily due to lower employee-related costs and outside costs devoted to the program compared with 2020. In June 2020, Gilead provided notice that it was terminating the Gilead Agreement and a related R&D agreement.
Depot injectable programs
Our research and development expenses for depot injectable programs increased to $1.4 million in 2021 from $862,000 in 2020 primarily due to higher employee-related costs and higher outside expenses for these programs.
Other DURECT research programs
Our research and development expenses for all other research activities increased to $1.1 million in 2021 from $861,000 in 2020, primarily due to higher employee-related costs incurred for these programs.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 45 and 46 research and development employees, respectively.
We cannot reasonably estimate the timing and costs of our research and development programs due to the risks and uncertainties associated with developing pharmaceuticals as outlined in the “Risk Factors” section of this report. The duration of development of our research and development programs may span as many as ten years or more, and estimation of completion dates or costs to complete are highly speculative and subjective due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing pharmaceutical products, including significant and changing government regulation, the uncertainties of future preclinical and clinical study results, uncertainties related to the COVID-19 outbreak, the uncertainties with our collaborators’ commitment to and progress in the programs and the uncertainties associated with process development and manufacturing as well as sales and marketing. In addition, with respect to our development programs subject to third-party collaborations, the timing and expenditures to complete the programs are subject to the control of our collaborators. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate the timing and costs of the efforts necessary to complete the research and development programs. For additional information regarding these risks and uncertainties, see “Risk Factors” above.
Selling, general and administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses are primarily comprised of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation associated with finance, legal, business development, sales and marketing (including sales and marketing expenses for our ALZET product line) and other administrative personnel, overhead and facility costs, and other general and administrative costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $14.4 million and $13.6 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Stock-based compensation expense recognized related to selling, general and administrative personnel was $1.4 million and $1.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in 2022 compared to 2021 as employee retention credits are no longer available.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $838,000 in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to an advisory fee related to the execution of the Innocoll agreement in 2021 compared with 2020.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had 24 and 26 selling, general and administrative personnel, respectively.
Other income (expense). Interest and other income were $156,000 and $517,000 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in interest and other income in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily the result of lower interest income generated as a result of lower interest rates associated with our cash and investments in 2021 compared with 2020.
Interest expense was $2.1 million and $2.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in interest expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to lower interest rates associated with the term loan with Oxford Finance in 2021 compared to 2020.
Income taxes. As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of approximately $351.9 million, of which approximately $279.8 million will expire in the years 2022 through 2037, and approximately $72.1 million will not expire under current tax laws. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal research and development tax credits of approximately $16.5 million, which expire at various dates beginning in 2022 through 2041, if not utilized. As of December 31, 2021, we had NOL carryforwards for state income tax purposes of approximately $239.1 million, which expire in the years 2022 through 2041, and state research and development tax credits of approximately $17.1 million, which do not expire under current tax laws. Utilization of the net operating losses may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to federal and state ownership change limitations. The annual limitation may result in the expiration of net operating losses and credits before utilization.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had net deferred tax assets of $116.4 million and $114.3 million, respectively. Deferred tax assets reflect the net tax effects of net operating loss and credit carryforwards and the temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for
financial reporting and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon future earnings, if any, the timing and amount of which are uncertain. Accordingly, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance.
Because realization of such tax benefits is uncertain, we provided a 100% valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Utilization of the NOL and R&D credits carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future provided by Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as well as similar state and foreign provisions. These ownership changes may limit the amount of NOL and R&D credits carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively. In general, an ownership change is defined as a greater than 50% change (by value) in its equity ownership over a three-year period, the corporation’s ability to use its pre-change net operating losses and other pre-change tax attributes (such as research and development credit carryforwards) to offset its post-change taxable income or taxes may be limited. Since our formation, we have raised capital through the issuance of capital stock on several occasions which, combined with the purchasing shareholders’ subsequent disposition of those shares, may have resulted in a change of control, as defined by Section 382, or could result in a change of control in the future upon subsequent disposition. We issued $60.0 million of convertible notes in 2003 and subsequently all of these notes had been converted as of December 31, 2008 into approximately 19.0 million shares of our common stock. We also issued approximately 4.4 million shares of our common stock to an institutional investor in connection with an equity financing in September 2009. In December 2012, November 2013, April 2016, June 2019 and February 2021, we completed underwritten public offerings in which we sold an aggregate of approximately 14.0 million, 8.2 million and 13.8 million, 29.0 million and 20.4 million shares, respectively, of our common stock pursuant to effective registration statements. In 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021, we issued approximately 5.2 million, 8.9 million, 9.6 million, 2.3 million, 5.3 million and 950,009 shares, respectively, of our common stock in the open market through Controlled Equity Offering sales agreements with Cantor Fitzgerald pursuant to effective registration statements. These transactions may also have resulted in a change of control as defined by Section 382 or could result in a change of control in the future upon the subsequent disposition of the shares.
We have not currently completed a study to assess whether a change in control has occurred or whether there have been multiple changes of control since our formation due to the significant complexity and cost associated with such a study and the fact that there could be additional changes in the future. If we have experienced a change of control at any time since our formation, utilization of our NOL or R&D credits carryforwards would be subject to an annual limitation under Sections 382 and 383 which is determined by first multiplying the value of our stock at the time of the ownership change by the applicable long-term tax-exempt rate, and then could be subject to additional adjustments, as required. Any limitation may result in expiration of a portion of our NOL or R&D credits carryforwards before utilization. Tax years 1998 to 2021 remain subject to future examination by the major tax jurisdictions in which we are subject to tax.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash, cash equivalents and investments totaling $70.0 million at December 31, 2021, which includes $150,000 of interest-bearing marketable securities classified as restricted investments on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 as compared to cash, cash equivalents, cash held in escrow, investments and restricted investments totaling $56.9 million at December 31, 2020.
We used $37.3 million and $38.7 million of cash in operating activities in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The cash provided by or used for operations was primarily to fund operations as well as working capital requirements. Our cash provided by or used in operating activities differs from our net loss in part due to the timing and recognition of up-front payments under collaborative agreements. Depending on the nature of the upfront payments received upon execution of collaborative agreements, which can either be recognized as revenue upfront in full or primarily recorded as deferred revenue and generally recognized over the period using a basis that best reflects the satisfaction of our performance obligations with the third-party collaborator pursuant to the applicable
agreement. The decrease in cash used in operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to changes in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, and accrued and other liabilities.
We generated $15.3 million and $9.4 million of cash from investing activities in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash received from investing activities in 2021 was due to cash received from the sale of the LACTEL product line, partially offset by an increase in net purchases of available-for-sale securities. We anticipate incurring capital expenditures of approximately $100,000 over the next 12 months. The amount and timing of these capital expenditures will depend on, among other things, our research and development activities and needs, and the need for equipment replacements.
We generated $50.5 million and $15.7 million of cash from financing activities in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash received from financing activities in 2021 was primarily due to higher net proceeds received from issuances of common stock in 2021 compared to 2020. In 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 20,364,582 shares of our common stock at a price of $2.2386 per share pursuant to an underwriting agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald, raising net proceeds of approximately $45.4 million. In 2021, we also raised net proceeds (net of commissions) of approximately $2.4 million from the sale of 950,009 shares of our common stock in the open market at a weighted average price of $2.60 per share pursuant to the October 2018 registration statement and 2015 Sales Agreement. In 2020, we raised net proceeds of approximately $12.3 million from the sale of 5,308,002 shares of the Company’s common stock in the open market at a weighted average price of $2.39 per share pursuant to the October 2018 registration statement.
In July 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the SEC (the “2021 Registration Statement”) (File No. 333-258333), which upon being declared effective in August 2021, terminated our registration statement filed in August 2018 (File No. 333-226518) and allowed us to offer up to $250.0 million of securities from time to time in one or more public offerings, inclusive of up to $75.0 million of shares of our common stock which we may sell, subject to certain limitations, pursuant to a sales agreement dated July 30, 2021 with Cantor Fitzgerald (the “2021 Sales Agreement”). The 2021 Sales Agreement replaced a prior 2015 Sales Agreement.
As of March 3, 2022, we had up to $250.0 million of our securities available for sale under the 2021 Registration Statement, of which $75.0 million of our common stock are available pursuant to the 2021 Sales Agreement.
Any material sales in the public market of our common stock, under the 2021 Sales Agreement or otherwise under the 2021 Registration Statement, could adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common stock.
In July 2016, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the Loan Agreement) with Oxford Finance LLC (Oxford Finance), pursuant to which Oxford Finance provided a $20.0 million secured single-draw term loan to us with an initial maturity date of August 1, 2020. The term loan was fully drawn at close and the proceeds may be used for working capital and general business requirements. The term loan repayment schedule provided initially for interest only payments for the first 18 months, followed by consecutive monthly payments of principal and interest in arrears starting on March 1, 2018 and continuing through the maturity date of August 1, 2020. Following five amendments, we make interest only payments under the amended Loan Agreement until June 1, 2023 and the final maturity date of the loan is September 1, 2025. The Loan Agreement provides for a floating interest rate (7.95% initially and 7.95% as of December 31, 2021) based on an index rate plus a spread and an additional payment equal to 10% of the principal amount of the term loan, which is due when the term loan becomes due or upon the prepayment of the facility. If we elect to prepay the loan, there is also a prepayment fee between 0.75% and 2.5% of the principal amount of the term loan depending on the timing of prepayment. Our debt repayment obligations under the Loan Agreement, as amended, may prove a burden to the Company as they become due, particularly following the expiration of the interest-only period.
The term loan is secured by substantially all of our assets, except that the collateral does not include any intellectual property (including licensing, collaboration and similar agreements relating thereto), and certain other excluded assets. The Loan Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by us, which covenants limit our ability to convey, sell, lease, transfer, assign or otherwise
dispose of certain assets; engage in any business other than the businesses currently engaged in by us or reasonably related thereto; liquidate or dissolve; make certain management changes; undergo certain change of control events; create, incur, assume, or be liable with respect to certain indebtedness; grant certain liens; pay dividends and make certain other restricted payments; make certain investments; and make payments on any subordinated debt.
The Loan Agreement also contains customary indemnification obligations and customary events of default, including, among other things, our failure to fulfill certain obligations under the 2016 Loan Agreement and the occurrence of a material adverse change which is defined as a material adverse change in our business, operations, or condition (financial or otherwise), a material impairment of the prospect of repayment of any portion of the loan, or a material impairment in the perfection or priority of lender’s lien in the collateral or in the value of such collateral. In the event of default by us under the 2016 Loan Agreement, the lender would be entitled to exercise its remedies thereunder, including the right to accelerate the debt, upon which we may be required to repay all amounts then outstanding under the Loan Agreement. As a result, that portion of the term loan that was due more than 12 months after December 31, 2021 was classified within non-current liabilities.
Cash used in our operating activities is heavily influenced by the timing and structure of new corporate collaborations. While one feature of our business strategy is seeking new corporate collaborations, assuming no new collaborations and no milestone payments, we anticipate that cash used in operating activities will increase in the near term.
The COVID-19 pandemic is impacting our business in several ways. COVID-19 initially had a negative impact on orders for our ALZET product line as many ALZET customers reduced their activities during the pandemic. ALZET orders recovered significantly in 2021, a trend that may or may not continue as the impact of the pandemic has proven to be difficult to predict. For larsucosterol, we may experience delays in patient enrollment of the Phase 2b AHFIRM clinical trial or disruptions in supplies of larsucosterol or other items required for clinical trials. Delays and potential disruptions would increase the overall costs of development of larsucosterol. We are actively monitoring the impact of COVID-19 and the possible effects on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, clinical trials, suppliers, industry and workforce. However, the full extent, consequences, and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting impact on the Company cannot currently be predicted. The Company will continue to evaluate the impact that these events could have on the Company’s operations, financial position, and the results of operations and cash flows. Additional volatility in capital markets and/or clinical trial delays resulting from the impacts of COVID-19 may also limit our ability to raise capital on acceptable terms, if at all.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our planned operations, existing debt and contractual commitments and planned capital expenditures through at least the next 12 months from December 31, 2021. We may consume available resources more rapidly than currently anticipated, resulting in the need for additional funding. Over the next twelve months, we anticipate a limited increase in revenues primarily from the launch of POSIMIR by Innocoll. However, we expect to incur continuing losses and negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future.
Depending on whether we enter into additional collaborative agreements in the near term and the extent to which we earn revenues from our collaborative agreements, we may decide to raise additional capital through a variety of sources in the short-term and in the long-term, including:
•
the public equity markets;
•
private equity financings;
•
collaborative arrangements; and/or
•
public or private debt.
There can be no assurance that we will enter into additional collaborative agreements or maintain existing collaborative agreements in the near term, will earn collaborative revenues or that additional capital will be available on favorable terms, if at all. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to significantly reduce or refocus our operations or to obtain funds through arrangements that
may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our products, technologies or potential markets, either of which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. To the extent that additional capital is raised through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the issuance of such securities would result in ownership dilution to our existing stockholders (assuming convertible debt securities were converted into shares).
Our cash and investments policy emphasizes liquidity and preservation of principal over other portfolio considerations. We select investments that maximize interest income to the extent possible given these two constraints. We satisfy liquidity requirements by investing excess cash in securities with different maturities to match projected cash needs and limit concentration of credit risk by diversifying our investments among a variety of high credit-quality issuers.
In 2021, there were no significant changes in our commercial commitments and contractual obligations. In aggregate, we are required to make future payments pursuant to our existing contractual obligations as follows (in thousands):
(1)
Includes principal, interest payments and final payments and assumes no acceleration of obligations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-13 (ASU 2016-13) “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” ASU 2016-13 requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 for smaller reporting companies, including interim reporting periods within those years and must be adopted using a modified retrospective approach, with certain exceptions. Early adoption is permitted. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material effect on its financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. In response to concerns about structural risks of the cessation of London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), the amendments in this ASU provide optional guidance for a limited time to ease the potential burden in accounting for (or recognizing the effects of) reference rate reform on financial reporting. The amendments in this ASU provide optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. The amendments in this ASU apply only to contracts and hedging relationships that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued due to reference rate reform. The expedients and exceptions provided by the amendments do not apply to contract modifications made and hedging relationships entered into or evaluated after December 31, 2022. The amendments in this ASU are elective and are effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022. The Company continues to evaluate contractual arrangements and hedging relationships that reference LIBOR.