Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
General Overview
The Company is an owner and operator of golf-related leisure and entertainment venues focused on bringing people together through competitive socializing. Our common stock is traded on the NYSE under the symbol “DS.”
The Company conducts its business through two primary operating segments:
Entertainment Golf Business | Drive Shack and Puttery
Our entertainment golf business is primarily focused on competitive socializing within the leisure and social entertainment industry, combining chef-inspired food and beverage offerings, with innovative technology modernizing ways to experience golf as a sport and form of entertainment that appeals to a broad range of audiences and competitive appetites.
During 2021, we opened our first two Puttery venues in The Colony, Texas and Charlotte, North Carolina.
We opened our first Drive Shack venue in Orlando, Florida in April 2018, which has largely served as our research and development and testing venue.During the second half of 2019, we opened three Generation 2.0 Drive Shack venues in Raleigh, North Carolina; Richmond, Virginia and West Palm Beach, Florida.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we briefly closed our Orlando, Florida venue to retrofit with Generation 2.0 enhancements, including new ball tracking technology (TrackMan™), enhanced gaming and a redesigned outfield to provide a more engaging guest experience.
Additionally, the Company is committed to a lease in Manhattan (Randall’s Island), New York for a Drive Shack entertainment golf venues. The Company also continues to hold its lease in New Orleans, Louisiana, but suspended development activities for the venue during 2021 and is currently exploring alternatives including a potential lease disposal.
Traditional Golf Business
Our traditional golf business, American Golf, is one of the largest operators of golf properties in the United States. As of December 31, 2021, we owned, leased or managed fifty-five (55) properties across nine states and have more than 30,000 members.
During 2021, the Company exited three management agreements and two leases that had expired.
For further information relating to our business, see “Item 1. Business.”
Market Considerations
Our ability to execute our business strategy, particularly the development of our entertainment golf business, depends to a degree on our ability to monetize our remaining investments in loans and securities, optimize our traditional golf business, including sales of certain owned properties, and obtain additional capital. We have substantially monetized our historical investments in loans and securities and have a small number of positions remaining that we could sell or use as collateral or support in a lending transaction. We raised capital through the equity markets in February 2021; however, rising interest rates or stock market volatility could impair our future ability to raise equity capital on attractive terms.
Our ability to generate income is dependent on, among other factors, our ability to raise capital and finance properties on favorable terms, deploy capital on a timely basis at attractive returns, and exit properties at favorable yields. Market conditions outside of our control, such as interest rates, inflation, consumer discretionary spending and stock market volatility affect these objectives in a variety of ways.
Entertainment Golf Business
Our ability to open our targeted number of entertainment golf-related venue formats in 2022 and beyond will depend on many factors, including our ability to identify sites that meet our requirements and negotiate acceptable purchase or lease terms. There is competition within the bid process, and land development and construction are subject to obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals. Delays in these processes, as well as completing construction and recruiting and training the necessary talent, could impact our business.
Trends in consumer spending, as well as climate and weather patterns, could have an impact on the markets in which we currently, or will in the future operate. In addition, our entertainment golf business could be impacted on a season-to-season basis, based upon corporate event and social gatherings during peak and off-peak times.
Traditional Golf Business
Our traditional golf business is subject to trends in consumer discretionary spending, as well as climate and weather patterns, which has a significant impact on the markets in which we operate. traditional golf is generally subject to seasonal fluctuations caused by significant reductions in golf activities due to shorter days and colder temperatures in the first and fourth quarters of each year. Consequently, a significantly larger portion of our revenue from our traditional golf operations is earned in the second and third quarters of our fiscal year. In addition, severe weather patterns can also negatively impact our results of operations.
While consumer spending in the traditional golf industry has not grown in recent years, we believe improving economic conditions and improvements in local housing markets have helped and will continue to help drive membership growth and increase the number of golf rounds played. In addition, we believe growth in related industries, including leisure, fitness and entertainment, may positively impact our traditional golf business.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions that could affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. Our estimates are based on information available to management at the time of preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements, including the result of historical analysis, our understanding and experience of the Company’s operations, our knowledge of the industry and market-participant data available to us.
Actual results have historically been in line with management’s estimates and judgments used in applying each of the accounting policies described below, and management periodically re-evaluates accounting estimates and assumptions. Actual results could differ from these estimates and materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. However, the Company does not expect our assessments and assumptions below to materially change in the future.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is presented in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, which appear in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The following is a summary of our accounting policies that are most affected by judgments, estimates and assumptions.
Impairment of Property and Equipment, Right of Use Assets and Intangible Assets
Long-lived property, equipment and definite-lived intangible assets are tested for potential impairment when changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets, or other appropriate grouping of assets, may not be fully recoverable. Indicators of impairment include material adverse changes in the projected revenues and expenses, significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, changes to our intent and ability to hold and use each asset, as well as any significant cost overruns on development of new venues, and significant negative industry or economic trends. An impairment is determined to have occurred if the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated is less than the carrying value of an asset. The impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value. Significant judgment is required both in determining impairment and in estimating the fair value. We may use assumptions and estimates derived from a review of our operating results, business projections, expected growth rates, discount rates, and tax rates. We also make certain assumptions about future economic conditions interest rates, and other market data. Many of the factors used in these assumptions and estimates are outside the control of management and can change in future periods.
Membership Deposit Liabilities
In our traditional golf business, until 2021, private country club members generally paid an advance initiation deposit upon their acceptance as a member to their country club. Initiation deposits are refundable 30 years after the date of acceptance as a member. The difference between the initiation deposit paid by the member and the present value of the refund obligation is considered to be deferred revenue and recognized as revenue in the Consolidated Statements of Operations on a straight-line basis over the expected life of an active membership, which is estimated to be seven years. The determination of the estimated average expected life of an active membership is based on company-specific historical data and involves judgment and estimation. The present value of the refund obligation is recorded as a membership deposit liability in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and accretes over a 30-year nonrefundable term using the effective interest method. This accretion is recorded as interest expense, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
As of the end 2021, all private country club members generally pay an advance initiation fee upon their acceptance as a member to their country club. Initiation fees are non-refundable after the date of acceptance as a member. The initiation fee revenue is deferred and recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations on a straight-line basis over the expected life of an active membership, which is estimated to be seven years. The determination of the estimated average expected life of an active membership is based on company-specific historical data and involves judgment and estimation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for information about recent accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize the changes in our consolidated results of operations from year-to-year (dollars in thousands):
N.M. - Not meaningful
(A)Includes $54.4 million and $50.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due to management contract reimbursements reported under revenue accounting standard, ASC 606.
Revenues from Golf Operations
Revenues from golf operations increased by $42.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $32.6 million increase in traditional golf revenue, which included $13.0 million of managed course expense reimbursements and $10.0 million increase in entertainment golf revenue. The increase in traditional golf revenue was primarily due to strong public green and cart fees, private course total rounds and memberships, and higher event revenue. Entertainment golf revenue increased by $10.0 million, of which $6.4 million is primarily due to higher traffic and increased events at Drive Shack venues as COVID-19 restrictions lifted and $3.6 million related to our Colony location completing its first full quarter of operations and our Charlotte location opening in mid-December.
Sales of Food and Beverages
Sales of food and beverages increased by $19.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $9.4 million increase in traditional golf sales and a $9.9 million increase in entertainment golf sales. The increase in traditional golf sales was primarily due to the return of tournament and large group event-related revenues as COVID-19 related restrictions were lifted. Entertainment golf increased by $9.9 million of which $8.1 million is due to higher traffic at the venues related to the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions and $1.8 million related to the openings of Puttery Colony and Puttery Charlotte.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $33.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $27.5 million increase in traditional golf operating expenses, and a $6.1 million increase in entertainment golf operating expenses. The increase in traditional golf expenses was due to $8.6 million of increased payroll and payroll related compensation costs due to the return of furloughed employees after the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions, $4.8 million in increased variable rent expenses, and $4.0 million of additional reimbursed expenses for our managed courses. Entertainment golf expenses increased $6.1 million due to $3.3 million of additional payroll and payroll related costs to support increased operations following the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions, $1.4 million of supplies and general operating expenses, $1.0 million of property tax and insurance expenses and additional expenses related to the openings of Puttery Colony and Puttery.
Cost of Sales - Food and Beverages
Food and beverage cost of sales increased by $4.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a $2.0 million increase in traditional golf cost of sales and a $2.0 million increase in entertainment golf cost of sales. The increase in traditional golf cost of sales was due to higher food and beverage sales related to the return of tournament and large group related revenues as COVID-19 relate restrictions were lifted. Entertainment golf cost of sales increased by $2.0 million due to higher food and beverage sales from increased traffic at the venues related to the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions and the openings of Puttery Colony and Puttery Charlotte.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $2.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and included a $0.5 million increase in traditional golf expense offset by a $1.5 million increase in entertainment golf expense, and a $0.5 million increase in corporate expense. The increase is primarily due to entertainment golf expense increases related to $1.0 million of business development mainly related to Puttery and $0.7 million of payroll and payroll-related expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased by $3.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the dispositions of the Lomas Santa Fe Country Club, SeaCliff Country Club, Tustin Ranch Golf and Yorba Linda Country Club, and Lomas Santa Fe Country Clubs during 2020.
Pre-Opening Costs
Pre-opening costs increased by $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the recent openings of our first two Puttery locations in The Colony and Charlotte. Pre-opening costs for each future opening of Puttery locations are expected to decline significantly.
(Gain) Loss on Lease Terminations and Impairment
During the year ended December 31, 2021, impairment and other losses primarily consisted of a $0.8 million loss on the traditional golf lease termination for the SeaCliff Country Club, a $1.0 million loss on traditional golf retired assets, and a $3.2 million asset impairment related to our New York, NY corporate office.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, impairment and other losses consisted of: a $2.9 million gain on the termination of two traditional golf leases in 2020 primarily due to the derecognition of long-lived asset, intangible asset, and ROU asset and liability balances and, a $2.0 million gain on sale of entertainment golf equipment, partially offset by $3.9 million of impairment on two traditional golf properties and $0.2 million of losses on asset retirements.
Interest and Investment Income
There was no significant change in Interest and investment income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense, net
There was no significant change in interest expense, net during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, Net
Net other income increased by $8.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an other-than-temporary impairment charge of $24.7 million in 2020 on the Company's equity method investment, offset by a 2020 gain of $16.6 million on the sale of a traditional golf property.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For details on Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, please see our 2020 10-K filed on March 16, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are our current balances of cash and cash equivalents. We also generated liquidity through our common stock offering completed during the first quarter of 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $58.3 million of available cash, including $17.1 million of cash from the traditional golf business.
Our primary cash needs are capital expenditures for developing and opening new Puttery venues and one Drive Shack venue, remodeling and maintaining existing facilities, funding working capital, operating lease and finance lease obligations, servicing our debt obligations, paying dividends on our preferred stock, and for general corporate purposes.
The Company’s growth strategy is capital intensive and our ability to execute is dependent upon many factors, including the current and future operating performance of our entertainment golf venues and traditional golf properties, the pace of expansion, real estate markets, site locations, our ability to raise financing and the nature of the arrangements negotiated with landlords. Based upon current levels of operations and anticipated growth, we expect that cash flows from operations, combined with other financing alternatives in place or available will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the foreseeable future.
As of December 31, 2021, we are actively exploring the capital markets to meet our near term liquidity requirements to fund our planned growth, including new venue development and construction, product innovation, and general corporate needs. Our financial objectives include diversifying our financing sources, optimizing the mix and maturity of new debt financings, public or private equity issuances, and strategically monetizing our remaining real estate securities and other investments. We continually monitor market conditions for these financing and capital opportunities, and at any given time, may enter into or pursue one or more of the transactions described above. However, we cannot ensure that capital will be available on reasonable terms, if at all.
In February 2021, the Company raised $54.6 million in net proceeds through an equity offering. See Note 17 in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for information about this transaction.
We also generated capital through the completion of the sales of 25 of our 26 owned traditional golf properties which was completed by December 31, 2020. The proceeds generated by these transactions were reinvested in our entertainment golf business and used to pay overhead expenses.
For a further discussion of risks that could affect our liquidity, access to capital resources and our capital obligations, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” above.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table and discussion summarize our key cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities:
Operating Activities
Cash flows used in operating activities consist primarily of net losses adjusted for certain items including depreciation and amortization of assets, amortization of prepaid golf member dues, impairment losses, other gains and losses from the sale of assets, stock-based compensation expense, and the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash flow used in operating activities changed from $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to net cash flow provided by operating activities of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. It changed from $2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These changes resulted primarily from the factors described below:
2021 compared to 2020
•Operating cash flows increased due to the following:
◦$16.7 million in net operating cash flows generated from the entertainment venues;
◦$1.8 million reduction in corporate payroll primarily due to reductions in headcount;
◦$0.5 million reduction in interest payments associated with the junior subordinated notes due to a lower coupon rate.
•Operating cash flows decreased due to the following:
◦$8.6 million in net operating cash flows used from traditional golf operations;
◦$7.0 million primarily due to additional general and administrative payments;
◦$1.2 million in tax payments;
◦$0.6 million in payment of annual bonuses in 2021 that were earned in 2020.
2020 compared to 2019
•Operating cash flows decreased due to the following:
◦$17.1 million decrease of general and administrative expenses due to decreased headcount and professional fees primarily due to COVID-19 related reductions
◦$7.3 million increase in operating cash flows from the Traditional Golf business primarily due to addition of managed courses during 2019 and 2020 and the exit of non-profitable courses in 2019
◦$2.3 million increase in operating cash flows primarily due to the more months in operation in 2020 for the Entertainment Golf venues in Raleigh, North Carolina, Richmond, Virginia and West Palm Beach, Florida as compared to 2019.
Investing Activities
Cash flows used in investing activities primarily relate to capital expenditures related to the development of the entertainment golf venues, and renovations of existing facilities.
Cash used in investing activities decreased by $32.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020. Cash provided by investing activities increased by $24.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Capital Expenditures. Our total capital expenditures for 2021, 2020, and 2019 were $32.6 million, $10.7 million, and $74.9 million respectively.
We expect our capital expenditures over the next 12 months to range between $46.0 and $50.0 million, which includes developing new Puttery venues and one Drive Shack venue remodeling and maintaining existing facilities.
Traditional Golf property dispositions. We continue to own one traditional golf property, which is classified as held-for-use. We may continue to pursue the monetization of our owned golf property to generate capital for reinvestment in the entertainment golf business.
Financing Activities
Cash flows used in or provided by financing activities consist primarily of cash from the repayment of debt obligations, deposits received on golf memberships, and the payment of preferred dividends.
Cash provided by financing activities increased by $48.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020. Cash used in financing activities decreased by $6.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Dividends. The Company has paid preferred dividends declared in the amount of $5.6 million in 2019 and 2021. The Company did not declare preferred dividends in 2020. The Company has an ongoing obligation to satisfy the distribution requirements of the preferred shares, in accordance with the terms of the issuance. The timing and amount of distributions on our common stock are in the sole discretion of its board of directors, which has elected not to declare common stock dividends for 2018 through 2021 to retain capital for growth.
Debt Obligations. The Company made contractual payments on its finance leases in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Golf Membership Deposits. Until 2021, private country club members generally paid an advance initiation deposit upon their acceptance as a member to the respective country club, which are refundable 30 years after the date of acceptance as a member.
Debt Instruments
See Note 8 in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further information related to our debt obligations and contractual maturities as of December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had the following material off-balance sheet arrangements. We believe that these off-balance sheet structures presented the most efficient and least expensive form of financing for these assets at the time they were entered, and represented the most common market-accepted method for financing such assets.
•In April 2006, we securitized Subprime Portfolio I. The loans were sold to a securitization trust, of which 80% were treated as a sale, which is an off-balance sheet financing.
•In July 2007, we securitized Subprime Portfolio II. The loans were sold to a securitization trust, of which 90% were treated as a sale, which is an off-balance sheet financing.
We have no obligation to repurchase any loans from either of our subprime securitizations. Therefore, it is expected that our exposure to loss is limited to the carrying amount of our retained interests in the securitization entities, in the amount of $3.5 million as of December 31, 2021. A subsidiary of ours gave limited representations and warranties with respect to the second securitization; however, it has no assets and does not have recourse to the general credit of the Company.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual arrangements as of December 31, 2021, and the timing and effect that such commitments are expected to have on our liquidity and capital requirements in future periods:
(A)Includes interest based on rates existing at lease inception or ASC 842 adoption on January 1, 2019. Leases that are repayable prior to maturity at our options are reflected as their contractual maturity dates. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussions.
(B)Includes interest based on rates existing at December 31, 2021 and assumes no prepayments. Obligations that are repayable prior to maturity at our option are reflected at their contractual maturity dates. See Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussions.
(C)Includes leases of golf courses and related facilities, carts and equipment. Excludes escalation charges which per our lease agreements are not fixed and determinable payments. Also excludes four month-to-month property leases which are cancellable by the parties with 30 days written notice and various month-to-month operating leases for carts and equipment. The aggregate monthly expense of these leases was $0.1 million. See Notes 2 and 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussions.
(D)Amounts represent gross initiation deposits refundable 30 years after the date of acceptance of a member. See Notes 2 and 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.