ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 9, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,041,948 in cash and working capital of $1,657,797.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor agreed to provide the Company with loans in such amounts as may be required by the Company to fund the Company’s working capital requirements up to an aggregate of $1,500,000. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management is currently evaluating the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from March 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the Public Offering, and, since the closing of the Public Offering, a search for a business combination candidate. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the
form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Public Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 9, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had net income of $5,167,792, which consisted of formation and operating costs amounting to $376,682 and $505,566 of offering expenses related to warrants offset by bank interest income amounting to $22 interest income earned on cash held in Trust Account amounting to $18,018 and change in fair value of warrant liability of $6,032,000.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the NYSE, we agreed to pay our sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying such monthly fees. At December 31, 2021, $30,667 was incurred for the administrative service fee.
Registration Rights
The holders of the (i) Founder Shares, which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of the Public Offering, (ii) Private Placement Warrants, which were issued in a private placement simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering and the shares of Class A common stock underlying such Private Placement Warrants and (iii) Private Placement Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of the Company’s securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on the effective date of the Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the Company’s completion of the initial business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering (including the exercise of the over-allotment option), or $4,600,000. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% or $8,050,000 of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering (including the exercise of the over-allotment option), held in the Trust Account upon the completion of the Company’s initial business combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 23,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Share of Common Stock
The Company has two classes of stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock. The 23,000,000 potential shares of common stock for which outstanding warrants to purchase the Company’s shares are exercisable were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the period March 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net loss per share of common stock is the same as basic net loss per share of common stock for the periods.
Our statement of operations applies the two-class method
in calculating net loss per share. Basic and diluted net loss per share of common stock for Class A common stock and Class B common stock is calculated by dividing net income attributable to the Company minus any deemed dividends by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock and Class B common stock outstanding, allocated proportionally to each class of common stock.
Warrant Liability
We evaluated the public warrants and Private Placement Warrants issued in the Public Offering in accordance with ASC 815-40,
“Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the warrant agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the public warrants and Private Placement Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the public warrants and Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, they will be recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the Public Offering) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Uncertainty arises in the underlying assumptions we use to value the Private Placement Warrants and significant estimates are required for each underlying assumption. A 10% increase in the valuation per share of our Private Placement Warrants would result in a $585,000 increase in the warrant liability and a $585,000 decrease in net income. A 10% decrease in the valuation per share of our Private Placement Warrants would result in a $585,000 decrease in the warrant liability and a $585,000 increase in net income.