Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) provides information we believe is useful in understanding our operating results, cash flows and financial condition. We provide quantitative and qualitative information about key drivers behind revenue and earnings performance, including the impact of foreign currency, acquisitions as well as changes in volume and pricing.
The MD&A should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the related Notes thereto, which are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP"), and included in Item 8 of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, The statements in this MD&A regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding our future performance, liquidity and capital resources and other non-historical statements are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in the “Risk Factors” and in the “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information”, and included in Items 1 and 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements.
Management Overview
We are a leading provider of hygiene, infection prevention and cleaning solutions. We develop mission-critical products, services and technologies that save lives and protect our environment. We are an exempted company incorporated under the laws of the Cayman Islands with limited liability, on November 3, 2020, for the purpose of completing a public offering and related transactions and in order to carry on the business of our indirect wholly-owned operating subsidiaries. The Company serves as a holding company in our corporate structure, and does not engage in any business or other activities other than those incident to its formation.
On March 29, 2021, we completed an initial public offering of 46,153,846 Ordinary Shares at a public offering price of $15.00 per ordinary share, receiving $654.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses. On April 9, 2021, we issued and sold an additional 5,000,000 Ordinary Shares pursuant to the underwriters' partial exercise of their option to purchase additional shares, receiving an incremental $71.4 million in net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expense. Our Ordinary Shares trade on The Nasdaq Global Select Market under the ticker symbol "DSEY".
On November 15, 2021, we issued and sold 15,000,000 Ordinary Shares at a public offering price of $15.00 per Ordinary Share, receiving $214.4 million in net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses.
Bain Capital beneficially owned approximately 74.2% of our outstanding Ordinary Shares as of December 31, 2021. As a result, we are a “controlled company” within the meaning of the corporate governance standards of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC ("Nasdaq"). Under Nasdaq listing rules, a company of which more than 50% of the voting power for the election of directors is held by an individual, group or another company is a “controlled company” and may elect not to comply with certain Nasdaq corporate governance requirements. We are currently relying on certain of these exemptions.
Reportable Segments
We report our results of operations in two segments: Institutional and Food & Beverage.
•Institutional segment - Our Institutional solutions are designed to enhance cleanliness, safety, environmental sustainability, and efficiency for our customers. We offer a broad range of products, services, solutions, equipment and machines, including infection prevention and personal care, products, floor and building care chemicals, kitchen and mechanical warewash chemicals and machines, dosing and dispensing equipment, and floor care machines. We also offer a range of engineering, consulting and training services related to productivity management, water and energy management, and risk management, supported by data provided through our digital solutions. We deliver these solutions to customers in the
healthcare, education, food service, retail and grocery, hospitality, and building service contractors industries.
•Food & Beverage segment - Our Food & Beverage products are designed to maximize the hygiene, safety, and efficiency of our customers’ production and cleaning processes while minimizing their impact on the natural resources they consume. We offer a broad range of products, solutions, equipment and machines including chemical products, engineering and equipment solutions, knowledge-based services, training through our Diversey Hygiene Academy, and water treatment. We deliver these solutions to enhance food safety, operational excellence, and sustainability for customers in the brewing, beverage, dairy, processed foods, pharmaceutical, and agriculture industries.
The Company evaluates the performance of each reportable segment based on the results of each segment. In addition, corporate reflects indirect costs that support all segments, but are not allocated or monitored by segment management, and include executive and administrative functions, finance and accounting, procurement, information technology and human resources. For additional information regarding key factors and measures used to evaluate our business, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and “Net Sales by Segment”.
Recent Trends and Events
Impact of COVID-19. In 2020, governmental agencies around the world, including federal, state and local governments in the United States, implemented varying degrees of restrictions on social and commercial activities to promote social distancing in an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19. These measures, as well as future measures, have had and will continue to create a significant adverse impact upon many sectors of the global economy. Additionally, the spread of COVID-19 continues in many parts of the world, including the United States.
We continue to monitor the impact that COVID-19 has on all aspects of our business and geographies, including the impact on our employees, customers, suppliers, business partners and distribution channels. We continually assess the evolving situation and implement business continuity plans across all operations.
Markets We Serve. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a meaningful impact on our business, especially within our Institutional segment. In the first quarter of 2021, strong demand for our infection prevention products and services offset volume related declines in sales to restaurants, hotels and entertainment facilities. In the remainder of 2021, we saw restrictions and lock-downs start to ease in some markets, resulting in stronger than anticipated sales in those markets, except for infection prevention products. Conversely, as expected, demand for infection prevention products and services slowed in the second quarter of 2021 to levels below the peak demand from 2020, but continuing above pre-COVID-19 levels.
In the long-term, we expect that our recent product enhancements, digital investments, and cost efficiencies will result in accelerated growth as the end markets most negatively impacted by the pandemic continue to normalize and return to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels. Moreover, we expect increased demand for our infection prevention products and services to endure. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in higher disinfection standards and thus a permanent increase in the demand for our products.
Despite the increased demand for infection prevention products generated by the pandemic, the disruption to global markets that has occurred has adversely impacted the demand for our goods and services particularly in the hotel, restaurant, office cleaning and travel industries. The outbreak and continued spread of COVID-19 has caused an economic slowdown. Currently, there is a significant degree of uncertainty and lack of visibility as to the extent and duration of any such slowdown. Given the significant economic uncertainty and volatility created by the COVID-19 pandemic, it is difficult to predict the nature and extent of impacts on demand for our products. These expectations are subject to change without warning and investors are cautioned not to place undue reliance on them. The prolonged permanence of COVID-19 has resulted in a significant downturn in the food service, hospitality, office cleaning and travel industries and a significant drop in demand for some of our products and services, which could materially adversely affect our business.
Supply Chain and Operations. Our global operations have continued to operate and serve the needs of our customers through the global COVID-19 pandemic. We experienced minimal facility closures due to government
orders. While we have introduced social distancing, health monitoring and any necessary quarantining into our global operations, this work has been done with limited impact to overall production capacity.
We cannot predict the impact on our operations of future spread or worsening of the COVID-19 pandemic or future restrictions on commercial activities by governmental agencies to limit the spread of the virus. The health of our workforce, and our ability to meet staffing needs in our manufacturing facilities, distribution of our products and other critical functions are key to our operations. The health of our third-party suppliers' employees that are linked to our supply chain (contract manufacturers, third-party logistics providers and freight carriers) is also critical to support our operations.
In addition, as economies around the world reopened in 2021, increases in demand have created significant disruptions to the global supply chain, which have affected our ability to receive goods on a timely basis and at anticipated costs. These supply chain disruptions have been caused and compounded by many factors, including changes in supply and demand, industry capacity constraints, raw material shortages and labor shortages. Global logistics network challenges have resulted in delays, shortages of certain materials, and increased transportation costs. We have materially mitigated to date the impact of these disruptions through the work of our procurement and supply chain teams, but there continues to be significant uncertainties regarding the future impact of supply chain disruptions, which we cannot predict.
Capital Investments. To support the expansion of our North American Institutional business we plan to expand production capacity in the United States, and in the third quarter of 2021 we entered into a lease agreement for a future manufacturing facility site located in northern Kentucky. This facility will help us better serve our institutional customers, strengthen our business and market position, and better manage our inventory and supply chain.
On June 29, 2021, we entered into a global exclusive license agreement with Halomine, Inc. for its patented HaloFilmTM disinfectant technology. This will allow customers to achieve up to a 30 day efficacy by using this new product alongside a chlorine-based disinfectant. This ultimately helps our customers further protect their direct customers, while also saving on chemical and labor costs.
On September 20, 2021, we acquired certain assets of Tasman Chemicals Pty. Limited, an Australian manufacturer of professional hygiene and cleaning solutions with over 55 years of experience in the market. Having our own manufacturing facility in Australia is expected to improve our ability to deliver the right customer service outcomes and margin profile.
On November 5, 2021, we acquired certain assets of Avmor Ltd, a Canadian based supplier of specialist hygiene solutions for the Institutional segment with over 70 years of experience in the market. This acquisition will strengthen our market presence in Quebec, as well as the rest of Canada, and enhance our service and product offerings for distributors and direct customers.
On December 3, 2021, we acquired Birko Corporation, a North American manufacturer of food safety chemical solutions for the Food & Beverage segment, and Chad Equipment LLC, a subsidiary of Birko Corporation, which manufactures food safety equipment for the Protein industries. This acquisition strengthens our market presence in the United States and Canada, enhancing our scale, service and product offering, and creating numerous cross-sell and revenue opportunities as a truly global provider in the food and beverage industries.
On January 24, 2022, we acquired Shorrock Trichem, a distributor of cleaning and hygiene solutions and services based in northwest England. This acquisition increases our capabilities in providing an enhanced value proposition to our customers, delivering access to mechanical ware washing, laundry machine leasing and washroom solutions which complement the market leading products that Diversey provides for these areas. This enables us to provide one point of service for customers, for both equipment and products.
Employee Health and Safety and Business Continuity. The health and safety of our employees, suppliers and customers continues to be our top priority. Safety measures remain in place at each of our facilities, including: enhanced cleaning procedures, employee temperature checks, use of personal protective equipment for location-
dependent workers, social distancing measures within operating sites, remote work arrangements for non-location dependent employees, visitor access restrictions and limitations on travel, particularly in regions with high transmission of COVID-19.
Remote work arrangements will remain in place for some of our non-location dependent employees as appropriate. In a remote working environment, we continue our efforts to mitigate information technology risks including failures in the physical infrastructure or operating systems that support our businesses and customers, and cyber-attacks and security breaches of our networks or systems.
While we continue to practice enhanced employee safety and other precautionary measures during this pandemic, there continues to be significant uncertainties regarding the future impact of COVID-19, which we cannot predict.
Impact of Inflation. Inflation affects our manufacturing, distribution and operating costs. During 2021, we have seen unprecedented inflation impact the cost of our raw materials, packaging and transportation and expect that trend to continue into early 2022. We are committed to maintaining our margins, and have taken actions to mitigate inflation through price increases, cost control, raw material substitutions, and more efficient logistics practices. We will continue these practices in 2022; however, our success is dependent on competitive pressures and market conditions, and we cannot guarantee the negative impacts of inflation can be fully recovered. In periods of significant inflation, we may experience a lag between our ability to recover both the cost and margin in the short term.
Other Factors Affecting Our Operating Results
Our operating results have been, and will likely continue to be, affected by numerous factors, including the increasing worldwide demand for our products and services, increasing regulatory compliance costs, macroeconomic and political conditions, the introduction of new and upgraded products, recent acquisitions and foreign currency exchange rates. Each of these factors is briefly discussed below.
Increasing Demand for Our Products and Services. Governmental regulations for food safety and disease control, and consumer focus on hygiene and cleanliness have increased significantly across the world in recent years. Climate change, water scarcity and environmental concerns have combined to create further demand for products, services and solutions designed to minimize waste and support broader sustainability. In addition, many of our customers require tailored cleaning solutions that can assist in reducing labor, energy, water-use and the costs related to cleaning, sanitation and hygiene activities. We help our customers realize efficiencies throughout the operation of their facilities by developing customized solutions. We believe that our value-added customer service approach and proven commitment to providing cost-savings and sustainable solutions position us well to address these and other critical demand drivers in order to drive revenue growth.
Increasing Regulatory Compliance Costs. Although our industry has always been highly regulated, it is becoming more regulated with the introduction of, among other things, the Environmental Protection Agency Biocidal Product Regulation and the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals. Compliance costs associated with these new regulations have impacted our cost of doing business, and we expect these regulations and other existing and new regulations to continue to affect our cost of doing business in the future.
Impact of Currency Fluctuations. We have significant international operations with 80.8% of our net sales for 2021 being generated from sales to customers located outside of the United States. Our international operations are subject to changes in regional and local economic conditions, including local inflationary pressures.
We present our Consolidated Financial Statements in U.S. dollars. As a result, we must translate the assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses of all of our operations into U.S. dollars at applicable exchange rates. Consequently, increases or decreases in the value of the U.S. dollar may affect the value of these items with respect to our non-U.S. dollar businesses in our Consolidated Financial Statements, even if their value has not changed in their local currency. For example, a stronger U.S. dollar will reduce the relative value of reported results of non-U.S. dollar operations, and, conversely, a weaker U.S. dollar will increase the relative value of the non-U.S. dollar
operations. These translations could significantly affect the comparability of our results between financial periods and/or result in significant changes to the carrying value of our assets, liabilities and stockholders’ equity.
In addition, many of our operations buy materials and incur expenses in a currency other than their functional currency. As a result, our results of operations are impacted by currency exchange rate fluctuations because we are generally unable to match revenues received in foreign currencies with expenses incurred in the same currency. From time to time, as and when we determine it is appropriate and advisable to do so, we may seek to mitigate the effect of exchange rate fluctuations through the use of derivative financial instruments.
Argentina. Economic and political events in Argentina have continued to expose us to heightened levels of foreign currency exchange risk. Accordingly, Argentina has been designated a highly inflationary economy under U.S. GAAP effective July 1, 2018, and the U.S. dollar replaced the Argentine peso as the functional currency for our subsidiaries in Argentina. For more information, see “Foreign currency (gain) loss related to Argentina subsidiaries” below.
Consolidated Operating Results
Results of Operations
Net sales by Segment. In “Net sales by Segment” and in certain of the discussions and tables that follow, we exclude the impact of foreign currency translation when presenting net sales information, which we define as “constant dollar,” and we exclude acquisitions in the first year after closing and the impact of foreign currency translation when presenting net sales information, which we define as “organic.” Changes in net sales excluding the impact of foreign currency translation is a Non-GAAP financial measure. As a global business, it is important that we take into account the effects of foreign currency translation when we view our results and plan our strategies. Nonetheless, we cannot control changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Consequently, when we look at our financial results to measure the core performance of our business, we may exclude the impact of foreign currency translation by translating our current period results at prior period foreign currency exchange rates. We also may adjust for the impact of foreign currency translation when making incentive compensation determinations. As a result, we believe that these presentations are useful internally and useful to investors in evaluating our performance.
The following tables set forth net sales by segment:
2021 vs 2020
Institutional. Net sales decreased $76.9 million, or 3.9%, in 2021 compared with 2020. Foreign currency translation had a positive effect of $33.5 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales decreased $110.4 million, or 5.5%, with our acquisitions contributing $6.2 million of growth. Organic sales decreased 5.8% in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to a decrease in sales of Infection Prevention products as demand slowed in 2021 to levels below the peak demand from 2020. This decrease was slightly offset by a recovery in certain geographic markets, which led to an increase in sales in areas that were primarily impacted by COVID-19 related shutdowns, particularly in restaurants, hotels, and entertainment facilities.
Food & Beverage. Net sales increased $66.6 million, or 10.5%, in 2021 compared with 2020. Foreign currency translation had a positive effect of $4.7 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $61.9 million, or 9.8%, with our acquisitions contributing $17.7 million of growth. Organic sales increased 7.0%, as our Food & Beverage segment was less affected by the COVID-19 pandemic as many of our customers were considered essential businesses and did not experience shutdowns to the extent experienced in the Institutional segment. The increase in sales is primarily driven by new customer wins, pricing actions, and the continued rollout of water treatment solutions.
2020 vs 2019
Institutional. Net sales increased $16.2 million, or 0.8%, in 2020 compared with 2019. Foreign currency translation had a negative effect of $19.7 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $35.9 million, or 1.8%, with the Wypetech acquisition contributing $4.9 million of growth. Organic growth of 1.6% was driven primarily by pricing actions across all regions while volumes remained flat on a global basis. On a regional basis, North America revenue grew 38.0% reflecting unprecedented demand for Infection Prevention products, which more than offset marked volume declines in other product categories driven by COVID-19 related shutdowns, particularly in restaurants, hotels, and entertainment facilities. Growth in North America (“NAM”) more than offset sales declines in all other regions, which were significantly impacted by COVID-related shutdowns, most heavily in Asia Pacific, Europe and the Middle East and Africa (“MEA”).
Food & Beverage. Net sales decreased $10.9 million, or 1.7%, in 2020 compared with 2019. Foreign currency translation had a negative effect of $28.0 million. On a constant dollar basis, net sales increased $17.1 million, or 2.7%, reflecting growth across all regions with the exception of Asia Pacific. Our Food & Beverage segment was less affected by the COVID-19 pandemic as many of our customers are considered essential businesses and did not experience shutdowns to the extent experienced in the Institutional segment. On a regional basis, growth was led by
MEA and Latin America, which were primarily driven by price increases to offset inflation. Sales volumes were also higher in these regions as well as in NAM due to a combination of demand for sanitizers and disinfectant products and new customer wins.
Cost of sales and gross profit. Cost of sales is primarily comprised of direct materials and supplies consumed in the production of product, as well as labor and direct overhead expense necessary to acquire and convert the purchased materials and supplies into finished products. Also included are expenses associated with service organization, quality oversight, warranty costs and share-based compensation.
2021 vs 2020
Our gross profit was $1,015.5 million in 2021 and $1,069.8 million in 2020, and our gross margin was 38.8% in 2021 and 40.7% in 2020. Gross profit for 2021 was favorably impacted by $16.1 million of foreign currency translation, and was offset by a $13.9 million charge for excess inventory related to COVID-19 and a $7.5 million increase in share-based compensation related to the cash long-term incentive plan as a result of our IPO. Customer demand for sanitizer products surged at the outset of COVID-19, and we met the rapidly increasing demand and sold the vast majority of the sanitizer inventory. However, COVID-19 variant-related delays of customer reopenings and consumer activity resulted in a small portion of excess sanitizer inventory. Excluding the impact of these items, gross profit decreased by $49.0 million during 2021, and was negatively impacted by lower sales volumes as described above, as well as additional freight costs, increased inflation, and higher labor and manufacturing costs, which were partially offset by other cost reduction initiatives and price increases.
2020 vs 2019
Our gross profit was $1,069.8 million in 2020 and $1,101.8 million in 2019, and our gross margin was 40.7% in 2020 and 42.0% in 2019. Of the $32.0 million decrease in gross profit in 2020, $18.5 million was due to unfavorable foreign currency translation. The remaining decrease in gross profit reflects lower demand driven by lock-downs and restrictions in our core food service and hospitality industries and under absorbed manufacturing costs in Europe. The gross margin decrease was driven by additional freight costs, higher manufacturing costs reflecting social distancing and higher employee absenteeism resulting from COVID-19, which was partially offset by other cost reduction initiatives and price increases as well as a significant increase in volume of infection prevention products driven by COVID-19 demand.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses are comprised primarily of marketing, research and development and administrative costs. Administrative costs, among other things, include share-based compensation, professional consulting expenditures, administrative salaries and wages, certain software and hardware costs and facilities costs.
2021 vs 2020
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $828.3 million in 2021 compared to $835.7 million in 2020. The decrease of $7.4 million during 2021 was due in part to cost saving initiatives, reduced spending and cost control measures in response to COVID-19 implemented during 2020. These savings were partially offset by a $40.2 million increase in share-based compensation and $8.8 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation.
2020 vs 2019
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $835.7 million in 2020 compared to $858.6 million in 2019. The decrease of $22.9 million primarily reflects cost saving initiatives, reduced spending and cost control measures in response to COVID-19 implemented during 2020, and $8.2 million of favorable foreign currency translation. These items were partially offset by a $64.5 million increase in share-based compensation and a $7.2 million increase in the allowance for trade receivables due to minor deterioration in the aging of receivables.
Transition and transformation costs. Transition and transformation costs were $52.3 million, $42.5 million, and $52.8 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These costs consist primarily of professional and consulting
services in areas such as information technology, controllership, tax, treasury, transformation services, debt refinancing, human resources, procurement and supply chain (which are non-operational in nature), incurred in becoming a standalone company and preparing to become a publicly traded company. Costs incurred in 2021 in connection with becoming a publicly traded company were $14.7 million.
Management fee. Pursuant to a management agreement with Bain Capital, we were obligated to pay Bain Capital an annual management fee of $7.5 million plus reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with management services provided. The management agreement was terminated in March 2021, pursuant to its terms upon the consummation of our IPO, and we recorded a termination fee of $17.5 million during 2021. We paid Bain Capital $19.4 million, $7.5 million and $7.5 million in management fees during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Amortization of intangible assets acquired. In connection with our various business acquisitions, the acquired assets, including separately identifiable intangible assets, and assumed liabilities were recorded as of the acquisition date at their respective fair values. Amortization of intangible assets acquired was $96.7 million, $98.2 million, and $93.7 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Restructuring and exit costs. We recorded restructuring and exit costs of $27.4 million, $25.6 million, and $19.8 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These charges represent facilities consolidations, the exit of certain businesses that leased equipment to customers under sales-type leases, and employee termination costs related to our initiatives to align our labor resources to our anticipated business needs. See Note 19 - Restructuring and Exit Activities in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Non-operating results. Our non-operating results were as follows:
Interest Expense. We incurred interest expense during 2021 of $57.2 million, $28.7 million and $13.1 million related to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, the 2021 and 2017 Senior Notes and other debt, respectively.
We incurred interest expense during 2020 of $83.0 million, $30.3 million and $3.1 million related to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, the 2017 Senior Notes and other debt, respectively.
We incurred interest expense during 2019 of $102.1 million, $29.9 million and $1.5 million related to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, the 2017 Senior Notes and other debt, respectively.
Amortization of deferred financing costs and original issue discount totaling $27.3 million, $11.3 million, and $10.5 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, are included in the interest expense line item disclosed above. In connection with the repayment of 2017 U.S. Dollar Term Loan and the Euro Term Loan, $18.9 million of accelerated interest amortization was incurred during 2021.
Gain on sale of business and investments. On December 17, 2019, we acquired all of the accelerated hydrogen peroxide intellectual property ("IP") of Virox Holdings, Inc. and Virox International Holdings, Inc., including patents, trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets, third party licenses, associated income, all technology, regulatory master registrations (EPA, Biocidal Products Regulations) and other rights and licenses required to operate the IP
(the “Virox Acquisition”). The IP was valued at $37.4 million, comprised of a cash purchase agreement of $34.2 million and a non-exclusive license back to Virox of that IP for specific sectors (excluding healthcare), valued at $3.2 million. Additionally, Virox acquired our shares of Virox Holdings, Inc. and Virox International Holdings, Inc. for $27.1 million in cash, resulting in a gain of $13.0 million.
Foreign currency loss related to Argentina subsidiaries. On July 1, 2018, the economy of Argentina was designated as a highly inflationary economy under U.S. GAAP. Therefore, the U.S. dollar replaced the Argentine peso as the functional currency for our subsidiaries in Argentina. All Argentine peso-denominated monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured into U.S. dollars using the current exchange rate available to us, and any changes in the exchange rate are reflected in foreign currency exchange loss related to our Argentine subsidiaries. As a result of this designation, we recorded a remeasurement gain of $2.1 million during 2021, and remeasurement losses of $1.6 million and $11.4 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. On September 29, 2021, the Company completed the sale of $500.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.625% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “2021 Senior Notes”) in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers in reliance on Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and to non-U.S. persons (as defined in Regulation S) pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The Company used the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Senior Notes, together with borrowings under its New Senior Secured Credit Facilities (as defined below) and cash on hand, to redeem all of the €450.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.625% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2017 Senior Notes”), pay fees and/or expenses incurred in connection with the issuance of the 2021 Senior Notes and for general corporate purposes.
The Company redeemed the 2017 Senior Notes at the redemption price (expressed as percentages of principal amount) of 101.4%, for a total of $536.7 million, which consisted of $529.1 million of principal amount and $7.6 million of redemption premium. The premium cost and the balance of the unamortized deferred financing costs related to the 2017 Senior Notes of $8.0 million were charged to Loss on Extinguishment of Debt during 2021.
Other (income) expense, net. Our other (income) expense, net was as follows:
The change in the interest income was primarily due to the fluctuation of our cash balances.
The unrealized foreign exchange loss in 2021 was primarily due to the weakening of the Euro versus the U.S. dollar, which had an unfavorable impact on our U.S. dollar denominated debt held at our functional entity, which was partially offset by a favorable impact on our tax receivable agreement. The unrealized foreign exchange gain in 2020 was primarily due to the strengthening of the Euro versus the U.S. dollar which had a favorable impact on our U.S. dollar denominated debt held at our Euro functional entity. The unrealized foreign exchange loss in 2019 was primarily due to the weakening of the Euro versus the U.S. dollar, which had an unfavorable impact on our U.S. dollar denominated debt held at our functional entity.
The realized foreign exchange losses in 2021 were primarily caused by the refinancing of the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. See Note 10 - Debt and Credit Facilities in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. The other realized foreign exchange gains and losses were primarily due to internal cash-pooling activity.
In accordance with the provisions contained in Accounting Standards Update 2017-07, Compensation - Retirement Benefits, we record net pension income when the expected return on plan assets exceeds the interest costs associated with these plans.
The release of our tax indemnification asset was due to the lapse of statute of limitations for unrecognized tax benefits. See Note 15 - Income Taxes in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
The tax receivable agreement adjustments were due to changes in tax laws and changes in the valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets; therefore there was a net reduction of the tax benefits under the tax receivable agreement. See Note 15 - Income Taxes in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Income tax provision. For 2021, the difference in the statutory income tax benefit of $(28.4) million and the recorded income tax provision of $25.3 million was primarily attributable to $14.5 million of income tax expense related to non-deductible share-based compensation, and a net $23.8 million increase in the valuation allowance as a result of changes in the assessment of the realizability of deferred tax assets.
For 2020, the difference in the statutory income tax benefit of $(7.3) million and the recorded income tax provision of $9.2 million was primarily attributable to $16.9 million of income tax expense related to non-deductible share-based compensation and $14.5 million of income tax expense driven by changes to tax laws impacting our deferred tax liabilities, offset by a net favorable change of $10.3 million from audit settlements and changes to unrecognized tax benefits.
For 2019, the difference in the statutory income tax benefit of $(19.0) million and the recorded tax provision of $32.7 million was primarily attributable to $23.4 million of income tax expense driven by changes to tax laws impacting deferred tax liabilities, $11.7 million of unfavorable adjustments to deferred tax balances in foreign subsidiaries, $9.2 million of income tax expense related to the impact of permanent differences, and a net unfavorable change of $8.1 million from audit settlements and changes to unrecognized tax benefits. These increases to income tax expense were partially offset by a net $12.0 million decrease in the valuation allowance as a result of changes in the assessment of the realizability of non-U.S. deferred tax assets.
Adjusted EBITDA by Segment. Adjusted EBITDA for each of our reportable segments is as follows:
2021 vs 2020
Institutional. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $16.6 million, or 4.9%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. Foreign currency translation had a positive effect of $5.8 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA in 2021 decreased $22.4 million, or 6.7%, as compared with 2020. Our acquisitions contributed $1.1 million of growth in 2021. Adjusted EBITDA margin decreased from 16.9% in 2020 to 16.7% in 2021, which reflected a decline in gross profit margin due to lower sales volumes and higher freight costs, inflation, and higher manufacturing costs reflecting social distancing and higher employee absenteeism resulting from COVID-19, which was partially offset by cost saving initiatives.
Food & Beverage. Adjusted EBITDA increased $21.8 million, or 19.5%, in 2021 compared with 2020. Foreign currency translation had a positive effect of $0.2 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA in 2021 increased $21.6 million, or 19.3%, when compared to 2020. Our acquisitions contributed $3.5 million of growth in 2021. Adjusted EBITDA margin improved from 17.7% in 2020 to 19.1% in 2021, which was driven by price increases and cost control measures including in-year and carry over from prior year structural cost savings, headcount freezes, furlough assistance received in certain jurisdictions, and lower travel spend in response to the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Corporate Costs. Corporate costs decreased from $47.1 million in 2020 to $43.4 million in 2021. The reduction was primarily driven by cost reduction initiatives and controlled discretionary spending.
2020 vs 2019
Institutional. Adjusted EBITDA increased $40.0 million, or 13.5%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Foreign currency translation had a negative effect of $3.2 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA in 2020 increased $43.2 million, or 14.6%, as compared with 2019, with the acquisition of Wypetech contributing $1.2 million to growth. Adjusted EBITDA margin grew from 15.0% in 2019 to 16.9% in 2020. Organic growth of 14.2% and margin expansion of 1.9% was driven primarily by the impact of cost saving initiatives (including in-year and carry over from prior year structural cost savings, headcount freezes, furlough assistance received in certain jurisdictions, and lower travel spend in response to the global pandemic), in addition to price increases and supply chain cost savings, which more than offset additional freight costs, under absorbed manufacturing costs and unfavorable mix resulting from COVID-19.
Food & Beverage. Adjusted EBITDA increased $10.0 million, or 9.8%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Foreign currency had a negative effect of $7.0 million. On a constant dollar basis, Adjusted EBITDA in 2020 increased $17.0 million, or 16.7%, when compared to 2019. Adjusted EBITDA margin improved from 15.8% in 2019 to 17.7% in 2020. Margin expansion was driven by price increases and cost control measures including in-year and carry over from prior year structural cost savings, headcount freezes, furlough assistance received in certain jurisdictions, and lower travel spend in response to the global pandemic.
Corporate Costs. Corporate costs fell from $58.5 million in 2019 to $47.1 million in 2020. The reduction was primarily driven by cost reduction initiatives and controlled discretionary spending in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present financial information that conforms to U.S. GAAP. We also present financial information that does not conform to U.S. GAAP, as we believe it is useful to investors. In addition, Non-GAAP measures are used by management to review and analyze our operating performance and, along with other data, as internal measures for setting annual budgets and forecasts, assessing financial performance, providing guidance and comparing our financial performance with our peers.
Non-GAAP financial measures also provide management with additional means to understand and evaluate the core operating results and trends in our ongoing business by eliminating certain expenses and/or gains (which may not occur in each period presented) and other items that management believes might otherwise make comparisons of our ongoing business with prior periods and peers more difficult, obscure trends in ongoing operations or reduce management’s ability to make useful forecasts. Non-GAAP measures do not purport to represent any similarly titled U.S. GAAP information and are not an indicator of our performance under U.S. GAAP. Investors are cautioned against placing undue reliance on these Non-GAAP measures. Further, investors are urged to review and consider carefully the adjustments made by management to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to arrive at these Non-GAAP financial measures, described below.
Our Non-GAAP financial measures may also be considered in calculations of our performance measures set by our Board of Directors for purposes of determining incentive compensation. The Non-GAAP financial metrics exclude items that we consider to be certain specified items (“Special Items”), such as restructuring charges, transition and transformation costs, certain transaction and other charges related to acquisitions and divestitures, gains and losses related to acquisitions and divestitures, and certain other items. We evaluate unusual or Special Items on an individual basis. Our evaluation of whether to exclude an unusual or Special Item for purposes of determining our Non-GAAP financial measures considers both the quantitative and qualitative aspects of the item, including among other things (i) its nature, (ii) whether it relates to our ongoing business operations, and (iii) whether we expect it to occur as part of our normal ongoing business on a regular basis.
Our calculation of these Non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences between companies in the method of calculation. As a result, the use of these Non-GAAP measures has limitations and should not be considered superior to, in isolation from, or as a substitute for, related U.S. GAAP measures.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that the financial statements and other financial information presented have been prepared in a manner that complies, in all material respects, with U.S. GAAP, and are consistent with current practices with the exception of the presentation of certain Non-GAAP financial measures, including EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. EBITDA consists of net income (loss) before income tax provisions (benefit), interest expense, interest income, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA consists of EBITDA adjusted to (i) eliminate certain non-operating income or expense items, (ii) eliminate the impact of certain non-cash and other items that are included in net income and EBITDA that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance, and (iii) eliminate certain unusual and non-recurring items impacting results in a particular period.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures that are not required by, or presented in accordance with, U.S. GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures of our financial performance under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to revenues, net income (loss), income (loss) before income tax provision or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor should they be considered as alternatives to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, our method of calculating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may vary from the methods used by other companies.
We consider EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to be key indicators of our financial performance. Additionally, we believe EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in our industry. We also believe that investors, analysts and rating agencies consider EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA useful means of measuring our ability to meet our debt service obligations and evaluating our financial performance, and management uses these measures for one or more of these purposes.
Our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have important limitations as analytical tools and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. The use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA instead of net income has limitations as an analytical tool, including the following:
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debt;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our income taxes;
•Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
•EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect historical cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments; and
•Other companies in our industry may calculate these measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as a comparative measure.
Adjusted EBITDA includes adjustments that represent a cash expense or that represent a non-cash charge that may relate to a future cash expense, and some of these expenses are of a type that we expect to incur in the future, although we cannot predict the amount of any such future charge.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a replacement for net income or as a measure of discretionary cash available to us to service our indebtedness or invest in our business. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings (Loss) Per Share (“Adjusted EPS”) are also Non-GAAP financial measures. We define Adjusted Net Income as net income (loss) adjusted to (i) eliminate certain non-operating income or expense items, (ii) eliminate the impact of certain non-cash and other items that are included in net income that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance, (iii) eliminate certain unusual and non-recurring items impacting results in a particular period, and (iv) reflect the tax effect of items (i) through (iii) and other tax special items. We define Adjusted EPS as our Adjusted Net Income divided by the number of weighted average shares outstanding in the period.
We believe that, in addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS are useful in evaluating our business, results of operations and financial condition. We believe that Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS may be helpful to investors because they provide consistency and comparability with past financial performance and facilitate period to period comparisons of our operations and financial results, as they eliminate the effects of certain variables from period to period for reasons that we do not believe reflect our underlying operating performance or are unusual or infrequent in nature. However, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS are presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute or alternative for financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS have limitations as an analytical tool; some of these limitations are:
• Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
• other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS differently, which reduce their usefulness as comparative measures; and
• in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in our calculation of Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS and our presentation of Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS
should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by the types of items excluded from the calculation of Adjusted Net Income or Adjusted EPS.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS alongside other financial performance measures, including net loss, basic and diluted loss per share, and our other U.S. GAAP results. Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS are not presentations made in accordance with U.S. GAAP and the use of these terms may vary from other companies in our industry. The most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure to Adjusted Net Income is net loss and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure to Adjusted EPS is basic and diluted loss per share.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) before income tax provision (benefit) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
The following table reconciles net loss to Adjusted Net Income and basic and diluted loss per share to Adjusted EPS for the periods presented:
(1)In the period following the Diversey Acquisition, we incurred costs primarily consisting of professional and consulting services in such areas as information technology, controllership, tax, treasury, transformation services, human resources, procurement and supply chain in establishing ourselves as a standalone company and to position ourselves for future growth. Costs incurred in 2021 include those necessary in becoming a publicly traded Company.
(2)Includes costs related to restructuring programs and business exit activities. See Note 19 - Restructuring and Exit Activities in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(3)Effective July 1, 2018, Argentina was deemed to have a highly inflationary economy and the functional currency for our Argentina operations was changed from the Argentine peso to the United States dollar and remeasurement charges/credits are recorded in our Consolidated Statements of Operations rather than as a component of Cumulative Translation Adjustment on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(4)In connection with the Diversey Acquisition, the purchase agreement governing the transaction includes indemnification provisions with respect to tax liabilities. The offset to this adjustment is included in income tax provision. See Note 15 - Income Taxes in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(5)These costs consisted primarily of investment banking, legal and other professional advisory services costs.
(6)In connection with various acquisitions we recorded fair value increases to our inventory. These amounts represent the amortization of this increase.
(7)Represents fees paid to Bain Capital pursuant a management agreement whereby we have received general business consulting services; financial, managerial and operational advice; advisory and consulting services with respect to selection of advisors; advice in different fields; and financial and strategic planning and analysis. The management agreement was terminated in March 2021 pursuant to its terms upon the consummation of the IPO, and we recorded a termination fee of $17.5 million during 2021.
(8)Represents the net impact of the expected return on plan assets, interest cost, and settlement cost components of net periodic defined benefit income related to our defined benefit pension plans. See Note 14 - Retirement Plans in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(9)Represents the unrealized foreign currency exchange impact on our operations, primarily attributed to the valuation of the U.S. dollar-denominated debt held by our European entity and our tax receivable agreement.
(10)On November 15, 2018, we entered into a factoring Master Agreement with Factofrance, S.A. Additionally, on April 22, 2020, the Company entered into a securitization arrangement with PNC Bank ("PNC") to sell certain North American customer receivables without recourse on a revolving basis. This amount represents the fees to complete the sale of the receivables without recourse. See Note 6 - Financial Statement Details to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(11)Represents compensation expense associated with our Management Equity Incentive Plan and Long-Term Incentive Plan awards. See Note 18 - Share-Based Compensation in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(12)Represents the adjustment to our tax receivable agreement liability due to changes in tax laws and changes in valuation allowances that impact the realizability of the attributes of the tax receivable agreement. See Note 15 - Income Taxes in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(13)Represents non-cash gain on sale of our shares in connection with the Virox IP Acquisition. See Note 5 - Acquisitions in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(14)Represents the costs incurred in connection with the redemption of the 2017 Senior Notes on September 29, 2021. See Note 10 - Debt and Credit Facilities in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(15)During 2021, the Company incurred a realized foreign currency exchange loss of $4.5 million related to the refinancing of the Senior Secured Credit Facilities. See Note 10 - Debt and Credit Facilities in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
(16)Customer demand for COVID-related products surged at the outset of COVID-19, and we met the rapidly increasing demand and sold the vast majority of this inventory. However, COVID-19 variant-related delays of customer reopenings and consumer activity resulted in a small portion of excess inventory. The Company recorded a charge of $13.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 for excess inventory and estimated disposal costs.
(17)Represents accelerated non-cash expense of deferred financing costs and original issue discount costs as the Company's U.S. Dollar Incremental Loan was fully repaid and the Euro Term Loan was paid down significantly using proceeds from the IPO.
(18)Includes other costs associated with restructuring which are recorded within Cost of sales.
(19)The tax rate used to calculate the tax impact of the pre-tax adjustments is based on the jurisdiction in which the charge was recorded.
(20)Represents adjustments related to discrete tax items including uncertain tax positions, impacts from rate changes in certain jurisdictions and changes in our valuation allowance.
(21)For purposes of calculating earnings (loss) per share the Company has retrospectively presented earnings (loss) per share as if the Reorganization Transactions (See Note 1 - General and Description of Business in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information) had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented. Such retrospective presentation reflects an increase of approximately 47.4 million shares due to the exchange of shares in Constellation for shares in the Company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of cash are the collection of trade receivables generated from the sales of our products and services to our customers, amounts available under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below) and accounts receivable factoring and securitization programs. Our primary uses of cash are payments for operating expenses, investments in working capital, capital expenditures, interest, taxes, debt obligations, restructuring expenses and other long-term liabilities. Our principal source of liquidity, in addition to cash from operating activities, has been through our Revolving Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $207.6 million and unused borrowing capacity of $442.1 million under our Revolving Credit Facility. We believe that cash flow from operations, available cash on hand and available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility will be adequate to service our debt, meet our liquidity needs and fund necessary capital expenditures for the next twelve months. We also believe these financial resources will allow us to manage our business operations for the foreseeable future, including mitigating unexpected reductions in revenues and delays in payments from our customers. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities and the introduction of new and enhanced products and services offerings.
Material Cash Requirements. In 2021, we began a strategic initiative to consolidate certain production and office facilities within Europe and North America, which also includes opening a new manufacturing facility in North America. These actions will both expand our production capacity and allow us to better manage our inventory, supply chain and workforce. We expect to spend an estimated $90.0 million in total cash for the initiative in 2021 through 2023, which consists of $55.0 million of capitalized expenditures and $35.0 million of expenses. Of these amounts, we paid $25.6 million for capital expenditures and $2.3 million for expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021. Our remaining cash requirements for 2022 and 2023 are estimated at $29.4 million for capital expenditures and $32.7 million for expenses. We believe that cash flow from operations and available cash on hand will meet our need to fund this initiative.
Historical Cash Flows. Note that the table below and discussion that follows include restricted cash as part of net cash in accordance with the provisions of ASU 2016-18, Statement of Cash Flows - Restricted Cash. We include restricted cash from our factoring arrangements and compensating balance deposits as part of our cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash for purposes of preparing our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
The following table presents a summary of our net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities:
Operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities decreased $191.7 million during 2021 as compared to 2020, and was primarily attributable to a decrease in net income and unfavorable fluctuations in working capital items totaling $172.8 million. The changes in working capital reflect unfavorable fluctuations in trade receivables of $143.8 million (primarily relating to increased sales in 2021 in Latin America and the Middle East and Africa, which have longer payment terms, and the securitization of receivables in 2020) and other assets and liabilities of $105.1 million (primarily relating to timing of payroll related accruals, rebates and lease receivables), partially offset by a favorable fluctuation in accounts payable of $75.3 million.
Cash flows from operating activities increased $81.2 million during 2020 as compared to 2019, and was primarily attributable to an increase in net income $70.5 million. Changes in working capital items were not significant in
aggregate, totaling $0.9 million. However, the changes in working capital reflect favorable fluctuations in trade receivables of $100.0 million (primarily relating to the securitization of receivables in 2020) and other assets and liabilities of $15.7 million (primarily relating to timing of payroll related accruals, rebates and lease receivables), partially offset by unfavorable fluctuations in inventory of $83.1 million (primarily relating to the increase in 2020 due to COVID-19) and accounts payable of $33.5 million (primarily related to the change in inventory).
Investing activities
Cash flows from investing activities are primarily impacted by the timing of business acquisitions and our securitization program for receivables, as well as capital investments in the business.
Cash received from beneficial interests on sold receivables was $40.1 million, $66.9 million and $80.8 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our investments in dosing and dispensing equipment and capital expenditures totaled $119.2 million, $87.0 million and $122.4 million during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In 2021, we purchased Avmor Ltd., Birko Corporation and Tasman Chemicals, and entered into a global exclusive license agreement with Halomine, Inc. for their patented HaloFilmTM disinfectant technology, and our total cash paid for acquisitions was $56.3 million. In 2020, we purchased Wypetech and SaneChem for a total of $51.2 million. In 2019, we acquired AHP® intellectual property from Virox and sold our investment in Virox, resulting in a net cash payment of $6.3 million.
Financing activities
Cash flows from financing activities primarily reflect proceeds from the issuance of ordinary shares in our IPO and follow-up offering, and borrowings and repayment of debt.
In 2021, we received net proceeds from our IPO and follow-up offering of $940.1 million, and combined with amending our credit facilities as noted below, paid down long-term borrowings of $668.8 million. Additionally, we paid $42.7 million in deferred financing costs, original issue discount costs and bond redemption premium costs, primarily related to amending our credit facilities.
In 2020, we received net proceeds from long-term borrowings of $146.1 million related to the new U.S. Dollar Incremental Loan, the proceeds of which were used to pay off our revolving credit facility borrowings of $120.0 million.
In 2019, we received net proceeds from borrowings on the revolving credit facility of $111.0 million, which were offset primarily by payments of long-term and short-term borrowings and contingent consideration of $35.8 million.
Debt Capitalization. We had $207.6 million and $192.9 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The following table details our debt outstanding:
On September 29, 2021, we entered into an amendment of our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, which was previously comprised of a $900.0 million senior secured U.S. dollar denominated term loan (the “2017 U.S. Dollar Term Loan"), a €970.0 million senior secured Euro denominated term loan (the “Euro Term Loan” and together with the 2017 U.S. Dollar Term Loan, the "Term Loan Facility") and a $450.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility,” together with the "Term Loan Facility", the "Senior Secured Credit Facilities").
The amendment provided for the repayment of the 2017 U.S. Dollar Term Loan in the amount of $868.5 million and the Euro Term Loan in the amount of $535.7 million. The amendment also provided for a new $1,500.0 million senior secured U.S. dollar denominated term loan (the “2021 U.S. Dollar Term Loan” and, together with the Revolving Credit Facility, the “New Senior Secured Credit Facilities”). The 2021 U.S. Dollar Term Loan matures on September 29, 2028, while the Revolving Credit Facility matures on March 28, 2026. At December 31, 2021, the interest rate for the 2021 U.S. Dollar Term Loan is 3.50%. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the agreements governing the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities.
Prior to amending the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, in the first and second quarters of 2021, we used proceeds from the IPO of $725.7 million to pay off a U.S. dollar incremental loan that was obtained during 2020 ("U.S. Dollar Incremental Loan") and pay down the Euro Term Loan. See to Note 10 - Debt and Credit Facilities in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
On September 29, 2021, we completed the sale of $500.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2021 Senior Notes in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers in reliance on Rule 144A under the Securities Act, and to non-U.S. persons (as defined in Regulation S) pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. We used the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Senior Notes, together with borrowings under its New Senior Secured Credit Facilities and cash on hand, to redeem all of the €450.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2017 Senior Notes, pay fees and/or expenses incurred in connection with the issuance of the 2021 Senior Notes and for general corporate purposes. The 2021 Senior Notes mature on October 1, 2029, bear interest at 4.625%, and interest is payable semi-annually on April 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on April 1, 2022. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the indenture governing the 2021 Senior Notes.
We redeemed the 2017 Senior Notes at the redemption price (expressed as a percentage of principal amount) of 101.4%, for a total of $536.7 million, which consisted of $529.1 million of principal amount and $7.6 million of redemption premium.
In connection with entering into the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities and issuing the 2021 Senior Notes (collectively, the "Refinancing Transactions"), we also entered into a series of derivative agreements to manage the impacts of fluctuations in interest rates and currency exchange rates on a portion of the Company’s floating-rate and U.S dollar denominated debt. The Refinancing Transactions extended the maturities of the debt and decreased the interest rates, and combined with the new derivatives, will reduce our future interest expense. Assuming that interest rates on the floating-rate debt remain constant, we anticipate annual interest expense savings to be in excess of $11.0 million, which could increase to $14.0 million by further reducing the interest rate for the 2021 U.S. Dollar Term Loan, upon achieving a Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the New Senior Secured Credit Facilities) of less than or equal to 4.50 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2021, our Total Net Leverage Ratio was less than 4.50 to 1.00, and the interest rate reduction noted above will be effective during the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022.
Preferred Equity Certificates. Constellation (BC) 2 S.à r.l., was financed in part by preferred equity certificates ("PECs"), which are commonly used in private equity transactions in Luxembourg. PECs were a part of the capital structure and while classified as a debt instrument because they did not have equity rights, they were a capital contribution from the investor and were subordinate to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities and other creditors. On March 25, 2021, the $620.9 million of PECs outstanding were exchanged for ordinary shares of the Company in connection with our IPO.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of some assets and liabilities and, in some instances, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the applicable reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates. These estimates involve judgments with respect to, among other things, future economic factors that are difficult to predict and are beyond management’s control. As a result, actual amounts could differ from these estimates.
Net Sales. Our revenue earning activities primarily involve manufacturing and selling products and services. Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized using a five-step model consisting of the following: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies a performance obligation. Performance obligations are satisfied when the Company transfers control of a good or service to a customer, which can occur over time or at a point in time. The amount of revenue recognized is based on the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, including the expected value of variable consideration. The customer’s ability and intent to pay the transaction price is assessed in determining whether a contract exists with the customer. If collectability of substantially all of the consideration in a contract is not probable, consideration received is not recognized as revenue unless the consideration is nonrefundable and the Company no longer has an obligation to transfer additional goods or services to the customer or collectability becomes probable.
Business Combinations. Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting, which requires the acquired assets, including separately identifiable intangible assets, and assumed liabilities to be recorded as of the acquisition date at their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the assets acquired, including separately identifiable intangible assets, and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Fair value determination is subject to a significant degree of estimates.
The determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed involves assessments of factors such as the expected future cash flows associated with individual assets and liabilities and appropriate discount rates at the date of the acquisition. Where appropriate, external advisors are consulted to assist in the determination of fair value. For non-observable market values, fair value has been determined using acceptable valuation principles (e.g., multiple excess earnings, relief from royalty and cost methods) which is considered to be a Level 3 fair value.
The results of operations for businesses acquired are included in the consolidated financial statements from the acquisition date.
Financial Instruments. We may from time to time use financial instruments, such as cross-currency swaps, interest rate swaps, caps and collars, U.S. treasury lock agreements and foreign currency exchange forward contracts and options relating to our borrowing and trade activities. We may use these financial instruments from time to time to manage our exposure to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. We do not purchase, hold or sell derivative financial instruments for trading purposes. We face credit risk if the counterparties to these transactions are unable to perform their obligations. Our policy is to have counterparties to these contracts that are rated at least BBB− by Standard & Poor's and Baa3 by Moody’s.
Derivative instruments are reported at fair value and establish criteria for designation and effectiveness of transactions entered into for hedging purposes. Before entering into any derivative transaction, we identify our specific financial risk, the appropriate hedging instrument to use to reduce this risk, and the correlation between the financial risk and the hedging instrument. We use forecasts and historical data as the basis for determining the anticipated values of the transactions to be hedged. We do not enter into derivative transactions that do not have a high correlation between the transaction risks and the hedging instruments. We
regularly review hedge positions and the correlation between the transaction risks and the hedging instruments.
We record gains and losses on derivatives qualifying as cash flow hedges in other comprehensive income to the extent that hedges are effective, and until the underlying transactions are recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations, at which time we recognize the gains and losses on these derivatives in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Generally, our practice is to terminate derivative transactions if the underlying asset or liability matures or terminates or if we determine the underlying forecasted transaction is no longer probable of occurring. Any deferred gains or losses associated with the derivative instrument are recognized on the Consolidated Statements of Operations over the period in which the income or expense on the underlying hedged transaction is recognized.
Long-Lived Assets. Long-lived assets represent a significant portion of our total assets, the aggregate amount of which was $1,602.2 million and $1,667.0 million, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Such long-lived assets primarily consist of definite-lived intangible assets in an aggregate amount of $1,292.6 million and $1,411.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
We perform an impairment review for definite-lived intangible assets, such as customer relationships, contracts, intellectual property, and for other long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Such events may include, but are not limited to, a significant decrease in the market price of an asset or asset group, change in manner in which an asset is being used, significant change in business climate and significant cash flow or operating losses that demonstrate continuing losses associated with the use of the asset. We calculate the undiscounted value of the projected cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset or asset group and compare this estimated amount to the carrying value of the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount is found to be greater than the undiscounted value of the projected cash flows of the asset or asset group, we record an impairment loss of the excess of carrying value over the fair value of the asset or asset group. In addition, we re-evaluate the remaining useful lives of the assets and modify them, as appropriate.
Definite-lived intangible assets, such as trade names and customer relationships are amortized over their estimated economic lives. The reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets is regularly evaluated. Once these assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the balance sheet. We evaluate these assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets represent a significant portion of our total assets. Our goodwill had a carrying value of $471.5 million and $467.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Indefinite-lived intangible assets, which consist of the Diversey trade name, had a carrying value of $854.7 million and $900.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
We review goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for possible impairment on a reporting unit level, which are consistent with our operating segments, on an annual basis as of October 1st of each year, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset has declined below its carrying value. Such events may include, but are not limited to, impairment of other assets or establishment of valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, cash flow or operating losses at a reporting unit, negative current events or long-term outlooks for our industry, and negative adjustments to future forecasts. In performing the annual goodwill impairment assessment, we have the option under U.S. GAAP to qualitatively assess whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we conclude from the qualitative assessment that there are no indicators of impairment, we do not perform a quantitative
test, which would require a valuation of the reporting unit as of October 1. U.S. GAAP provides a set of qualitative factors such as macroeconomic, industry, market and company specific factors, including cost factors, overall performance, market capitalization, and other events specific to the company to consider in performing the qualitative assessment described above, which factors are not all inclusive; management considers the factors it deems relevant in making its more likely than not assessments.
If we conclude from our qualitative assessment that there are indicators of impairment and that a quantitative test is required, the annual or interim quantitative goodwill impairment test involves comparing the fair value of each of our reporting units with goodwill to its carrying value, including the goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, there is no impairment and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount of the excess, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Our annual assessment of the recovery of goodwill begins with management’s reassessment of its operating segments and reporting units. A reporting unit is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, which is referred to as a component. This reassessment of reporting units is also made each time we change our operating segments. If the goodwill of a reporting unit is allocated to newly-formed reporting units, the allocation is made to each reporting unit based upon their relative fair values.
Based on the results of our 2021 annual qualitative assessment, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of each of the reporting units exceeded its carrying value. As such, it was not necessary to perform a quantitative impairment analysis, and we concluded that our reporting units were not impaired.
For our 2020 and 2019 annual assessments, we elected to bypass performing the qualitative screen and went directly to performing the quantitative test, and neither test identified any impairments.
The fair value of our reporting units is determined using both an income approach, which is based on discounted cash flows (“DCF”), and a market approach when we quantitatively test goodwill for impairment, either on an interim basis or annual basis as of October 1 of each year. Significant judgments inherent in using a DCF analysis include the selection of appropriate discount and long-term growth rates and estimating the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. The expected cash flows used in the DCF analyses are based on our most recent forecast and budget and, for years beyond the budget, our estimates, which are based, in part, on forecasted growth rates. The discount rates and growth rates used in the DCF analyses are intended to reflect the risks inherent in the expected future cash flows of the respective reporting units. Assumptions used in the DCF analyses, including the discount rate and the long-term growth rate, are assessed based on each reporting unit's current results and forecasted future performance, as well as macroeconomic and industry specific factors, and reflect our best estimate as of the impairment testing date. Any changes in such assumptions or estimates as a result of changes in our budgets, forecasts or negative macroeconomic trends could significantly affect the value of the Company’s reporting units which could impact whether an impairment of goodwill has occurred. The discount rates used in the quantitative test for determining the fair value of our reporting units was 9.0% in 2020, and ranged from 8.0% to 13.5% in 2019. Determining fair value using a market approach considers multiples of financial metrics based on both acquisitions and trading multiples of a selected peer group of companies. From the comparable companies, a representative market multiple is determined which is applied to financial metrics to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit. To determine a peer group of companies for our respective reporting units, we considered companies relevant in terms of consumer use, monetization model, margin and growth characteristics, and brand strength operating in their respective sectors.
If the carrying value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment equal to the excess is recorded. The 2021, 2020 and 2019 annual assessments of the indefinite-lived intangible asset did not identify any impairments.
Based on the results of our 2021 annual qualitative assessment, we concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeded the carrying value. As such, it was not necessary to perform a quantitative impairment analysis, and we concluded that the indefinite-lived intangible asset was not impaired.
When performing a quantitative test, we determine the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset using a relief from royalty DCF valuation analysis. Significant judgments inherent in this analysis include the selection of appropriate royalty and discount rates and estimating the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. The discount rates used in the DCF analyses are intended to reflect the risks inherent in the expected future cash flows generated by the respective intangible assets. The royalty rates used in the DCF analyses are based upon an estimate of the royalty rates that a market participant would pay to license our trade names. The future cash flows are based on our most recent forecast and budget and, for years beyond the budget, our estimates, which are based, in part, on forecasted growth rates. Assumptions used in the relief from royalty DCF analyses, including the discount rate and royalty rate, are assessed annually based on the actual and projected cash flows related to the asset, as well as macroeconomic and industry specific factors. The discount rates used in our annual indefinite-lived impairment assessment was 9.0% in 2020 and 10.5% in 2019, and the royalty rate used in 2020 and 2019 was 3.0%.
Income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for operating losses and tax credit carry forwards. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates applicable in the years in which they are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax law is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We do not provide for income taxes on undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries that are intended to be indefinitely reinvested. Where we do not intend to indefinitely reinvest earnings of foreign subsidiaries, we provide for income taxes and foreign withholding taxes, where applicable, on undistributed earnings.
We recognize the benefit of an income tax position only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position will be sustained. The tax benefits recognized are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. Additionally, we recognize interest and penalties accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of provision (benefit) for taxes on income.
Pension Benefits. In connection with the Diversey Acquisition, we assumed certain defined benefit plan obligations and acquired certain related plan assets for current employees of our subsidiaries. In addition, we implemented a replacement retiree health care reimbursement plan for certain U.S. employees.
The projected benefit obligation and the net periodic benefit cost are based on third-party actuarial assumptions and estimates that are reviewed and approved by management on a plan-by-plan basis each fiscal year. The principal assumptions concern the discount rate used to measure future obligations, the expected future rate of return on plan assets and the expected rate of future compensation increases. We revise these assumptions based on an annual evaluation of long-term trends and market conditions that may have an impact on the cost of providing retirement benefits.
In determining the discount rate, we utilize market conditions and other data sources management considers reasonable based upon the profile of the remaining service life of eligible employees. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is determined by taking into consideration the weighted-average expected return on our asset allocation, asset return data, historical return data, and the economic environment. We believe these considerations provide the basis for reasonable assumptions of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. The rate of compensation increase is based on our long-term plans for such increases. The measurement date used to determine benefit obligations and plan assets is December 31.
In general, material changes to the principal assumptions could have a material impact on the costs and liabilities recognized in our Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 14 - Retirement Plans in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Fair Value Measurements of Financial Instruments. In determining the fair value of financial instruments, we utilize various techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs to the extent possible and consider counterparty credit risk in our assessment of fair value. We determine fair value for our financial instruments based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability in the principal or most advantageous market. When considering market participant assumptions in fair value measurements, the following fair value hierarchy distinguishes between observable and unobservable inputs, which are categorized in one of the following levels:
•Level 1 Inputs: Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities to the reporting entity at the measurement date.
•Level 2 Inputs: Other than quoted prices included in Level 1 Inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the asset or liability.
•Level 3 Inputs: Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available, thereby allowing for situations in which there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability at the measurement date.
Our fair value measurements in our financial instruments are subjective and involve uncertainties and matters of significant judgment. Changes in assumptions could significantly affect our estimates.
Share-Based Compensation. Share-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is generally expensed over the requisite service period. See Note 18-Share-based Compensation in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to the sub-section, "New Accounting Guidance," within Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussions.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have reviewed our off-balance sheet arrangements and have determined that none of our arrangements that are not already disclosed in our consolidated financial statements have a material current effect or is reasonably likely to have a material future effect on our consolidated financial statements, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Guarantees and Indemnification Obligations. We are party to many contracts containing guarantees and indemnification obligations. These contracts primarily consist of:
• product and service warranties with respect to certain products sold to customers in the ordinary course of business. These warranties typically provide that products will conform to specifications. We generally do not establish a liability for product warranty based on a percentage of sales or other formula. We accrue a product warrant liability on a transaction-specific basis depending on the individual facts and circumstances related to each sale. Both the liability and annual expense related to product warranties are immaterial to our consolidated financial position and results of operations; and
• licenses of intellectual property by us to third parties in which we have agreed to indemnify the licensee against third party infringement claims.