Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis (“this MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events and risks and uncertainties that may be outside the Company’s control. The Company’s actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Introduction
This MD&A is intended to provide investors with an understanding of the Company’s recent performance, financial condition and prospects. This discussion and analysis compares 2021 results to 2020.
Daseke is a premier North American transportation solutions specialist dedicated to servicing challenging industrial end-markets. The Company believes it provides one of the most comprehensive transportation and logistics solution offerings in the open-deck industry. The Company delivers a diverse offering of transportation and logistics solutions to approximately 5,300 customers across the continental United States, Canada and Mexico through two reportable segments: Flatbed Solutions and Specialized Solutions. The Flatbed Solutions segment focuses on delivering transportation and logistics solutions that principally require the use of flatbed and retractable-sided transportation equipment, and the Specialized Solutions segment focuses on delivering transportation and logistics solutions that require the use of specialized trailering transportation equipment. Excluding intercompany eliminations, the Flatbed Solutions segment revenue and the Specialized Solutions segment revenue was approximately 44% and 56%, respectively, of segment revenue in 2021 and approximately 40% and 60%, respectively, of segment revenue in 2020.
Both of the Company’s reportable segments operate highly flexible business models comprised of company-owned tractors and trailers and asset-light operations (which consist of owner-operator transportation, freight brokerage and logistics). The Company’s asset-based operations have the benefit of providing shippers with certainty of delivery and continuity of operations. Alternatively, the Company’s asset-light operations offer flexibility and scalability to meet customers’ dynamic needs and have lower capital expenditure requirements and fixed costs. Approximately 44% of 2021 freight, logistics and brokerage revenue was derived from company-owned equipment and approximately 56% was derived from asset-light services.
Industry Trends and Outlook; Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In light of the ongoing spread of the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19, in the United States and abroad, including the emergence of new variants of the coronavirus, government and public health authorities continue to recommend or impose regulations designed to protect human life, but which have simultaneously had (and are expected to continue to have) serious adverse impacts on domestic and foreign economies. As levels of activity in the Company’s business have historically been positively correlated to broad measures of economic activity and to measures of industrial production since many of the Company’s customers are in the manufacturing and industrial segments,
the Company expects that its results of operations and financial condition could be adversely impacted in the near-term by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In particular, in 2020, shelter-in-place mandates, the closing of manufacturing facilities and the overall depressed economic environment significantly affected demand for many of the Company’s customers, including those in aerospace and manufacturing industries. However, given the diversity of the Company’s customer base and the various end markets that Daseke serves, not all of the Company’s customers were as affected. During 2020, demand for the Company’s services by customers in certain end markets, such as wind energy, defense projects and high security cargo, increased, partially offsetting softness in other end markets, and in 2021, the Company saw pockets of strength throughout its industrial customer base that were previously pressured by the pandemic. In many of the geographic regions in which the Company operates, state-ordered business closures and masking mandates have been lifted; however, some businesses may implement their own policies related to masks and vaccination. While a federal vaccine mandate enforceable by OSHA has been suspended pending developments in litigation, certain customers, or potential customers, may require all service providers to be vaccinated. Accordingly, uncertainty regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and various governmental actions taken to mitigate its impact, remains.
As an essential business under the guidelines issued by each of the Company’s states of operations, the Company has been allowed to continue to operate its business through the COVID-19 pandemic, and in general, the Company has experienced limited operational impacts as a result of COVID-19 directly. In fact, during 2021, freight rates have exceeded pre-pandemic levels and volumes improved (although overall miles were down due to strategic right-sizing efforts unrelated to the COVID-19 pandemic). All of the Company's operating sites have remained open and have been operating since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite some sporadic and short-lived COVID-19 pandemic disruptions to outbound volumes during 2020 at the nation's ports that the Company serves, these ports have remained open with strong inbound and outbound volumes during 2021. The Company has permitted some personnel to work from home and has taken additional precautions to ensure the safety of its workforce, customers and the communities in which it operates.
The Company believes that a significant portion of its cost structure is variable, and the Company has taken and will continue to take aggressive actions to adjust its expenses to reflect changes in demand for its services. These actions, which have been supported by the operational integrations and business improvement plans that the Company began to implement in 2019 (and which are discussed below), have included reduced use of contractors, reduced travel and advertising costs, reduced employee hours, furloughs, layoffs and voluntary use of paid time off, consistent with local regulations. The Company's volumes, which have improved post-pandemic, were impacted due to the strategic rightsizing of tractors that served unprofitable business lines, while the freight rate increases more than offset this decline. In addition, the actions that the Company is taking, combined with the variable components of its cost structure, has, and should continue to, partially mitigate the impact of the pandemic on its results of operations. Conversely, however, the Company is taking additional measures and incurring additional expense to protect the health and safety of its workforce and its customers. In addition, the Company could incur restructuring and other costs as it modifies and right-sizes its operations for declines and/or surges in demand.
The COVID-19 pandemic could impact the Company in 2022. However, we expect a modest increase in volumes in 2022 as the freight environment remains strong, despite the decrease in volumes due to the strategic rightsizing of tractors in 2021. We have a diverse customer base with exposure to a wide array of industrial end markets, each of which are experiencing their own respective growth and economic recovery patterns. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may remain prevalent for a significant period of time and may continue to adversely affect the Company’s business, results of operations and financial condition. We cannot anticipate the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic or the degree to which the economy rebounds post-pandemic will have on our fiscal 2022 results, or the effectiveness and distributions of vaccines and therapeutics and changes to mask mandate policies. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic” for more information regarding risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Thus far in 2022 and looking ahead to the remainder of 2022, despite pressures related to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as increased operating costs and inflationary pressures, driver shortages, and supply chain disruptions, the Company remains optimistic that its internally-driven, operational improvements and industrial end market tailwinds will combine to improve financial performance in 2022 as compared to 2021.
Revenue
The Company records four types of revenue: freight (company and owner operator), brokerage, logistics and fuel surcharge. Freight revenue is generated by hauling freight for the Company’s customers using its tractors or its owner-operators’ equipment. Generally, the Company’s customers pay for its services based on the number of miles in the most direct route between pick-up and delivery locations and other ancillary services the Company provides. Freight revenue is the product of the number of revenue-generating miles driven and the rate per mile the Company receives from customers plus assessorial charges, such as loading and unloading freight for its customers, cargo protection, fees for detaining its equipment or fees for route planning and supervision. Freight revenue is affected by fluctuations in North American economic activity as well as changes in specific customer demand, the level of capacity in the industry and driver availability.
The Company’s brokerage revenue is generated by its use of third-party carriers when it needs capacity to move its customers’ loads. The main factor that affects brokerage revenue is the availability of the Company’s drivers and owner-operators (and hence the need for third-party carriers) and the rate for the load. Brokerage revenue is also affected by fluctuations in North American economic activity as well as changes in the level of capacity in the industry and driver availability.
Logistics revenue is generated from a range of services, including value-added warehousing, loading and unloading, vehicle maintenance and repair, preparation and packaging, fuel management, and other fleet management solutions. Logistics revenue is primarily driven by specific customer requirements for additional services and may fluctuate depending on customers’ utilization of these services due to changes in cargo specifications, delivery staging and fluctuations in North American economic activity.
Fuel surcharges are designed to compensate the Company for fuel costs above a certain cost per gallon base. Generally, the Company receives fuel surcharges on the miles for which it is compensated by customers. However, in some cases, a customer may request an all-in freight rate without a separate contracted fuel surcharge. In those instances, the Company invoices the all-in freight rate to the customer and allocates an estimated portion of the freight revenue to fuel surcharge revenue. The Company continues to have exposure to increasing fuel costs related to empty miles, fuel efficiency challenges due to engine idle time and other factors and to the extent to which the surcharge charged to the customer is insufficient. The main factors that affect fuel surcharge revenue are the price of diesel fuel and the number of loaded miles. In general, a declining energy and fuel price environment negatively affects the Company’s fuel surcharge revenues, and conversely, an environment with rising fuel and energy prices benefits its fuel surcharge revenues. As discussed above, although the Company’s surcharge programs vary by customer, they typically involve a computation based on the change in national or regional fuel prices. The Company’s fuel surcharges are billed on a delayed basis, meaning it typically bills customers in the current week based on a previous week’s applicable index. Therefore, in times of increasing fuel prices, the Company does not recover as much as it is currently paying for fuel. In periods of declining prices, the opposite is true. Also, its fuel surcharge programs typically require a specified minimum change in fuel cost to prompt a change in fuel surcharge revenue. Therefore, many of these programs have a time lag between when fuel costs change and when the change is reflected in fuel surcharge revenue.
Expenses
The Company’s most significant expenses vary with miles traveled and include driver wages (which are recorded on the “Salaries, wages and employee benefits” line of the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income), services purchased from owner-operators and other transportation providers (which are recorded on the “Purchased freight” line of the Company’s consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income) and fuel. Driver-related expenses vary with miles traveled.
Maintenance and tire expenses and cost of insurance and claims generally vary with the miles the Company travels but also have a controllable component based on safety improvements, fleet age, efficiency and other factors. The Company’s primary fixed costs are depreciation of long-term assets (such as tractors, trailers and terminals), interest expense, rent and non-driver compensation.
The Company’s fuel surcharge programs help to offset increases in fuel prices but typically do not offset empty miles, idle time and out of route miles driven. As discussed above under “Revenue,” its fuel surcharge programs have a time lag between when fuel costs change and when the change is reflected in fuel surcharge revenue. Due to this time lag, the Company’s fuel expense, net of fuel surcharge, negatively impacts its operating income during periods of sharply rising fuel costs and positively impacts its operating income during periods of falling fuel costs. In general, due to the fuel surcharge programs, its operating income is less negatively affected by an environment with higher, stable fuel prices than an environment with lower fuel prices. In addition to its fuel surcharge programs, the Company believes the most effective protection against fuel cost increases is to maintain a fuel-efficient fleet by incorporating fuel efficiency measures. Also, the Company has arrangements with some of its significant fuel suppliers to buy the majority of its fuel at contracted pricing schedules that fluctuate with the market price of diesel fuel. The Company has not used derivatives as a hedge against higher fuel costs in the past but continues to evaluate this possibility.
Income from Operations
Differences in the mix of drivers and assets between the segments impact the proportion of operating income as a percentage of revenue. The Flatbed Solutions segment has historically had a proportionately higher operating income as a percentage of revenue when compared to the Specialized Solutions segment because certain operating expenses in the Specialized Solutions segment are proportionately greater. For example, the Specialized Solutions segment drivers, who typically are required to have a higher level of training and expertise, generally receive a higher driver pay per total mile than Flatbed Solutions segment drivers. The larger percentage of Company drivers in the Specialized Solutions segment also results in a greater percentage of fuel expense and operations and maintenance expense relative to our Flatbed Solutions segment, each of which is impacted by the miles per gallon realized with company equipment and the number of miles driven by Company drivers. Similarly, the Specialized Solutions segment had higher depreciation and amortization expense primarily due to the increase in company-owned vehicles. However, in 2020, the Specialized Solutions segment had a higher operating income as a percentage of revenue when compared to the Flatbed Solutions segment, primarily due to contributions from operational integrations and business improvement plans, and by strong wind energy and high security cargo revenues and margins in the Specialized Solutions segment.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth items derived from the Company’s consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue and the increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items. The following table also sets forth certain operating statistics for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following table sets forth the Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s revenue, operating expenses and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 in dollars and as a percentage of its Specialized Solutions segment’s total revenue and the increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items. The following table also sets forth certain operating statistics for the Company’s Specialized Solutions segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
SPECIALIZED SOLUTIONS
(1)Includes intersegment revenues and expenses, as applicable, which are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated results.
The following table sets forth the Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s revenue, operating expenses and operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 in dollars and as a percentage of its Flatbed Solutions segment’s total revenue and the increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items. The following table also sets forth certain operating statistics for the Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
FLATBED SOLUTIONS
(1)Includes intersegment revenues and expenses, as applicable, which are eliminated in the Company’s consolidated results.
Revenue. Total revenue increased $102.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The exit of the Aveda operations, which was completed in the fourth quarter of 2020, resulted in a $51.7 million, or 3.6%, reduction in total revenue. The increase in total revenue was driven primarily by the redeployment of assets, the improvement in our brokerage service offering year-over-year, and capturing elevated freight rates in both of our operating segments and increased fuel surcharge revenues offset by the normalization of wind-related revenues in the Specialized Solutions segment in 2021 as compared to 2020. In addition, there was a 12.2% increase in rate per mile and an 8.4% decrease in total miles driven.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s revenue decreased $19.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, driven primarily by the exit of the Aveda operations resulting in a $51.7 million, or 5.8%, reduction in the
Specialized Solutions segment's revenue consisting of $40.0 million reduction in total freight revenue, $11.4 million reduction in brokerage revenue, and $0.3 million reduction in logistics revenue. The decrease was also due to the normalization of wind-related revenues in 2021 as compared to 2020, and was partially offset by an $18.7 million increase in fuel surcharge due to increased fuel costs that led to higher fuel surcharges.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s revenue increased $115.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to increases in owner operator freight and brokerage revenue. Owner operator freight increased $68.0 million due to a 31.8% increase in owner operator rate per mile, partially offset by a 4.4% decrease in miles driven. The redeployment of assets into more favorable end markets resulted in increased brokerage revenue of $42.0 million. The increase in fuel surcharge revenue was due to increased fuel costs that led to higher fuel surcharges. Company freight revenue decreased due to the downsizing of company tractors which led to a decrease in miles.
Salaries, Wages and Employee Benefits. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, which consists of compensation for all employees, is primarily affected by the number of miles driven by company drivers, the rate per mile paid to company drivers, employee benefits including, but not limited to, health care and workers’ compensation, and to a lesser extent, the number of, and compensation and benefits paid to, non-driver employees. In general, the Specialized Solutions segment drivers receive a higher driver pay per total mile than Flatbed Solutions segment drivers due to the former requiring a higher level of training and expertise.
Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense decreased $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in salaries, wages and employee benefits expense was primarily due to lower driver pay due to the decrease in company miles and additional benefits from decreased employee headcount related to Project Synchronize. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, as a percentage of consolidated revenue (excluding brokerage revenue), decreased 3.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment had a $17.0 million decrease in salaries, wages and employee benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower driver pay due to the decrease in company miles and additional benefits from decreased employee headcount related to Project Synchronize. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, as a percentage of Specialized Solutions revenue (excluding brokerage revenue), decreased 1.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment had a $9.5 million decrease in salaries, wages and employee benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower driver pay due to the decrease in company miles and additional benefits from decreased employee headcount related to Project Synchronize. Salaries, wages and employee benefits expense, as a percentage of Flatbed Solutions revenue (excluding brokerage revenue), decreased 4.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020.
Fuel.  Fuel expense consists primarily of diesel fuel expense for company-owned tractors and fuel taxes. The primary factors affecting fuel expense are the cost of diesel fuel, the miles per gallon realized with company equipment and the number of miles driven by Company drivers.
Total consolidated fuel expense increased $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Total fuel expense for the Specialized Solutions segment increased $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Total fuel expense for the Flatbed Solutions segment increased $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. These increases were primarily due to a 28.9% increase in fuel prices, partially offset by an 11.5% decrease in Company miles driven for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Company miles driven in our Specialized Solutions segment decreased 4.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Company miles driven in our Flatbed Solutions segment decreased 22.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020.
Operations and Maintenance. Operations and maintenance expense consists primarily of ordinary vehicle repairs and maintenance, operating lease cost for revenue equipment, costs associated with preparing tractors and trailers for sale or trade-in, driver recruiting, training and safety costs, permitting and pilot car fees and other general operations expenses. Operations and maintenance expense is primarily affected by the age of company-owned tractors and trailers, the number of miles driven in a period and driver turnover.
Operations and maintenance expense decreased $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 due to a decrease of $5.8 million in maintenance costs such as repairs and tires, $18.4 million in operation costs such as pilot car and
permit fees, and $1.2 million in other operations expenses. Operations and maintenance expense in our Specialized Solutions segment decreased $25.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 due to a decrease of $5.2 million in maintenance expense such as repairs and tires due to a reduction of tractors and trailers in the Company’s fleet, a decrease of $18.3 million in operation costs such as pilot car and permit fees and a decrease of $1.5 million in other operations expenses. These expenses were lower in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the record wind activity we experienced in 2020 that was more normalized in 2021. Operations and maintenance expense in our Flatbed Solutions segment decreased $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 due to a decrease of $0.6 million in maintenance and upkeep of tractors and trailers, partially offset by $0.3 million increase in operations expenses. In addition, there were fewer tractors, which helped reduce the overall operations and maintenance expense. Operations and maintenance expense, as a percentage of revenue (excluding brokerage revenue), decreased 2.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020.
Purchased Freight. Purchased freight expense consists of the payments to owner-operators, including fuel surcharge reimbursements, and payments to third-party capacity providers that haul loads brokered to them. Purchased freight expense generally takes into account changes in diesel fuel prices, resulting in lower payments during periods of declining fuel prices.
Total purchased freight expense increased $107.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Purchased freight expense from owner operators increased $69.2 million, or 20.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of a 24.4% increase in owner operators' rate, partially offset by a 4.4% decrease in owner operator miles driven. Purchased freight expense from third-party capacity providers increased $37.9 million, or 23.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, as a result of an increase in utilization of third-party capacity providers in the Company's Flatbed Solutions segment. Purchased freight expense, as a percentage of consolidated revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 4.6%, as compared to the same period in 2020.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s purchased freight expense increased $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Purchased freight expense from owner operators increased $8.7 million, or 7.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, as a result of a 8.6% increase in owner operators' rate, partially offset by a 4.2% decrease in owner operator miles driven. Purchased freight expense from third-party capacity providers increased $0.1 million, or 0.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, as a result of a decrease in utilization of third-party capacity providers. The Company had utilized third-party capacity providers for excess wind volumes in 2020 that was more normalized in 2021. Other operating companies within the Specialized Solutions segment had an increase in brokerage which partially offset this decrease due to the normalization of wind. Purchased freight expense, as a percentage of Specialized Solutions revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 1.6%, as compared to the same period in 2020.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s purchased freight expense increased $92.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. Purchased freight expense from owner-operators increased $60.6 million, or 27.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, as a result of a 31.8% increase in owner operators’ rate, partially offset by a 4.4% decrease in owner operators’ miles driven. Purchased freight expense from third-party capacity providers increased $31.5 million, or 70.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily as a result of increased utilization of third-party capacity providers. Purchased freight expense, as a percentage of Flatbed Solutions revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 5.6%, as compared to the same period in 2020.
Administrative. Administrative expense consists of operating lease cost for real estate, professional fees and other expenses that are not directly associated with the Company’s fleet services. Administrative expense decreased $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of cost reduction initiatives. Administrative expense, as a percentage of revenue, was generally consistent with the same period in 2020.
Taxes and Licenses.  Operating taxes and licenses expense primarily represents the costs of taxes and licenses associated with the Company’s fleet of equipment and will vary according to the size of its equipment fleet. Taxes and license expense decreased $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of an 8.0% decrease in the average company-owned tractor and trailer count. Operating taxes and license expense, as a percentage of revenue, was generally consistent with the same period in 2020.
Insurance and Claims.  Insurance and claims expense consists of insurance premiums and the accruals the Company makes for estimated payments and expenses for claims for bodily injury, property damage, cargo damage and other casualty events. The primary factor affecting the Company’s insurance and claims expense is seasonality (the Company typically experiences higher accident frequency in winter months), the frequency and severity of accidents, trends in the development factors used in its accruals and developments in large, prior-year claims. The frequency of accidents tends to increase with the miles the Company travels. Insurance and claims expense decreased $5.6 million for
the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 due to decreases in insurance claims and premiums. Insurance and claims, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased 0.7% compared to the same period in 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization.  Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of depreciation for company-owned tractors and trailers and amortization of those financed with finance leases. The primary factors affecting these expense items include the size and age of company-owned tractors and trailers and the cost of new equipment. Amortization of intangible assets is also included in this expense.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of a 19.5% decrease in average tractor count in the Company’s fleet.
The Company’s Specialized Solutions segment’s depreciation and amortization expense decreased $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of a 17.4% decrease in average tractor count in the segment’s fleet.
The Company’s Flatbed Solutions segment’s depreciation and amortization expense decreased $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of a 23.8% decrease in average tractor count in the segment’s fleet.
Impairment.  There was no impairment for the year ended December 31, 2021. Impairment expense was $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted of $13.4 million in our Specialized Solutions segment related to the Aveda divestiture, and $2.0 million in our Flatbed Solutions segment related to a tradename impairment resulting from the reorganization of two of our operating companies.
Restructuring Costs.  Restructuring costs were $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Restructuring costs were $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which related to Phase I of Project Synchronize, which was completed in the first quarter of 2020, Phase II of Project Synchronize and the closure of certain Aveda terminals. For the year ended December 31, 2020, restructuring costs were $8.8 million for the Specialized Solutions segment, $0.6 million for the Flatbed Solutions segment and $0.1 million for the Corporate segment.
Other (Income) Expense. Interest expense consists of cash interest, amortization of related issuance costs and fees and prepayment penalties. Interest expense decreased $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. This decrease was primarily attributable to lower interest rates achieved through the successful refinancing of our Term Loan Facility and decreases in the balance outstanding on the Term Loan Facility. Change in fair value of warrant liability was a gain of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss of $2.1 million for the same period in 2020. The change in fair value is directly related to the fair value of the warrant liability as of each period end as calculated using Level 1 and Level 3 inputs. Other income decreased $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to an arbitration settlement relating to the Aveda earnout liability, which resulted in a gain of $13.7 million during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Income Tax.  Income tax expense was $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to income tax benefit of $0.2 million for the same period in 2020. The effective tax rate was 31.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to (5.1%) for the same period in 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to the significant increase in pre-tax book income. In addition, the individual impact of permanent differences, which consisted of one-time benefits related to state income taxes and the arbitrated decrease in contingent consideration for the year ended December 31, 2020, did not have a significant impact to the effective tax rate for 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Capital Requirements
The Company had the following sources of liquidity available as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions).
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity have been cash provided by operating activities, issuances of capital stock and borrowings under its credit facilities. The Company also receives cash from sales of equipment. Cash decreased by $28.7 million at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020. This decrease primarily resulted from $178.2 million in net cash used in financing activities, partially offset by $144.7 million in net cash provided by operating activities and $4.9 million in net cash provided by investing activities. See below for more information related to investing activities. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no borrowings outstanding on
the ABL Facility, $23.3 million in outstanding letters of credit (discussed below), with $107.8 million available under the ABL Facility, based on current qualified collateral.
The Company’s business requires substantial amounts of cash for operating expenses, including salaries and wages paid to employees, contract payments to independent contractors, insurance and claims payments, tax payments, and others. On March 22, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to 3,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, of which all 3,000,000 shares were repurchased by the Company during 2021 for approximately $20.4 million in cash. The Company also uses large amounts of cash and credit for capital expenditures.
The Company believes it can finance its expected cash needs, including debt repayment, in the short-term with cash flows from operations, and borrowings available under the ABL Facility. The Company expects that the ABL Facility will provide sufficient credit availability to support its ongoing operations, fund debt service requirements, capital expenditures, and working capital needs. Over the long-term, the Company will continue to have significant capital requirements, and expects to devote substantial financial resources to grow its operations and fund its acquisition activities. As a result of these funding requirements, the Company likely will need to sell additional equity or debt securities or seek additional financing through additional borrowings, lease financing or equity capital. The availability of financing or equity capital will depend upon the Company’s financial condition and results of operations as well as prevailing market conditions. If such additional borrowings, lease financing or equity capital is not available at the time it needs to incur such expenditures, the Company may be required to extend the maturity of then outstanding indebtedness, rely on alternative financing arrangements or engage in asset sales.
Business combinations - Since its inception in late 2008 through 2018, the Company acquired 20 open-deck trucking companies. The primary reason for each acquisition was to add resources and services in geographic areas, customers and markets that the Company wants to serve. The Company will continue to evaluate potential acquisitions and any other sources of growth it considers in its best interest.
Capital Expenditures
The Company follows a dual strategy of both owning assets and employing asset-light activities, the latter of which reduces the capital expenditures required to operate the business. Asset-light activities are conducted utilizing tractors and trailers provided by owner-operators and third-party carriers for significant portions of our flatbed and specialized services. Company-owned asset expenditures require substantial cash and financing (including finance and operating leases) to maintain a modern tractor fleet, refresh the trailer fleet, fund replacement and growth in the revenue equipment fleet, and for the acquisition of real property and improvements to existing terminals and facilities. The Company had net cash provided by property and equipment purchases and sales of $4.9 million and financed $64.7 million of non-cash capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Total property and equipment additions for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are shown below (in millions):
Total net property and equipment additions increased due to an increase in financed capital expenditures due to timing of the Company’s replacement cycle for revenue equipment and a decrease in net cash capital receipts due to fewer sales of equipment.
Additionally, the Company entered into operating leases for revenue equipment with terms of one year to five years and real property with terms of one to seven years having asset values at lease inception of $19.0 million and $4.6 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company currently estimates its 2022 net capital expenditures to be $160 to $170 million; roughly $25 million of which was planned capital spending from 2021 that was pushed into 2022 due to lack of availability in new equipment markets stemming from the global supply chain constraints. Additionally, the Company intends to deploy roughly $10 million of net capital expenditures toward systems enhancements and technology upgrades.
Cash Flows
The Company’s summary statements of cash flows information for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is set forth in the table below (in millions):
Operating Activities.  Cash provided by operating activities was $144.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted of $56.0 million of net income plus $96.1 million of non-cash items, consisting primarily of depreciation and gain on disposition of property and equipment, offset by $7.4 million of net cash used in working capital and other activities.
The $0.2 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily the result of a $51.9 million improvement in net income, reduced by decreases in net cash provided by working capital of $49.9 million and decreases in non-cash items of $2.2 million. Cash used in changes in operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to $7.4 million as compared to $42.5 million cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an accounts receivable impact of $59.9 million resulting from the decrease in revenue from 2019 to 2020, the increase in revenue from 2020 to 2021 and the timing of collections on those related billings.
Investing Activities. Cash flows from investing activities decreased $26.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to same period in 2020 due to an increase of $16.5 million in cash equipment purchases and a net decrease of $10.2 million in cash receipts from sales of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021. The net decrease in cash receipts from sales of property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to proceeds of $30.0 million related to the disposition of Aveda assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 that did not reoccur in 2021.
Total net cash capital expenditures (receipts) for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are shown below (in millions):
Financing Activities. Cash flows used in financing activities increased from $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $178.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily a result of the refinance of the Term Loan Facility in the first quarter of 2021 utilizing $97.5 million of proceeds from replacement term loans and $83.5 million in cash. The Company also repurchased 3,000,000 shares of the Company's common stock for $20.4 million.
Material Debt
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had the following material debt:
The amounts outstanding under such agreements were as follows as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in millions):
See Note 8 and Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein for information regarding the Company’s material debt and finance lease liabilities, respectively.
ABL and Term Loan Facilities and Equipment Financing Agreements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has (i) a $400.0 million senior secured term loan credit facility, and (ii) an asset-based senior secured revolving credit facility with an aggregate maximum credit amount equal to $150.0 million (that may be increased to $200.0 million, subject to availability under a borrowing base). See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information regarding the Term Loan Facility and the ABL Facility, including the March 9, 2021 Term Loan refinancing and the April 29, 2021 ABL Amendment.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $169.0 million of equipment and real estate loans and $28.5 million of finance leases collateralized primarily by revenue equipment, with the majority of the equipment loans and finance leases having terms of 48 to 60 months. Certain of the term loans contain conditions, covenants, representations and warranties, events of default, and indemnification provisions applicable to the Company and certain of its subsidiaries that are customary for equipment financings, including, but not limited to, limitations on the incurrence of additional debt and the prepayment of existing indebtedness, certain payments (including dividends and other distributions to persons not party to its ABL Facility) and transfers of assets.
Letters of credit - Under the terms of the ABL Facility, lenders may issue up to $40 million of standby letters of credit on our behalf. Outstanding letters of credit reduce the availability on the $150 million ABL Facility. Standby letters of credit are generally issued for the benefit of regulatory authorities, insurance companies and state departments of insurance for the purpose of satisfying certain collateral requirements, primarily related to automobile, workers’ compensation, and general insurance liabilities.
Inflation
Inflation can have an impact on the Company’s operating costs. A prolonged period of inflation could cause interest rates, fuel, wages and other costs to increase, which would adversely affect the Company’s results of operations unless freight rates correspondingly increase. The Company attempts to limit the effects of inflation through increases in freight rates, certain cost control efforts and limiting the effects of fuel prices through fuel surcharges and measures intended to reduce the consumption of fuel. Recently, we have experienced inflationary cost pressures including rising driver and employee compensation.
Seasonality
In the transportation industry, results of operations generally show a seasonal pattern. The Company’s productivity decreases during the winter season because inclement weather impedes operations, end-users reduce their activity and certain shippers reduce their shipments during winter. At the same time, operating expenses increase, and fuel efficiency decreases because of engine idling and harsh weather creating higher accident frequency, increased claims and higher equipment repair expenditures. The Company also may suffer from weather-related or other events such as tornadoes, hurricanes, blizzards, ice storms, floods, fires, earthquakes and explosions, which may increase in frequency or intensity due to climate change. These events may disrupt fuel supplies, increase fuel costs, disrupt freight shipments or routes, affect regional economies, destroy the Company’s assets, increase insurance costs or adversely affect the business or financial condition of its customers, any of which could adversely affect the Company’s results of operations or make such results more volatile.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires it to make estimates and assumptions that impact the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Therefore, the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and associated disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities are affected by these estimates and assumptions. The Company evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis, utilizing historical experience, consultation with experts and other methods considered reasonable in the particular circumstances. Nevertheless, actual results may differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions, and it is possible that materially different amounts will be reported using differing estimates or assumptions. The Company considers critical accounting estimates to be those that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the Company's financial condition or results of operations. The Company’s critical accounting estimates include the following:
Impairment of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment at least annually on October 1 (or more frequently if impairment indicators arise) for each reporting unit by applying either a qualitative or quantitative analysis in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance for such assets. The Company first assesses qualitative factors to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount as the basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. The Company may bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly with the quantitative analysis. The quantitative analysis compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires judgement and the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Such estimates and assumptions include discount rates, revenue growth rates, future operating margins, future capital expenditures, changes in working capital requirements and terminal growth rates. The Company believes the estimates and assumptions used in our impairment assessments are reasonable and based on available market information, but variations in any of the assumptions could result in materially different calculations of fair value and determinations of whether or not an impairment is indicated.
For goodwill, the Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit using the discounted cash flow method (an income approach) and the guideline public company method (a market approach). Under the discounted cash flow method, the Company determines the fair value based on estimated cash flows of each reporting unit discounted to present value using risk-adjusted discount rates. Cash flow projections are determined by management. Under the guideline public company method, the Company determines the estimated fair value of each reporting unit by applying valuation multiples of comparable publicly-traded companies to each reporting unit's projected earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA). During 2021, the Company elected to bypass the qualitative analysis and prepared a quantitative analysis on three of its reporting units for goodwill. The key assumptions used in this analysis for the income approach was a discount rate of 10.0% and long-term growth rate of 3.0%. For the market approach, the key assumptions used were valuation multiples of comparable publicly-traded companies ranging from 4.0x to 6.6x and a multiple adjustment of 80.0%. As a result of the quantitative analysis, each of the reporting units had estimated fair value of equity that exceeded the carrying value of equity by greater than 20%.
For indefinite-lived intangible assets, the Company determines the fair value of the reporting unit using the relief-from-royalty method. The relief-from-royalty method (an income approach) was used to determine the fair value of the Company's trade names. Effectively, a royalty rate was applied to forecasted revenue to determine the amount of royalty payments a market participant would pay to use the trade name. This valuation approach involved two general steps: (1) Established an estimate of future cash flows associated with the asset being measured and (2) discounted those estimated future cash flows to present value. In addition, the calculations were tax-effected. During 2021, the Company elected to bypass a qualitative analysis and prepared a quantitative analysis on four of its reporting units for trade names. The key assumptions used in this analysis were a royalty rate ranging from 0.5% to 1.0%, EBITDA margins ranging from 7.2% to 19.0%, terminal growth rate of 3.0%, discount rate of 11.0% and capitalization rate of 8.0%. As a result of the quantitative analysis, the estimated fair value of each of the trade names exceeded its carrying value. For one trade name, the estimated fair value exceeded the carrying value by less than 20%.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, and deferred tax asset and liability balances reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid, and significant judgments and estimates are required in determining our income taxes. Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the consolidated financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities at the applicable enacted tax rates. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled.
When we maintain deferred tax assets, we must assess the likelihood that these assets will be recovered through adjustments to future taxable income. To the extent we believe recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance to reduce the asset to a value we believe will be recoverable based on our expectation of future taxable income. We believe the accounting estimate related to the valuation allowance is a critical accounting estimate because it is susceptible to change from period to period, requires management to make assumptions about our future taxable income to determine the realizability of our deferred tax assets. For our deferred tax assets that do not have a valuation allowance, we believe these are more likely than not to be realized due to our projected future taxable income. If the Company were to generate lower taxable income than expected, this may affect the ultimate realization of those deferred tax assets.
The Company recognizes the tax benefit from uncertain tax positions only if, in our judgment, it is more likely than not that the tax positions will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. We adjust our liabilities for uncertain tax positions when our judgment changes as a result of new information previously unavailable.
Accrued Insurance and Claims
The Company uses a combination of purchased insurance, self-insurance, and captive group programs. The insurance provides for the cost of vehicle liability, cargo loss, damage, general liability, property, workers’ compensation claims and employee medical benefits. Self-insurance accruals relate primarily to vehicle liability, cargo damage, workers’ compensation and employee medical claims. The measurement and classification of self-insured costs requires the consideration of historical cost experience, demographic and severity factors, and judgments about the current and expected levels of cost per claim and retention levels. These methods provide estimates of the liability associated with claims incurred as of the balance sheet date, including claims not yet reported. A liability is recognized for the estimated cost of all self-insured claims including an estimate of incurred but not reported (IBNR) claims based on historical experience. The Company uses an actuarial method to develop currently known claim information to derive an estimate of the ultimate claim liability to account for estimated IBNR. The Company believes these methods are appropriate for measuring these highly judgmental self-insurance accruals. However, the use of any estimation method is sensitive to the assumptions and factors described above, based on the magnitude of claims and the length of time from the date the claim is incurred to ultimate settlement. Accordingly, changes in these assumptions and factors can materially affect actual costs paid to settle the claims and those amounts may be different than estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
Awards of equity instruments issued to employees and directors are accounted for under the fair value method of accounting. Compensation cost is measured for all equity-classified stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognized using the straight-line method over the service period over which the awards are expected to vest. Compensation cost is remeasured for all liability-classified stock-based awards at fair value at each period-end and recognized using the straight-line method over the service period over which the awards are expected to vest.
Determining compensation cost is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. For example, (i) the fair value of all time-vested options as of the date of grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, which require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility, (ii) since the Company does not have a sufficient history of exercise behavior, expected term is calculated using the assumption that options will be exercised ratably from the date of vesting to the end of the contractual term for each vesting tranche of awards, and (iii) fair values of liability-classified performance stock units with a market condition are estimated each period-end using the Monte Carlo valuation model in a risk-neutral framework to model future stock price movements based upon highly subjective assumptions, including historical volatility, risk-free rates of return and the stock price simulated over the performance period.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements on page.