Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Descrypto Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company”) should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations to “us,” “we,” “our,” and similar terms refer to the Company. This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements, as that term is defined in the federal securities laws, based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. Words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions are used to identify forward-looking statements. We caution you that these statements are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. Reference is made to “Risk Factors,” which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We seek to invest in companies with:
● defensible barriers to entry,
● proven value propositions,
● identifiable growth opportunities or operational improvements, and
● paths to sustainable competitive advantages.
We expect to provide strategic guidance through a network of experienced executives with operational and industry expertise, as well as financing support and other resources necessary to drive value.
Business of OpenLocker
Established on August 25, 2021, OpenLocker is dedicated to offering marketing solutions for collegiate and professional sports organizations and athletes using non-fungible tokens (NFTs) to create more immersive experiences for fans. The OpenLocker platform is designed to offer a seamless experience for users who have no prior experience buying or trading digital tokens. Utilizing the Flow blockchain, a fast, scalable and reliable blockchain, OpenLocker is able to use less energy than some other blockchains including Ethereum.
OpenLocker connects the digital and the physical worlds by offering real world utility and a physical token of ownership to fans who purchase a digital collectible on its Web3 platform. The limited-edition Platinum Cards are wallet-sized, metal collectible cards that are hand-signed by the athlete and feature the digital art on one side and QR code on the back which directs to the digital viewer. The digital and physical collectibles will grant access to VIP experiences and enable fans to receive rewards from local, regional and national retailers.
The fan communities in development will feature unique branding and strategic marketing campaigns to bolster fan awareness without the use of university-licensed marks. For instance, the Radford University fan community has been dubbed the Rowdy Redz to pay homage to the school’s rich history while incorporating a fun and edgy feel. OpenLocker collects feedback from student-athletes and die-hard fans to create the collectibles, experiences and utility that will resonate with each fan base.
The OpenLocker mission is to empower athletes to monetize their fan engagement with innovative digital collectibles and to create meaningful experiences for fans by using OpenLocker’s technology to build communities. Each digital token is authenticated on the blockchain with a unique serial number which is assigned to the buyer upon purchase. The selection and pricing of each collection is determined by such factors as the size of the target audience, the athlete’s popularity, and associated utility and goals set forth by the community manager. To further engage super fans and boosters, as well as increase athlete’s earning potential, a one-of-one NFT may also be offered for sale by auction and includes autographed gear/ memorabilia and personalized experiences (meet-and-greet or customized activity) with the athlete, arranged by OpenLocker with the athlete’s input and approval.
The Bone Yard Huskyz Club (BYHC) was created by OpenLocker in January 2022 for the University of Connecticut using the Name, Image and Likeness (NIL) of all 14 eligible members of the men’s basketball team as a proof of concept. The OpenLocker creative team designed a BYHC logo and Huskyz avatar (a takeoff on the university’s Huskies mascot) in the likeness of each of the athletes which were used for branding and promotional purposes. A website with a project roadmap outlining the perks and rewards of club membership was activated two weeks prior to the NFT release date, which was strategically timed around the basketball team’s season schedule. OpenLocker’s comprehensive marketing campaign included digital programmatic advertising, organic and paid social media strategy (including pre- and post-drop Twitter conversations with fans, blockchain experts, athletes and parents of athletes), podcasts, email blasts and gorilla marketing at several home basketball games. The OpenLocker athlete liaison also provided the athletes with graphics and talking points they could use to leverage their social media followers and promote sales of their own NFTs by word-of-mouth.
A majority of the revenue from the BYHC project was generated on the first day of sales of the NFTs. The first two hours were the busiest as fans were incentivized by the free autographed “Platinum card” that was included with purchase for the first 25 NFTs sold per athlete. This unique collectible is a metal, wallet-sized card hand-signed by the athlete with the digital art printed on the front and quick response (QR) code that directs to the NFT viewer on the back. Another stream of revenue was generated in March 2022 as the University of Connecticut basketball team wrapped up their regular season and played post-season tournaments.
OpenLocker’s plan is to take the exclusive fan club model (Bone Yard Huskyz Club), originally created for the University of Connecticut, to other universities in partnership with independent groups working to provide college athletes with NIL opportunities. Since the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) changed its policy to allow college athletes to benefit from their NIL, alumni and boosters are eager to raise funds in a way that meets NCAA, state and university compliance requirements. OpenLocker anticipates expanding to four to six more colleges in the third quarter of 2022 (prior to the start of the fall football season) and another four to six colleges in the fourth quarter of 2022 (to coincide with basketball pre-season).
OpenLocker’s current revenue model includes (i) profit sharing of primary sales on the OpenLocker platform with partners and athletes, (ii) collecting transaction fees from transactions on OpenLocker’s trading portal, as well as (iii) service fees for additional creative design work, development and product fulfillment services.
OpenLocker has also negotiated deals with several professional lacrosse players to release an NFT collection leading into the 2022 Premier Lacrosse League season. OpenLocker plans to open an online portal for individual athletes to create and sell their own NFT collections and physical collectibles by the third quarter of 2022. While OpenLocker currently does not have licensing agreements with any professional sports leagues, teams or institutions, OpenLocker anticipates finalizing one or more such deals by the end of 2022 and into 2023. However, there can be no assurance that the foregoing can occur as planned, or at all. OpenLocker believes that licensing the NIL of athletes directly with each athlete allows OpenLocker to retain more revenue, while giving the athlete a larger percentage of the profit, which is an important differentiating factor for OpenLocker in the sports NFT space.
Moreover, OpenLocker has been in discussions with athletes outside of the college sports arena, including related to golf and race car driving and foresees opportunities in NASCAR, Ultimate Fighting Championship, and beyond.
OpenLocker launched the OpenStable marketplace in April 2022 to engage the next generation of thoroughbred racing enthusiasts. Through its relationships with owners, trainers and influencers in the racing industry, OpenStable aims to be able to give fans access to exclusive information, real life experiences, and memorabilia so that they may engage in a truly immersive journey covering a racehorse’s career.
The launch strategy for the OpenStable marketplace involved reaching the largest audience of racing fans (both casual and committed) by creating a collection of NFTs featuring the leading contenders in the Kentucky Derby and Kentucky Oaks, as well as scheduling their release on the weekend prior to each of those two prominent races. Per a Memorandum of Understanding (the “MOU”) dated April 15, 2022, OpenLocker and Horse Races Now established terms for a marketing collaboration, whereby Horse Races Now agreed to drive traffic from its app and e-mail marketing campaigns targeted at its existing user base of racing fans, in exchange for OpenLocker paying Horse Races Now 12.5% of its retained revenues (after transaction fees) generated from sales of all NFT collections, on OpenStable.
The MOU has provided OpenLocker with access to the Horse Races Now’s (horseracesnow.com) database of 600,000 users and placement in the app. OpenLocker also executed a weeklong digital promotion in the Daily Racing Form and conducted media interviews, as well as social media campaigns. While the racing season was at its height, OpenLocker benefited from significant traffic to its website and generated some sales of gear, including apparel, hats, pins, and other items featuring each racehorse’s unique brand (also featuring the OpenStable logo). Additional NFT releases are expected to be made over the course of summer 2022, in connection with various racehorses.
Finally, the user-friendly interface that OpenLocker created for college sports fans and emphasis on fan community building is an important differentiator for OpenStable as it seeks to position itself as the next-generation marketing solution within the thoroughbred racing space. As the average fan is currently over 50 years old and likely unfamiliar with blockchain technology, simplifying NFTs is vital for piquing their interest. Offering ownership of digital tokens along with rewards and experiences, both in the virtual and physical realms, also makes OpenStable products attractive to a younger audience with a goal to develop a next generation younger fan engagement around the thoroughbred racing sport.
OpenLocker believes that it has found a unique and attractive market for the application of NFTs by focusing on the college athlete market. For example, pursuant to a Statista survey published on April 8, 2022, in a survey conducted in March 2022, 11 percent of respondents stated that they were avid fans of NCAA men’s college basketball in the United States, whereas 26 percent of respondents stated they were casual fans. The NCAA men’s basketball is the college level of basketball played in the United States and is seen as the final step up before the NBA.
Plan of Operations
Over the next 12 months, we expect to require approximately $2,000,000 in operating funds to carry out our intended plan of operations.
We are planning to obtain the funds necessary to execute our plan of operations from various capital raises, including potentially through private placements or our common stock or the issuance and sales of convertible notes, as well as potentially through a registration statement or an offering statement filed with the SEC.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain the necessary funds for our foregoing operations on terms that are acceptable to us or at all, and there can be no assurance that our plan of operations can be executed as planned, or at all.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues
During the year ended July 31, 2022 and the seven months ended July 31, 2021, we generated revenues of $208 and $0, respectively. The lack of revenue was a result of an inability to execute on any business due to limited capital and management resources.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended July 31, 2022 and the seven months ended July 31, 2022 were $2,494,425 and $16,045, respectively. The increase in expenses was due to a rise in fixed general administrative expenses and increased research and development.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations for the year ended July 31, 2022 and the seven months ended July 31, 2022 was $2,494,217 and $16,045, respectively. The increase in expenses was due to a rise in fixed general administrative expenses and increased research and development.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended July 31, 2022 and the seven months ended July 31, 2022 was $2,556,714 and $27,219, respectively. The increase in expenses was due to a rise in fixed general administrative expenses and increased research and development.
There is significant uncertainty projecting future profitability due to our history of losses and lack of revenues. In our current state, we have no recurring or guaranteed source of revenues and cannot predict when, if ever, we will become profitable. There is significant uncertainty projecting future profitability due to our minimal operating history and lack of guaranteed ongoing revenue streams.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of July 31, 2022, we had $607,135 in cash and did not have any other cash equivalents. The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flow for all financial statement periods presented in this Annual Report. To date, we have financed our operations through the issuance of stock and borrowings.
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the year ended July 31, 2022 and the seven months ended July 31, 2021:
Since inception, we have financed our cash flow requirements through issuance of common stock and debt financing. As we expand our activities, we may, and most likely will, continue to experience net negative cash flows from operations. We anticipate obtaining additional financing to fund operations through additional common stock offerings, to the extent available, or to obtain additional financing to the extent necessary to augment our working capital.
We anticipate that we will incur operating losses in the next twelve months. Our lack of operating history makes predictions of future operating results difficult to ascertain. Our prospects must be considered in light of the risks, expenses and difficulties frequently encountered by companies in their early stage of development, particularly companies in new and rapidly evolving markets. Such risks for us include, but are not limited to, an evolving and unpredictable business model and the management of growth. To address these risks, we must, among other things, obtain a customer base, implement and successfully execute our business and marketing strategy, continually develop and upgrade our website, provide national and regional industry participants with an effective, efficient and accessible website on which to promote their products and services through the Internet, respond to competitive developments, and attract, retain and motivate qualified personnel. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in addressing such risks, and the failure to do so can have a material adverse e
Effects of Coronavirus on the Company
If the current outbreak of the coronavirus continues, the effects of such a widespread infectious disease and epidemic may inhibit our ability to conduct our business and operations and could materially harm our Company. The coronavirus may cause us to have to reduce operations as a result of various lock-down procedures enacted by the local, state or federal governments. The continued coronavirus outbreak may also restrict our ability to raise funding when needed, and may cause an overall decline in the economy as a whole. The specific and actual effects of the spread of coronavirus are difficult to assess at this time as the actual effects will depend on many factors beyond the control and knowledge of the Company. However, the spread of the coronavirus, if it continues, may cause an overall decline in the economy as a whole and also may materially harm our Company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Going Concern and Management’s Plans
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business.
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, for the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company had:
● Net loss of $2,556,714; and
● Net cash used in operations of $286,527
Additionally, at July 31, 2022, the Company had:
● Accumulated deficit of $2,708,155
● Stockholders’ equity of $5,719,109; and
● Working capital of $506,260
We manage liquidity risk by reviewing, on an ongoing basis, our sources of liquidity and capital requirements. The Company has cash on hand of $607,135 at July 31, 2022. Although the Company intends to raise additional debt or equity capital, the Company expects to continue to incur significant losses from operations and have negative cash flows from operating activities for the near-term. These losses could be significant as operations ramp up along with continuing expenses related to compensation, professional fees, and regulatory are incurred.
The Company has incurred significant losses since its inception and has not demonstrated an ability to generate sufficient revenues to achieve profitable operations. There can be no assurance that profitable operations will ever be achieved, or if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. In making this assessment we performed a comprehensive analysis of our current circumstances including: our financial position, our cash flows and cash usage forecasts for the twelve months ended July 31, 2023, and our current capital structure including equity-based instruments and our obligations and debts.
The Company has satisfied its obligations from the issuance of common stock; however, there is no assurance that such successful efforts will continue during the twelve months subsequent to the date these consolidated financial statements are issued.
If the Company does not obtain additional capital, the Company will be required to reduce the scope of its business development activities or cease operations. The Company continues to explore obtaining additional capital financing and the Company is closely monitoring its cash balances, cash needs, and expense levels.
These factors create substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within the twelve-month period subsequent to the date that these consolidated financial statements are issued. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. Accordingly, the consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a basis that assumes the Company will continue as a going concern and which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities and commitments in the ordinary course of business.
Management’s strategic plans include the following:
● Pursuing additional capital raising opportunities,
● Continuing to explore and execute prospective partnering or distribution opportunities;
● Identifying strategic acquisitions; and
● Identifying unique market opportunities that represent potential positive short-term cash flow.
Principles of Consolidation
These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates
Preparing financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reported period. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and those estimates may be material.
Goodwill and Impairment
In financial reporting, goodwill is not amortized, but is tested for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Events that result in an impairment review include significant changes in the business climate, declines in our operating results, or an expectation that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We assess potential impairment by considering present economic conditions as well as future expectations. All assessments of goodwill impairment are conducted at the individual reporting unit level.
The Company uses qualitative factors according to ASC 350-20-35-3 to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is less than its carrying amount. During the year ended July 31, 2022 and the period ended July 31, 2021, the Company determined there were no impairments of goodwill.
Intangible Assets and Impairment
Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment annually. The Company reviews definite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
There were no impairment losses for the year ended July 31, 2022 and the period ended July 31, 2021, respectively.
Revenue Recognition
OpenLocker generates revenue from two main sources, primary sales of NFTs on its online store and commissions collected from sales on the secondary marketplace.
Revenue is recognized in accordance with FASB Topic ASC No. 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. The Company recognizes revenue when its performance obligations are complete, which occurs at a point in time related to the transfer of an NFT to its customer. Currently, all sales contain a single performance obligation.
All payments are received from third-party payment processing providers. The Company receives payments from sales on its primary marketplace (Shopify site) as well as two other sources. Each of these sources of payment relate to the completion of a single performance obligation completed at a point in time, which occurs upon the transfer of an NFT and where no further performance obligations are required:
● Shopify payouts from credit/debit cards transactions typically occur 2-3 days after date of sale,
● PayPal payments are received same day; and
● Cryptocurrency payments are deposited immediately into OpenLocker’s Coin Payments account.
The Company also recognizes revenues generated from the 5% commission fee collected on secondary marketplace sales transacted on the OpenLocker Trading Portal site, operated by Mint Blockchain Solutions, which is deposited into a blocto wallet. The platform uses FUSD (1:1 USD-backed stablecoin) as the fungible token on the Flow network. Conversion from FUSD to USD and transfers to company bank account will be made on a monthly basis.
Shipping fees collected from customers for physical collectibles are included with revenues received from Shopify payouts. The majority of those collectibles have not yet been shipped due to a delay in receiving the goods from our vendor. Prior to the product shipping, any amounts received in advance are accounted for as contract liabilities (deferred revenue).
Software Development Costs
Internal-use software development costs are accounted for in accordance with ASC 350- 40, “Internal-Use Software”. The costs incurred in the preliminary stages of development are expensed as research and development costs as incurred.
Once an application has reached the development stage, internal and external costs incurred to develop internal-use software are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the software (typically three to five years).
Maintenance and enhancement costs, including those costs in the post-implementation stages, are typically expensed as incurred, unless such costs relate to substantial upgrades and enhancements to the software that result in added functionality, in which case the costs are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the software.
The Company reviews the carrying value for impairment whenever facts and circumstances exist that would suggest that assets might be impaired or that the useful lives should be modified. Amortization expense related to capitalized internal-use software development costs will be included in cost of goods sold in the statements of operations.
For the year ended July 31, 2022 and the period ended July 31, 2021, the Company expensed $46,667 and $0, respectively, in software development costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.