Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following combined discussion is separately filed by DTE Energy and DTE Electric. However, DTE Electric does not make any representations as to information related solely to DTE Energy or the subsidiaries of DTE Energy other than itself.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
DTE Energy is a diversified energy company with 2021 Operating Revenues of approximately $15.0 billion and Total Assets of approximately $39.7 billion. DTE Energy is the parent company of DTE Electric and DTE Gas, regulated electric and natural gas utilities engaged primarily in the business of providing electricity and natural gas sales, distribution, and storage services throughout Michigan. DTE Energy also operates two energy-related non-utility segments with operations throughout the United States.
On July 1, 2021, DTE Energy completed the separation of its natural gas pipeline, storage and gathering non-utility business. Effective with the separation, DTE retains no ownership in the new company, DT Midstream, which was formerly comprised of DTE Energy’s Gas Storage and Pipelines segment and certain DTE Energy holding company activity within the Corporate and Other segment. Gas Storage and Pipelines is no longer a reportable segment of DTE Energy, and financial results of DT Midstream are presented as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, “Dispositions and Impairments,” for additional information regarding the separation of DT Midstream and discontinued operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations below reflect DTE Energy’s continuing operations, unless noted otherwise. The following table summarizes DTE Energy's financial results:
The decrease in 2021 Net Income Attributable to DTE Energy Company was primarily due to lower earnings in the Corporate and Other segment, driven primarily by losses on the extinguishment of debt incurred in 2021. The decrease was also due to lower earnings in the Energy Trading segment, partially offset by higher earnings in the Electric, Gas, and DTE Vantage segments. The increase in 2020 Net Income Attributable to DTE Energy Company was primarily due to higher earnings in the Electric and Corporate and Other segments, partially offset by lower earnings in the Energy Trading segment.
STRATEGY
DTE Energy's strategy is to achieve long-term earnings growth with a strong balance sheet and an attractive dividend.
DTE Energy's utilities are investing capital to support a modern, reliable grid and cleaner, affordable energy through investments in base infrastructure and new generation. An increasing amount of high wind and other extreme weather events driven by climate change, coupled with increasing electric vehicle adoption, will drive a continued need for substantial grid investment over the long-term.
DTE Energy is committed to reducing the carbon emissions of its electric utility operations by 32% by 2023, 50% by 2028, and 80% by 2040 from 2005 carbon emissions levels. DTE Energy is also committed to a net zero carbon emissions goal by 2050 for its electric and gas utility operations. To achieve the carbon reduction goals at the electric utility, DTE Energy has begun to transition away from coal-powered sources and is replacing or offsetting the generation from these facilities with renewable energy and energy waste reduction initiatives. Refer to the "Capital Investments" section below for further discussion regarding DTE Energy's retirement of its aging coal-fired plants and transition to renewable energy and other sources. Over the long-term, DTE Energy is also monitoring the viability of emerging technologies involving energy storage, carbon capture and sequestration, alternative fuels such as hydrogen, and advanced nuclear power.
For gas utility operations, DTE Energy aims to cut carbon emissions across the entire value chain. To achieve net zero emissions by 2050 for both internal operations and from suppliers, DTE Energy is working to source gas with lower methane intensity, reduce emissions through its gas main renewal and pipeline integrity programs, and if necessary, use carbon offsets to address any remaining emissions. DTE Energy is also committed to helping DTE Gas customers reduce their emissions by 35% by 2050 by increasing energy efficiency, pursuing advanced technologies such as hydrogen, and through the CleanVision Natural Gas Balance program which provides customers the option to use carbon offsets and renewable natural gas.
DTE Energy expects that these initiatives at the electric and gas utilities will continue to provide significant opportunities for capital investments and result in earnings growth. DTE Energy is focused on executing its plans to achieve operational excellence and customer satisfaction with a focus on customer affordability. DTE Energy's utilities operate in a constructive regulatory environment and have solid relationships with their regulators.
DTE Energy also has significant investments in non-utility businesses and expects growth opportunities in its DTE Vantage segment. DTE Energy employs disciplined investment criteria when assessing growth opportunities that leverage its assets, skills, and expertise, and provides diversity in earnings and geography. Specifically, DTE Energy invests in targeted markets with attractive competitive dynamics where meaningful scale is in alignment with its risk profile.
A key priority for DTE Energy is to maintain a strong balance sheet which facilitates access to capital markets and reasonably priced short-term and long-term financing. Near-term growth will be funded through internally generated cash flows and the issuance of debt and equity. DTE Energy has an enterprise risk management program that, among other things, is designed to monitor and manage exposure to earnings and cash flow volatility related to commodity price changes, interest rates, and counterparty credit risk.
CAPITAL INVESTMENTS
DTE Energy's utility businesses require significant capital investments to maintain and improve the electric generation and electric and natural gas distribution infrastructure and to comply with environmental regulations and renewable energy requirements. Capital plans may be regularly updated as these requirements change.
DTE Electric's capital investments over the 2022-2026 period are estimated at $15 billion, comprised of $8 billion for distribution infrastructure, $4 billion for base infrastructure, and $3 billion for cleaner generation including renewables. DTE Electric has retired six coal-fired generation units at the Trenton Channel, River Rouge, and St. Clair facilities and has announced plans to retire its remaining eleven coal-fired generating units, including five units at Trenton Channel and St. Clair in 2022. The two units at the Belle River facility will cease the use of coal by 2028 and will be evaluated for conversion to cleaner energy resources. The four units at the Monroe facility are expected to be retired by 2040. Generation from the retired facilities will be replaced or offset with a combination of renewables, energy waste reduction, demand response, and natural gas fueled generation, including the Blue Water Energy Center which will commence operations in 2022.
DTE Gas' capital investments over the 2022-2026 period are estimated at $3.1 billion, comprised of $1.5 billion for base infrastructure and $1.6 billion for gas main renewal, meter move out, and pipeline integrity programs.
DTE Electric and DTE Gas plan to seek regulatory approval for capital expenditures consistent with ratemaking treatment.
DTE Energy's non-utility businesses' capital investments are primarily for expansion, growth, and ongoing maintenance in the DTE Vantage segment, including approximately $1 billion to $1.5 billion from 2022-2026 for renewable energy and industrial energy services projects.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
The Registrants are subject to extensive environmental regulations, including those to address climate change. Additional costs may result as the effects of various substances on the environment are studied and governmental regulations are developed and implemented. Actual costs to comply could vary substantially. The Registrants expect to continue recovering environmental costs related to utility operations through rates charged to customers, as authorized by the MPSC.
Increased costs for energy produced from traditional coal-based sources due to recent, pending, and future regulatory initiatives could also increase the economic viability of energy produced from renewable, natural gas fueled generation, and/or nuclear sources, energy waste reduction initiatives, and the potential development of market-based trading of carbon instruments which could provide new business opportunities for DTE Energy's utility and non-utility segments. At the present time, it is not possible to quantify the financial impacts of these climate related regulatory initiatives on the Registrants or their customers.
See Items 1. and 2. Business and Properties and Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Commitments and Contingencies," for further discussion of Environmental Matters.
OUTLOOK
The next few years will be a period of rapid change for DTE Energy and for the energy industry. DTE Energy's strong utility base, combined with its integrated non-utility operations, position it well for long-term growth.
Looking forward, DTE Energy will focus on several areas that are expected to improve future performance:
•electric and gas customer satisfaction;
•electric distribution system reliability;
•new electric generation and decarbonization;
•gas distribution system renewal;
•rate competitiveness and affordability;
•regulatory stability and investment recovery for the electric and gas utilities;
•strategic investments in growth projects at DTE Vantage;
•employee engagement, health, safety and well-being, and diversity, equity, and inclusion;
•cost structure optimization across all business segments; and
•cash, capital, and liquidity to maintain or improve financial strength.
The separation of DT Midstream on July 1, 2021 will result in a reduction to DTE Energy's net income and cash flows in the near term. However, DTE Energy remains well-positioned for long-term growth and focused on the key objectives noted above. DTE Energy will continue to pursue opportunities to grow its businesses in a disciplined manner if it can secure opportunities that meet its strategic, financial, and risk criteria.
COVID-19 Pandemic
DTE Energy has been monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and any related impacts to operating costs, customer demand, and the recoverability of assets in our business segments that could materially impact the Registrants' financial results.
As noted in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Commitments and Contingencies," the pandemic has contributed to a shift in electric sales volumes from commercial and industrial customers to residential customers. DTE Energy expects this shift to continue in the near term as businesses maintain more remote operations. Other impacts from COVID-19 have related primarily to health and safety-related costs at the utilities and volumes at certain non-utility businesses, but these impacts have not been significant in 2021.
Please see detailed explanations of segment performance in the "Results of Operations" section below, including impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic where applicable.
DTE Energy will continue to monitor these impacts as well as any regulatory and legislative activities related to COVID-19. The Registrants cannot predict the ultimate impact of these factors to our Consolidated Financial Statements as future developments involving COVID-19 and related impacts on economic and operating conditions are highly uncertain. For further discussion of these uncertainties, refer to "Risk Factors" in Item 1A. of this Report.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP, as well as the non-GAAP financial measures, Utility Margin and Non-utility Margin, discussed below, which DTE Energy uses as measures of its operational performance. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of financial performance, financial position or cash flows that excludes (or includes) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
DTE Energy uses Utility Margin and Non-utility Margin, non-GAAP financial measures, to assess its performance by reportable segment.
Utility Margin includes electric utility and gas utility Operating Revenues net of Fuel, purchased power, and gas expenses. The utilities’ fuel, purchased power, and natural gas supply are passed through to customers, and therefore, result in changes to the utilities’ revenues that are comparable to changes in such expenses. As such, DTE Energy believes Utility Margin provides a meaningful basis for evaluating the utilities’ operations across periods, as it excludes the revenue effect of fluctuations in these expenses. For the Electric segment, non-utility Operating Revenues are reported separately so that Utility Margin can be used to assess utility performance.
The Non-utility Margin relates to the DTE Vantage and Energy Trading segments. For the DTE Vantage segment, Non-utility Margin primarily includes Operating Revenues net of Fuel, purchased power, and gas expenses. Operating Revenues include sales of refined coal to third parties and the affiliated Electric utility, metallurgical coke and related by-products, petroleum coke, renewable natural gas and related credits, and electricity, as well as rental income and revenues from utility-type consulting, management, and operational services. For the Energy Trading segment, Non-utility Margin includes revenue and realized and unrealized gains and losses from physical and financial power and gas marketing, optimization, and trading activities, net of Purchased power and gas related to these activities. DTE Energy evaluates its operating performance of these non-utility businesses using the measure of Operating Revenues net of Fuel, purchased power, and gas expenses.
Utility Margin and Non-utility Margin are not measures calculated in accordance with GAAP and should be viewed as a supplement to and not a substitute for the results of operations presented in accordance with GAAP. Utility Margin and Non-utility Margin do not intend to represent operating income, the most comparable GAAP measure, as an indicator of operating performance and are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following sections provide a detailed discussion of the operating performance and future outlook of DTE Energy's segments. Segment information, described below, includes intercompany revenues and expenses, and other income and deductions that are eliminated in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
ELECTRIC
The Results of Operations discussion for DTE Electric is presented in a reduced disclosure format in accordance with General Instruction I (2) (a) of Form 10-K for wholly-owned subsidiaries.
The Electric segment consists principally of DTE Electric. Electric results and outlook are discussed below:
See DTE Electric's Consolidated Statements of Operations in Item 8 of this Report for a complete view of its results. Differences between the Electric segment and DTE Electric's Consolidated Statements of Operations are primarily due to non-utility operations at DTE Sustainable Generation and the classification of certain benefit costs. Refer to Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Retirement Benefits and Trusteed Assets" for additional information.
Utility Margin increased $158 million in 2021 and $283 million in 2020. Revenues associated with certain mechanisms and surcharges are offset by related expenses elsewhere in the Registrants' Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The following table details changes in various Utility Margin components relative to the comparable prior period:
______________________________
(a)Variances reflect the $90 million voluntary refund recognized in 2021 for the incremental tree trim surge and the $30 million COVID-19 voluntary refund recognized in 2020. Refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Regulatory Matters," for additional information regarding these refunds and the related regulatory liabilities.
______________________________
(a)Represents power that is not distributed by DTE Electric.
(b)Represents deliveries for self-generators that have purchased power from alternative energy suppliers to supplement their power requirements.
DTE Electric sales volumes increased in 2021, primarily attributable to commercial customers which were impacted more significantly in 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic and temporary shut-downs of certain commercial operations.
Operating Revenues - Non-utility operations decreased $2 million in 2021 and increased $9 million in 2020. The decrease in 2021 was primarily due to lower sales volumes at DTE Sustainable Generation. The increase in 2020 was due to renewable energy projects acquired in January 2020.
Operation and maintenance expense increased $67 million in 2021 and $55 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher EWR expense of $45 million, higher distribution operations expense of $42 million (primarily due to higher storm costs), higher corporate support costs of $21 million, higher legal and environmental expense of $15 million, and higher benefits expense of $13 million. These increases were partially offset by lower COVID-19 related expenses of $43 million, lower uncollectible expense of $26 million, and lower plant generation expense of $4 million.
The increase in 2020 was primarily due to COVID-19 related expenses of $50 million, higher benefits expense of $15 million, higher EWR expense of $11 million, higher RPS expenses of $9 million, and an $11 million adjustment in 2019 to defer expenses previously accrued for a new customer billing system. These increases were partially offset by lower plant generation expense of $25 million and lower distribution operations expense of $12 million.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $65 million in 2021 and $108 million in 2020. In 2021, the increase was primarily due to a $64 million increase resulting from a higher depreciable base. In 2020, the increase was primarily due to a $108 million increase resulting from a higher depreciable base and change in depreciation rates effective May 2019 and a $10 million increase resulting from new non-utility assets at DTE Sustainable Generation, partially offset by a decrease of $11 million associated with the TRM.
Taxes other than income increased $24 million in 2021 and decreased $14 million in 2020. In 2021, the increase was primarily due to higher property taxes of $22 million as a result of an increase in tax base and a favorable property tax settlement in 2020. In 2020, the decrease was primarily due to lower property taxes of $9 million as a result of a property tax settlement, partially offset by an increase in tax base. The decrease in 2020 was also due to lower payroll taxes of $3 million, which was primarily attributable to employee retention credits recognized pursuant to the CARES Act.
Asset (gains) losses and impairments, net decreased $40 million in 2021 and increased $28 million in 2020. The decrease in 2021 was primarily due to lower activity in the current year compared to a $41 million write-off of capital expenditures related to incentive compensation in 2020. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to the $41 million write-off of capital expenditures, which were disallowed in the May 8, 2020 rate order from the MPSC, compared to losses of $13 million in 2019.
Other (Income) and Deductions decreased $43 million in 2021 and increased $81 million in 2020. The decrease in 2021 was primarily due to lower contributions to the DTE Energy Foundation and other not-for-profit organizations of $28 million, a change in rabbi trust investment earnings (net gain of $7 million in 2021 compared to a net loss of $3 million in 2020), and lower non-operating retirement benefits expense of $4 million. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to a change in rabbi trust investment earnings (net loss of $3 million in 2020 compared to a gain of $37 million in 2019), $30 million of contributions to the DTE Energy Foundation and other not-for-profit organizations, and $22 million of higher interest expense. These increases were partially offset by a 2019 accrual of $6 million associated with an environmental-related settlement.
Income Tax Expense decreased $4 million in 2021 and $29 million in 2020. The decrease in both 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to higher amortization of the TCJA regulatory liability and higher production tax credits, partially offset by higher earnings.
Outlook - DTE Electric will continue to move forward in its efforts to achieve operational excellence, sustain strong cash flows, and earn its authorized return on equity. DTE Electric expects that planned significant capital investments will result in earnings growth. DTE Electric will maintain a strong focus on customers by increasing reliability and satisfaction while keeping customer rate increases affordable. Looking forward, additional factors may impact earnings such as weather, the outcome of regulatory proceedings, benefit plan design changes, investment returns and changes in discount rate assumptions in benefit plans and health care costs, uncertainty of legislative or regulatory actions regarding climate change, and effects of energy waste reduction programs.
On March 26, 2021, DTE Electric filed an application requesting a financing order approving the securitization financing of $184 million of qualified costs related to the net book value of the River Rouge generation plant and tree trimming surge program costs. The filing requested recovery of these qualifying costs from DTE Electric's customers. A final MPSC financing order was issued on June 23, 2021 authorizing DTE Electric to proceed with the issuance of securitization bonds for qualified costs of up to $236 million, increased for the inclusion of deferred taxes. The financing order further authorized customer charges for the timely recovery of the debt service costs on the securitization bonds and other ongoing qualified costs. Securitization financing is expected to occur in March 2022.
DTE Electric filed a rate case with the MPSC on January 21, 2022 requesting an increase in base rates of $388 million based on a projected twelve-month period ending October 31, 2023. The requested increase in base rates is primarily due to an increase in net plant resulting from generation and distribution investments, as well as related increases to depreciation and property tax expenses. The rate filing also requests an increase in return on equity from 9.9% to 10.25% and includes projected changes in sales. A final MPSC order in this case is expected in November 2022. Refer to Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Regulatory Matters", for additional information.
GAS
The Gas segment consists principally of DTE Gas. Gas results and outlook are discussed below:
Utility Margin increased $73 million in 2021 and $3 million in 2020. Revenues associated with certain mechanisms and surcharges are offset by related expenses elsewhere in DTE Energy's Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The following table details changes in various Utility Margin components relative to the comparable prior period:
The change in sales in 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in End-user transportation volumes, including lower generation needs at certain industrial customers. The decrease in sales in 2020 was primarily due to more unfavorable weather compared to 2019. Intermediate transportation volumes fluctuate period to period based on available market opportunities.
Operation and maintenance expense increased $25 million in 2021 and decreased $19 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher gas operations expense of $41 million, partially offset by lower uncollectible expense of $15 million. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to lower gas operations expense of $36 million, partially offset by higher EWR expense of $7 million, higher corporate overhead costs of $3 million, and a $6 million adjustment in 2019 to defer expenses previously accrued for a new customer billing system.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $20 million in 2021 and $13 million in 2020. The increase in both periods was primarily due to a higher depreciable base and change in depreciation rates effective October 2020.
Taxes other than income increased $9 million in 2021 and $4 million in 2020. The 2021 increase was primarily due to higher property taxes of $6 million and employee retention credits of $3 million recognized in 2020 pursuant to the CARES Act. The 2020 increase was primarily due to higher property taxes of $8 million, partially offset by the employee retention credits of $3 million.
Asset (gains) losses and impairments, net decreased $10 million in 2021 and increased $14 million in 2020. The decrease in 2021 was due to lower activity in the current year, including $4 million of capital write-offs, compared to a $14 million write-off of capital expenditures related to incentive compensation in 2020. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to the $14 million write-off of capital expenditures, which were disallowed in the July 17, 2020 rate case settlement.
Other (Income) and Deductions increased $11 million in 2021 and $4 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to contributions to the DTE Energy Foundation and other not-for-profit organizations. The increase in 2020 was primarily due to lower investment earnings of $2 million and higher interest expense of $2 million.
Income Tax Expense decreased $10 million in 2021 and $14 million in 2020. The decrease in 2021 was primarily due to higher amortization of the TCJA regulatory liability, partially offset by higher earnings. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to higher amortization of the TCJA regulatory liability and lower earnings.
Outlook - DTE Gas will continue to move forward in its efforts to achieve operational excellence, sustain strong cash flows, and earn its authorized return on equity. DTE Gas expects that planned significant infrastructure capital investments will result in earnings growth. Looking forward, additional factors may impact earnings such as weather, the outcome of regulatory proceedings, benefit plan design changes, and investment returns and changes in discount rate assumptions in benefit plans and health care costs. DTE Gas expects to continue its efforts to improve productivity and decrease costs while improving customer satisfaction with consideration of customer rate affordability.
DTE VANTAGE
The DTE Vantage segment is comprised primarily of projects that deliver energy and utility-type products and services to industrial, commercial, and institutional customers, produce reduced emissions fuel, and sell electricity and pipeline-quality gas from renewable energy projects. DTE Vantage results and outlook are discussed below:
Operating Revenues - Non-utility operations increased $258 million in 2021 and decreased $336 million in 2020. The changes are due to the following:
Non-utility Margin increased $73 million in 2021 and decreased $17 million in 2020. The changes are due to the following:
Operation and maintenance expense increased $7 million in 2021 and decreased $34 million in 2020. The 2021 increase was primarily due to higher production and new projects, partially offset by closed projects. The 2020 decrease was primarily due to $46 million of lower maintenance spending associated with lower production and terminated contracts, partially offset by $12 million of costs associated with new projects.
Asset (gains) losses and impairments, net changed by $46 million in 2021 from the net gain of $18 million in 2020, and changed by $19 million in 2020 from the net loss of $1 million in 2019. The change in 2021 was primarily due to an asset impairment of $27 million recorded in the Steel business for the closure of a pulverized coal facility and $17 million of activity in 2020. Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Dispositions and Impairments," for additional information regarding the $27 million asset impairment.
The change in 2020 was primarily due to to $11 million in the Steel business for an asset sale and write-off of environmental liabilities upon completing site remediation, $4 million for the sale of assets in the On-site business, and $2 million for the divestiture of a project in the Renewables business.
Other (Income) and Deductions increased $22 million in 2021 and decreased $6 million in 2020. The 2021 increase was primarily due to a $22 million settlement charge associated with a qualified pension plan in the Steel business recorded in 2020. The 2021 increase also included higher production in the REF business, offset by profit recognized from the sale of membership interests recorded in 2020.
The 2020 decrease was primarily due to the $22 million settlement charge in the Steel business and a change in insurance proceeds in the REF and Renewables businesses ($7 million received in 2019). This decrease was partially offset by $12 million of higher interest income associated with lease transactions in the On-site business and $11 million of profit recognized from the sale of membership interests in the REF business.
Income Taxes - Production Tax Credits increased by $2 million in 2021 and decreased by $17 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher production partially offset by the sale of membership interests in the REF business. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to the sale of membership interests in the REF business.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests increased by $1 million in 2021 and decreased by $4 million in 2020. The 2020 decrease was primarily due to lower production in the REF business.
Outlook - DTE Vantage will continue to leverage its extensive energy-related operating experience and project management capability to develop additional energy and renewable natural gas projects to serve energy intensive industrial customers. Beginning in 2022, DTE Vantage expects decreases in Other Income and Production Tax Credits that will cause a corresponding reduction to Net Income as REF facilities will have ceased operations. Over the long-term, DTE Vantage expects that growth in renewable energy and industrial energy services projects will offset the decreases to Net Income caused by the REF phase-out. DTE Vantage is also exploring decarbonization opportunities relating to carbon capture and storage projects.
ENERGY TRADING
Energy Trading focuses on physical and financial power, natural gas and environmental marketing and trading, structured transactions, enhancement of returns from its asset portfolio, and optimization of contracted natural gas pipeline transportation and storage positions. Energy Trading also provides natural gas, power, environmental and related services, which may include the management of associated storage and transportation contracts on the customers' behalf and the supply or purchase of environmental attributes to various customers. Energy Trading results and outlook are discussed below:
Operating Revenues - Non-utility operations and Purchased power and gas - non-utility increased in 2021 primarily due to significantly higher gas prices in the gas structured and gas transportation strategies and decreased in 2020 primarily due to lower gas prices, primarily in the gas structured strategy.
Non-utility Margin decreased by $132 million in 2021 and $17 million in 2020. The change in both periods was primarily due to timing from the unrealized and realized margins presented in the following tables:
_______________________________________
(a)Natural gas structured transactions typically involve a physical purchase or sale of natural gas in the future and/or natural gas basis financial instruments which are derivatives and a related non-derivative pipeline transportation contract. These gas structured transactions can result in significant earnings volatility as the derivative components are marked-to-market without revaluing the related non-derivative contracts.
(b)Amount includes $200 million of timing related losses related to gas strategies which will reverse in future periods as the underlying contracts settle.
(c)Amount includes $20 million of timing related losses related to gas strategies recognized in previous periods that reversed as the underlying contracts settled.
_______________________________________
(a)Natural gas structured transactions typically involve a physical purchase or sale of natural gas in the future and/or natural gas basis financial instruments which are derivatives and a related non-derivative pipeline transportation contract. These gas structured transactions can result in significant earnings volatility as the derivative components are marked-to-market without revaluing the related non-derivative contracts.
(b)Amount includes $15 million of timing related losses related to gas strategies which will reverse in future periods as the underlying contracts settle.
(c)Amount includes $10 million of timing related gains related to gas strategies recognized in previous periods that reversed as the underlying contracts settled.
Operation and maintenance expense increased $4 million in 2021 and $2 million in 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to higher compensation costs.
Other (Income) and Deductions increased $20 million in 2021 primarily due to contributions to the DTE Energy Foundation and other not-for-profit organizations.
Outlook - In the near-term, Energy Trading expects market conditions to remain challenging. The profitability of this segment may be impacted by the volatility in commodity prices and the uncertainty of impacts associated with regulatory changes, and changes in operating rules of RTOs. Significant portions of the Energy Trading portfolio are economically hedged. Most financial instruments, physical power and natural gas contracts, and certain environmental contracts are deemed derivatives; whereas, natural gas and environmental inventory, contracts for pipeline transportation, storage assets, and some environmental contracts are not derivatives. As a result, Energy Trading will experience earnings volatility as derivatives are marked-to-market without revaluing the underlying non-derivative contracts and assets. Energy Trading's strategy is to economically manage the price risk of these underlying non-derivative contracts and assets with futures, forwards, swaps, and options. This results in gains and losses that are recognized in different interim and annual accounting periods.
See also the "Fair Value" section herein and Notes 12 and 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Fair Value" and "Financial and Other Derivative Instruments," respectively.
CORPORATE AND OTHER
Corporate and Other includes various holding company activities, holds certain non-utility debt, and holds certain investments, including funds supporting regional development and economic growth. The 2021 net loss of $367 million represents an increase of $288 million from the 2020 net loss of $79 million. This increase was primarily due to higher losses on the extinguishment of debt in 2021 following the separation of DT Midstream, which reduced earnings by $294 million, higher net interest expense, and a valuation allowance established in 2021 for certain charitable contribution carryforwards. The higher loss was also due to the carryback of 2018 net operating losses to 2013 pursuant to the CARES Act, which resulted in a $34 million reduction to Income Tax Expense in 2020. The losses in 2021 were partially offset by the remeasurement of state deferred taxes following the separation of DT Midstream, which resulted in an $85 million reduction to Income Tax Expense in 2021.
For additional information regarding the loss on extinguishment of debt, refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Long-term Debt". For additional information regarding the remeasurement of state deferred taxes and valuation allowances, refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Income Taxes".
The 2020 net loss of $79 million represents a decrease of $47 million from the 2019 net loss of $126 million. This decrease was primarily due to the $34 million tax adjustment noted above resulting from the CARES Act. The decrease was also due to higher investment earnings in 2020 and the impairment of an equity method investment in 2019.
CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY
Cash Requirements
DTE Energy uses cash to maintain and invest in the electric and natural gas utilities, to grow the non-utility businesses, to retire and pay interest on long-term debt, and to pay dividends. DTE Energy believes it will have sufficient internal and external capital resources to fund anticipated capital and operating requirements. DTE Energy expects that cash from operations in 2022 will be approximately $2.6 billion. DTE Energy anticipates base level utility capital investments, including environmental, renewable, and energy waste reduction expenditures, and expenditures for non-utility businesses of approximately $3.7 billion in 2022. DTE Energy plans to seek regulatory approval to include utility capital expenditures in regulatory rate base consistent with prior treatment. Capital spending for growth of existing or new non-utility businesses will depend on the existence of opportunities that meet strict risk-return and value creation criteria.
Refer below for analysis of cash flows relating to operating, investing, and financing activities, which reflect DTE Energy's change in financial condition. Any significant non-cash items are included in the Supplemental disclosure of non-cash investing and financing activities within the the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Cash from Operating Activities
A majority of DTE Energy's operating cash flows are provided by the electric and natural gas utilities, which are significantly influenced by factors such as weather, electric retail access, regulatory deferrals, regulatory outcomes, economic conditions, changes in working capital, and operating costs.
Net cash from operations decreased $630 million in 2021. The reduction was primarily due to a decrease in Deferred income taxes, working capital items, and Net Income, adjusted for the Loss on extinguishment of debt to reconcile Net Income to Net cash from operating activities. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in Depreciation and amortization.
Net cash from operations increased $1.0 billion in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in Net Income, Depreciation and amortization, and cash from tax refunds and working capital items.
The change in working capital items in 2021 was primarily due to a decrease related to Accrued pension liability, Accounts receivable, net, Inventories, Accrued postretirement liability, and Other current and noncurrent assets and liabilities, partially offset by an increase related to Regulatory assets and liabilities, Accounts payable, and Derivative assets and liabilities. The change in working capital items in 2020 was primarily due to an increase related to Accounts receivable, net, Accounts payable, and Other current and noncurrent assets and liabilities, partially offset by a decrease related to Prepaid postretirement benefit costs and Regulatory assets and liabilities.
Cash used for Investing Activities
Cash inflows associated with investing activities are primarily generated from the sale of assets, while cash outflows are the result of plant and equipment expenditures and acquisitions. In any given year, DTE Energy looks to realize cash from under-performing or non-strategic assets or matured, fully valued assets.
Capital spending within the utility businesses is primarily to maintain and improve electric generation and the electric and natural gas distribution infrastructure, and to comply with environmental regulations and renewable energy requirements.
Capital spending within the non-utility businesses is primarily for ongoing maintenance, expansion, and growth. DTE Energy looks to make growth investments that meet strict criteria in terms of strategy, management skills, risks, and returns. All new investments are analyzed for their rates of return and cash payback on a risk adjusted basis. DTE Energy has been disciplined in how it deploys capital and will not make investments unless they meet the criteria. For new business lines, DTE Energy initially invests based on research and analysis. DTE Energy starts with a limited investment, evaluates the results, and either expands or exits the business based on those results. In any given year, the amount of growth capital will be determined by the underlying cash flows of DTE Energy, with a clear understanding of any potential impact on its credit ratings.
Net cash used for investing activities decreased $207 million in 2021 due primarily to decreases in non-utility plant and equipment expenditures and Acquisitions related to business combinations, net of cash acquired, partially offset by an increase in utility plant and equipment expenditures.
Net cash used for investing activities decreased $1.7 billion in 2020 due primarily to a decrease in Acquisitions related to business combinations, net of cash acquired, primarily driven by DTE Energy's acquisition of midstream natural gas assets in 2019 for net cash of $2.3 billion. The decrease was also due to lower Contributions to equity method investees, partially offset by an increase in Plant and equipment expenditures.
Cash from Financing Activities
DTE Energy relies on both short-term borrowing and long-term financing as a source of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by its operations.
DTE Energy's strategy is to have a targeted debt portfolio blend of fixed and variable interest rates and maturity. DTE Energy targets balance sheet financial metrics to ensure it is consistent with the objective of a strong investment grade debt rating.
Net cash from financing activities decreased $481 million in 2021. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in Redemption of long-term debt, Prepayment costs for redemption of long-term debt, Repurchase of common stock, and Dividends paid on common stock, partially offset by increases in the Issuance of long-term debt, net of issuance costs and Short-term borrowings, net, as well as the Acquisition related deferred payment made in 2020.
Net cash used for financing activities decreased $2.3 billion in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to to the issuance of equity units and common stock associated with the acquisition of midstream natural gas assets in 2019, as well as an increase in cash used for Short-term borrowings, net and the Acquisition related deferred payment in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by higher cash from the Issuance of long-term debt, net of issuance costs and lower Purchases of noncontrolling interest, principally SGG.
Outlook
Sources of Cash
DTE Energy expects cash flows from operations to increase over the long-term, primarily as a result of growth from the utility and non-utility businesses. Growth in the utilities is expected to be driven primarily by capital spending which will increase the base from which rates are determined. Non-utility growth is expected from additional investments in the DTE Vantage segment. DTE Vantage cash flows are expected to temporarily decrease beginning in 2022 as REF facilities will have ceased operations. Growth from new renewable energy investments and industrial energy services projects are expected to offset these decreases over the long-term.
DTE Energy's separation of DT Midstream will also reduce operating cash flows in the near term. However, DTE Energy still expects higher cash flows from operations over the long-term due to the growth of its utilities and other non-utility operations.
DTE Energy's utilities may be impacted by the timing of collection or refund of various recovery and tracking mechanisms as a result of timing of MPSC orders. Energy prices are likely to be a source of volatility with regard to working capital requirements for the foreseeable future. DTE Energy continues its efforts to identify opportunities to improve cash flows through working capital initiatives and maintaining flexibility in the timing and extent of long-term capital projects.
To finance the acquisition of midstream natural gas assets in December 2019, DTE Energy issued equity units that will result in the issuance of $1.3 billion of common stock in November 2022. Refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Long-Term Debt," for additional information regarding the equity units. DTE Energy does not anticipate the issuance of any additional equity in 2022. However, at the discretion of management and depending upon economic and financial market conditions, DTE Energy could issue additional equity as part of its financial planning process. If issued, DTE Energy anticipates these discretionary equity issuances to be made through contributions to the dividend reinvestment plan or employee benefit plans.
Over the long-term, DTE Energy does not have any equity commitments other than the 2019 equity units noted above and will continue to evaluate equity needs on an annual basis.
Uses of Cash
DTE Energy has $2.9 billion in long-term debt, including finance leases, maturing in the next twelve months. Repayment of the debt is expected to be made through internally generated funds, the issuance or remarketing of new long-term debt, or equity issuances associated with the 2019 equity units.
Over-the long term, DTE Energy's debt and interest obligations have decreased as a result of the separation of DT Midstream and DTE Energy's ability to optionally redeem $2.6 billion of long-term debt during 2021. Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Dispositions and Impairments", for additional information regarding the separation of DT Midstream, and refer to Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Long-term Debt", for additional information regarding the optional redemptions as well as DTE Energy's scheduled debt maturities and interest obligations.
DTE Energy has paid quarterly cash dividends for more than 100 consecutive years and expects to continue paying regular cash dividends in the future, including approximately $0.7 billion in 2022. Any payment of future dividends is subject to approval by the Board of Directors and may depend on DTE Energy's future earnings, capital requirements, and financial condition. Over the long-term, DTE Energy expects continued dividend growth and is targeting a payout ratio consistent with pure-play utility companies. Dividends are subject to certain restrictions as discussed in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Short-Term Credit Arrangements and Borrowings." However, these restrictions are not expected to impact DTE Energy's planned dividend payments.
Various subsidiaries and equity investees of DTE Energy have entered into contracts which contain ratings triggers and are guaranteed by DTE Energy. These contracts contain provisions which allow the counterparties to require that DTE Energy post cash or letters of credit as collateral in the event that DTE Energy's credit rating is downgraded below investment grade. Certain of these provisions (known as "hard triggers") state specific circumstances under which DTE Energy can be required to post collateral upon the occurrence of a credit downgrade, while other provisions (known as "soft triggers") are not as specific. For contracts with soft triggers, it is difficult to estimate the amount of collateral which may be requested by counterparties and/or which DTE Energy may ultimately be required to post. The amount of such collateral which could be requested fluctuates based on commodity prices (primarily natural gas, power, environmental, and coal) and the provisions and maturities of the underlying transactions. As of December 31, 2021, DTE Energy's contractual obligation to post collateral in the form of cash or letters of credit in the event of a downgrade to below investment grade, under both hard trigger and soft trigger provisions, was $667 million.
For cash obligations related to leases and future purchase commitments, refer to Note 17 and Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Leases" and "Commitments and Contingencies," respectively. Purchase commitments include capital expenditures that are contractually obligated. Also refer to the "Capital Investments" section above for additional information on DTE Energy's capital strategy and estimated spend over the next five years.
Other obligations are further detailed in Notes 9, 10, 14, 16, 18, and 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Regulatory Matters," "Income Taxes," "Long-Term Debt," "Short-Term Credit Arrangements and Borrowings," "Commitments and Contingencies," and "Retirement Benefits and Trusteed Assets," respectively.
Liquidity
DTE Energy has approximately $2.1 billion of available liquidity at December 31, 2021, consisting primarily of cash and cash equivalents and amounts available under unsecured revolving credit agreements.
DTE Energy believes it will have sufficient operating flexibility, cash resources and funding sources to maintain adequate liquidity and to meet future operating cash and capital expenditure needs. However, virtually all DTE Energy's businesses are capital intensive, or require access to capital, and the inability to access adequate capital could adversely impact earnings and cash flows.
Credit Ratings
Credit ratings are intended to provide banks and capital market participants with a framework for comparing the credit quality of securities and are not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities. DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas' credit ratings affect their costs of capital and other terms of financing, as well as their ability to access the credit and commercial paper markets. DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas' management believes that the current credit ratings provide sufficient access to capital markets. However, disruptions in the banking and capital markets not specifically related to DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas may affect their ability to access these funding sources or cause an increase in the return required by investors.
As part of the normal course of business, DTE Electric, DTE Gas, and various non-utility subsidiaries of DTE Energy routinely enter into physical or financially settled contracts for the purchase and sale of electricity, natural gas, coal, capacity, storage, and other energy-related products and services. Certain of these contracts contain provisions which allow the counterparties to request that DTE Energy posts cash or letters of credit in the event that the senior unsecured debt rating of DTE Energy is downgraded below investment grade. The amount of such collateral which could be requested fluctuates based upon commodity prices and the provisions and maturities of the underlying transactions and could be substantial. Also, upon a downgrade below investment grade, DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas could have restricted access to the commercial paper market, and if DTE Energy is downgraded below investment grade, the non-utility businesses, especially the Energy Trading and DTE Vantage segments, could be required to restrict operations due to a lack of available liquidity. A downgrade below investment grade could potentially increase the borrowing costs of DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas and their subsidiaries and may limit access to the capital markets. The impact of a downgrade will not affect DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas' ability to comply with existing debt covenants. While DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas currently do not anticipate such a downgrade, they cannot predict the outcome of current or future credit rating agency reviews.
The separation of DT Midstream has resulted in a shift in DTE Energy's strategy to a predominately pure-play utility, but to date has not had any impact on DTE Energy's credit ratings. Since the announcement of the planned separation in October 2020 and completed separation in July 2021, Standard and Poor's Global Ratings, Fitch Ratings, and Moody's Investor Service have all affirmed the ratings and stable outlook of DTE Energy, DTE Electric, and DTE Gas.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Registrants' Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect the results of operations and the amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Registrants' management believes that the areas described below require significant judgment in the application of accounting policy or in making estimates and assumptions in matters that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Additional discussion of these accounting policies can be found in the Combined Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Regulation
A significant portion of the Registrants' businesses are subject to regulation. This results in differences in the application of generally accepted accounting principles between regulated and non-regulated businesses. DTE Electric and DTE Gas are required to record regulatory assets and liabilities for certain transactions that would have been treated as revenue or expense in non-regulated businesses. Future regulatory changes or changes in the competitive environment could result in the discontinuance of this accounting treatment for regulatory assets and liabilities for some or all of the Registrants' businesses. The Registrants' management believes that currently available facts support the continued use of regulatory assets and liabilities and that all regulatory assets and liabilities are recoverable or refundable in the current rate environment.
See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, "Regulatory Matters."
Derivatives
Derivatives are generally recorded at fair value and shown as Derivative assets or liabilities. Changes in the fair value of the derivative instruments are recognized in earnings in the period of change. The normal purchases and normal sales exception requires, among other things, physical delivery in quantities expected to be used or sold over a reasonable period in the normal course of business. Contracts that are designated as normal purchases and normal sales are not recorded at fair value. Substantially all of the commodity contracts entered into by DTE Electric and DTE Gas meet the criteria specified for this exception.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in a principal or most advantageous market. Fair value is a market-based measurement that is determined based on inputs, which refer broadly to assumptions that market participants use in pricing assets or liabilities. These inputs can be readily observable, market corroborated, or generally unobservable inputs. The Registrants make certain assumptions they believe that market participants would use in pricing assets or liabilities, including assumptions about risk, and the risks inherent in the inputs to valuation techniques. Credit risk of the Registrants and their counterparties is incorporated in the valuation of assets and liabilities through the use of credit reserves, the impact of which was immaterial at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Registrants believe they use valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable market-based inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
The fair values the Registrants calculate for their derivatives may change significantly as inputs and assumptions are updated for new information. Actual cash returns realized on derivatives may be different from the results the Registrants estimate using models. As fair value calculations are estimates based largely on commodity prices, the Registrants perform sensitivity analyses on the fair values of forward contracts. See the sensitivity analysis in