Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Risk Factors” and our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Risk Factors” and our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions.
Overview
We own and operate premium authentic lifestyle brands with ingenious products we market and deliver through our Direct-To-Consumer (“DTC”) platform. We aim to help our customers enjoy good moments that create lasting memories. We consistently deliver innovative, high-quality products that are loved by our customers and revolutionize the outdoor experience, build community and help everyday people reconnect with what matters most. In fiscal year 2021, we acquired Oru Kayak and ISLE Paddle Boards, which expanded our served market opportunity into the U.S. paddle sports market, and Chubbies apparel, which expanded our served market opportunity into the clothing and accessories category.
As a result of the change in control transaction that occurred in 2020, we presented two periods of financial information in the consolidated statements of operations in 2020. The periods presented in 2020 are January 1, 2020 through October 8, 2020, defined as the Intermediate Successor, and October 9, 2020 through December 31, 2020, defined as the Successor. These periods are not comparable, as the principal impact of the change of control transaction relates to the application of purchase accounting, and the recognition of assets and liabilities at their fair values as of the time of the transaction (this transaction did not involve the combination of our Company with another operating company).
Supplemental to the presentation described above, we have combined the Intermediate Successor and Successor for fiscal year 2020. The combination of these periods is solely for illustrative purposes, only to assist the discussion below, and does not represent pro forma financial results compiled in accordance with Regulation S-X of the Securities Act. In particular, this combined presentation does not give effect to the recognition of assets and liabilities at fair market value, in accordance with purchase accounting, as if the transactions had occurred at the beginning of the corresponding fiscal year. The primary impact from the application of purchase accounting in both the Intermediate Successor and Successor periods was the step-up in the cost of our inventory and intangible assets to fair market value, which has a corresponding non-cash, negative impact on gross profit and net income.
Our net sales increased from $133.4 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020, to $403.7 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a growth rate of 202.6%. Our strong results were driven by solid demand despite supply chain challenges that impacted the industry. In addition, to generate long-term organic growth, we take deliberate care to monitor and respond to our customer health as measured for our Solo Stove products by our customer referral rate of 48.2%, our repeat purchase rate 40.0%, and our net promoter score of 77 in 2021. Together, these health checks ensure we continue to keep the customer at the center of what we do and drive solid customer lifetime value.
Our net income increased from a net loss of $24.2 million (comprised of a $15.9 million net loss in the Intermediate Successor period from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, and a net loss of $8.3 million in the Successor period from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020) in the combined year ended December 31, 2020 to net income of $56.5 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In 2021 we acquired three additional brands, Oru, ISLE, and Chubbies to pair with Solo Stove and further propel our Solo Brands growth story. Solo Stove stand-alone net sales grew 171.3% over the prior year to $362.0 million, while organic sales in our other lifestyle brands Chubbies, Oru, and ISLE, grew 60.4% to $121.3 million over the prior year. Altogether, our brands grew 131.2% to $483.3 million in net sales if we had owned all brands for the full year. We continue to look for new and exciting brands to add to our offering and bring our customers additional opportunities to create lasting memories.
Initial Public Offering and Reorganization Transactions
On October 28, 2021, we completed our initial public offer (the “IPO”), in which we issued and sold 12,903,225 shares of our Class A common stock at a price to the public of $17.00 per share. We raised net proceeds of $198.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and commissions and additional offering costs. On November 10, 2021, the underwriters exercised their option to purchase 1,935,483 Class A common stock. We received $30.6 million after deducting the underwriters discount. Solo Brands, Inc. used the proceeds to repay outstanding indebtedness under the Subordinated Debt of $30.0 million and Revolving Credit Facility of $196.1 million.
Prior to the completion of the IPO, we undertook certain reorganization transactions such that Solo Brands, Inc. is now a holding company, and its sole material asset is a controlling equity interest in Solo Stove Holdings, LLC (“Holdings”). As the general partner of Holdings, Solo Brands, Inc. operates and controls the business and affairs of Holdings and its subsidiaries and has the obligation to absorb losses and receive benefits from Holdings. Solo Brands, Inc. will consolidate Holdings in its consolidated financial statements and report a non-controlling interest related to the common units held by the pre-IPO common unitholders and the incentive units held by the continuing incentive unitholders in its consolidated financial statements.
Solo Brands, Inc. is a corporation for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes. Holdings has been since the Summit Acquisition (as described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) treated as a flow-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes, and as such, has generally not been subject to U.S. federal income tax at the entity level. Accordingly, the historical results of operations and other financial information set forth in this Annual Report do not include any material provisions for U.S. federal income tax for the periods prior to our initial public offering. Following our initial public offering, Solo Brands, Inc. pays U.S. federal and state income taxes as a corporation on its share of Holdings’ taxable income.
In addition, in connection with the reorganization and our IPO, we entered into the tax receivable agreement as described under “Tax Receivable Agreement.”
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the IPO, Solo Brands, Inc. entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement with the Continuing LLC Owners and Holdings. Under the Tax Receivable Agreement, Solo Brands, Inc. generally is required to make cash payments to the Continuing LLC Owners equal to 85% of the tax benefits, if any, that Solo Brands, Inc. actually realizes, or in certain circumstances is deemed to realize, as a result of (1) increases in Solo Brands, Inc.’s proportionate share of the tax basis of the assets of Holdings resulting from (a) any future redemptions or exchanges of LLC Interests by the Continuing LLC Owners for Solo Brands, Inc. Class A common stock or cash pursuant to the Holdings LLC Agreement, or (b) certain distributions (or deemed distributions) by Holdings and (2) certain other tax benefits arising from payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Although Solo Brands, Inc. will retain 15% of such tax benefits, this and other aspects of our organizational structure may adversely impact the future trading market for the Class A Common Stock. No such payments will be made to any holders of Solo Brands, Inc. Class A common stock unless such holders are also Continuing LLC Owners.
Outlook
We believe we have significant opportunities to continue our upward momentum. Our long-term growth strategy includes each of the following:
•Accelerate organic growth in each brand, including introducing new and enhanced products
•Utilize scale and platform efficiencies
•Expand internationally
•Strategic acquisitions
•Expand our wholesale sales channel
With the successful completion of our IPO, our current debt structure and the ability to access capital markets, we believe we are financially poised to successfully execute on our strategy. Additionally, we continue to recruit and retain top talent, and our people are key to our success.
Into 2021, we continued to experience tailwinds from growth in e-commerce as consumers progress in the shift toward online shopping, including in our wholesale and international channels, and digitally-native brands. However, while we are optimistic about the future growth opportunities for all our brands, we are not immune to the recent macro headwinds, including inflation, that could impact discretionary spending in 2022. In addition, increased freight and raw materials costs as well as supply chain issues persist in the economy and put pressure on our business. As these issues evolve, our margins may be impacted. Our first quarter is typically our lowest quarter for sales following the holiday shopping season as well as colder weather keeping more people indoors.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed in Item 1A - Risk Factors and included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Economic Conditions
Demand for our products is impacted by a number of economic factors impacting our customers, such as consumer confidence, demographic trends, employment levels, and other macroeconomic factors. These factors may influence the extent to which consumers invest in outdoor lifestyle products such as fire pits, stoves, grills, consumables, and associated accessories.
Success of Our Innovation Pipeline
Our future growth depends in part on our ability to introduce new and enhanced products. The success of our new and enhanced products depends on many factors, including anticipating consumer trends, finding innovative solutions to consumer needs, differentiating our products from those of our competitors, obtaining protection for our intellectual property and the ability to expand our brand beyond the categories of products we currently sell.
Seasonality/Weather
Sales have historically experienced seasonality, with our highest level of sales typically being generated in the second and fourth fiscal quarters, with the first fiscal quarter typically generating the lowest sales. This historical sales trend is supported by the demand for our products at the beginning of the summer and holiday shopping seasons. Unfavorable weather can impact demand, including wet or exceptionally hot or dry weather conditions. Widespread wild fires also have potential to adversely impact our business.
COVID-19 Impacts
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted global economies, resulting in travel restrictions, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, reduced economic activity, and changes in consumer behavior.
Disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have affected our business, as well as those of our consumers, retail partners, and suppliers. However, throughout the COVID-19 pandemic and during 2021, customer demand for our products continued and we generated significant growth. Two positive factors contributing to customer demand and our significant growth during the pandemic were: (1) COVID-19 increased consumer interest for outdoor living and outdoor recreation, and (2) it accelerated online shopping that has continued through today, increasing our DTC sales.
The COVID-19 pandemic created challenges with our supply chain. While we have maintained and added new suppliers to support our growth, ocean freightliners experienced unprecedented demand and the availability and cost of shipping containers severely increased. We experienced sharp increases to container costs and had to increase our resources to manage and ensure adequate space on ships to move our product from overseas by onboarding several new shipping carriers to our vendor list.
As we continue to monitor and navigate the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects, we may take additional actions based on the requirements and recommendations of local health guidelines, and intend to focus on investments for future, long-term growth. In certain circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future. In addition, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ability to Scale Our Operating Model
We depend on third-party manufacturers for the sourcing of our products and generally do not have long-term supply agreements with our manufacturers. Our future performance may be impacted by the inability or unwillingness of our third-party manufacturers to meet our product demand and the availability of land-based and air freight carriers. Our ability to support our growth will also be dependent on attracting, motivating, and retaining personnel.
Business Acquisitions
In fiscal year 2021, we acquired Oru Kayak and ISLE Paddle Boards, which expand our served marked opportunity into the U.S. paddle sports market, and Chubbies apparel, which expands our served market opportunity into the clothing and accessories category. Our ability to find suitable acquisition targets and integrate them on to the Solo Brands platform can impact our future business performance.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Sales
Net sales are comprised of DTC channel sales and wholesale channel sales to retail partners. Net sales in both channels reflect the impact of partial shipments, product returns, and discounts for certain sales programs or promotions.
We believe that our net sales include a seasonal component. In the DTC channel, our historical net sales tend to be highest in our second and fourth quarters, while our wholesale channel has generated higher sales in the first and third quarters. Additionally, we expect volatility in the results of operations throughout the year relative to the timing of new product launches.
Gross Profit
Gross profit reflects net sales less cost of goods sold, which primarily includes the purchase cost of our products from our third-party manufacturers, inbound freight and duties, product quality testing and inspection costs, and depreciation on molds and equipment that we own.
Selling, General, & Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of marketing costs, employee compensation and benefits costs, costs of our warehousing and logistics operations, costs of operating on third-party DTC marketplaces, professional fees and services, cost of product shipment to our customers, and general corporate infrastructure expenses.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses consist primarily of acquisition-related expenses related to the Oru, ISLE, and Chubbies acquisitions in 2021 and the change in control event in 2020. Additionally, other operating expenses include certain costs incurred for the initial public offering and business optimization and expansion expenses.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Sales
Net sales increased $270.3 million, or 202.6%, to $403.7 million for Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $133.4 million for the combined year ended December 31, 2020. $41.7 million of this increase was due to the acquisitions of Oru, ISLE and Chubbies. The remaining increase was primarily driven by a 145.2% increase in total orders period over period. Additionally, the average order size increased by 19.9%, period over period. We believe the increase in the number of orders was primarily due to our increased spending on our digital marketing strategy, growing brand awareness, and increased demand for outdoor recreation and leisure lifestyle products, which we believe was partially attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic solidifying consumer interest in the outdoors and our products.
Net sales for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was comprised of $57.0 million, or 93.6%, of DTC sales and $3.9 million, or 6.4%, of wholesale sales.
Net sales for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, was comprised of $65.7 million, or 90.5%, of DTC sales and $6.9 million, or 9.5%, of wholesale sales.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Cost of goods sold increased $98.4 million, or 211.7%, to $144.8 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $46.5 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased product and freight expenses associated with the increased demand of our products and a $12.3 million fair value write-up of inventory related to the acquisitions of Oru, ISLE and Chubbies. As of December 31, 2021, $7.8 million of the fair value write-up of inventory had not been recognized. Gross profit also increased $171.9 million, or 197.7%, to $258.9 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $87.0 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020, due to an increased demand for our products.
Cost of goods sold for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by product and freight expenses associated with the demand for our products, and an inventory write-up of $5.8 million as a result of the 2020 change in control event that was recognized in expense in this period. As of December 31, 2020, there was still $0.7 million of inventory write-up that had not yet been expensed through cost of goods sold that was expensed in 2021.
Cost of goods sold for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, was primarily driven by product and freight expenses associated with the demand for our products, and an inventory write-up of $1.9 million as a result of the 2019 change in control event that was recognized in this period.
Gross margin decreased 1.1% to 64.1% in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 65.2% in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to increased product and freight expenses associated with the increased demand of our products.
Gross margin for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by increased demand for our products, offset by product and freight expenses associated with this demand, as well as write-up of inventory resulting from the application of purchase accounting from change in control event that occurred in 2020.
Gross margin for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, was primarily driven by increased demand for our products offset by product and freight expenses associated with this demand.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A increased $119.5 million, or 298.7%, to $159.5 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $40.0 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in SG&A was primarily driven by the following: an increase in our advertising and marketing spend of $57.0 million, an increase in shipping costs of $24.4 million, an increase in employee costs of $20.6 million due to increased headcount and equity-based compensation expense, and an increase in seller fees of $8.9 million. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A increased to 39.5% in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, from 30.0% in the combined year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to the increase in advertising and marketing spend.
SG&A for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by advertising and marketing spend of $9.4 million, shipping costs of $4.1 million, seller fees of $2.8 million, and $1.4 million of employee costs.
SG&A for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, was primarily driven by advertising and marketing spend of $8.4 million, shipping costs of $5.1 million, employee costs of $3.3 million, and seller fees of $2.6 million.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $12.6 million, or 221.4%, to $18.2 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.7 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses was primarily driven by an $11.9 million increase in amortization related to increases in definite-lived intangible assets of $277.9 million as a result of the Oru, ISLE and Chubbies acquisitions as well as the 2020 change in control event.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by amortization expense of $3.2 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had a definite lived intangible asset balance of $203.8 million due to the 2020 change in control event.
Depreciation and amortization expenses for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020 was primarily driven by amortization expense of $2.3 million. As of October 8, 2020, we had a definite lived intangible asset balance of $41.1 million due to the 2019 change in control event.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses decreased $49.4 million, or 80.1%, to $12.3 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $61.7 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other operating expenses was primarily related to the 2020 change in control event, including the settlement of incentive awards and transaction bonuses of $37.9 million, $2.9 million of seller and transaction expenses, $1.9 million of buyer expenses paid by the seller, as well as a $19.1 million loss on contingent consideration in the combined year ended December 31, 2020 that did not recur in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021. Partially offsetting these decreases in other operating expenses were $8.1 million of acquisition-related expenses and $2.6 million of business optimization expenses in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the Company's significant growth, compared to no such expenses in the combined year ended December 31, 2020.
Other operating expenses for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was driven by an increase of $19.1 million to the fair value of the contingent consideration from the 2020 change in control transaction and $3.5 million of transaction expenses in connection with the 2020 change in control transaction.
Other operating expenses for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, was driven by $39.2 million of transaction expenses in connection with the 2020 change in control transaction.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense was $10.1 million in the Successor period for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.2 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to $131.9 million of gross debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $75.0 million of gross debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Interest expense for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020, through December 31, 2020, was primarily driven by $1.5 million of interest expense associated with the senior debt and subordinated debt.
Interest expense for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020, through October 8, 2020, was primarily driven by $1.7 million of interest expense associated with the term loan.
Income Taxes
We are the sole managing member of Holdings, and as a result, consolidate the financial results of Holdings. Holdings is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. As a partnership, Holdings is not subject to U.S. federal and certain state and local income taxes. Any taxable income or loss generated by Holdings is passed through to and included in the taxable income or loss of its members, including us, on a pro rata basis. We are subject to U.S. federal income taxes, in addition to state and local income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any taxable income or loss of Holdings, as well as any stand-alone income or loss generated by Solo Brands, Inc.
Income taxes was $2.0 million in the Successor period for year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. Income taxes represents federal, state, and local income taxes on the Company's allocable share of taxable income of Holdings, as well as Oru's and Chubbies' federal and state tax expense.
Income taxes for the Successor period, from October 9, 2020 through December 31, 2020, was driven by a nominal amount of Texas franchise tax expense.
Income taxes for the Intermediate Successor period, from January 1, 2020 through October 8, 2020, was driven by $0.1 million of Texas franchise tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Historically, our cash requirements have principally been for working capital purposes. We expect these needs to continue as we develop and grow our business. We fund our working capital, primarily inventory, and accounts receivable, from cash flows from operating activities, cash on hand, and borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Current Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had a cash balance of $25.1 million, working capital (excluding cash) of $87.2 million, and $317.5 million of borrowings available under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan
On May 12, 2021, we entered into that certain credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., the Lenders and L/C Issuers party thereto (each as defined therein) and the other parties thereto (as subsequently amended on June 2, 2021, and September 1, 2021, the “Revolving Credit Facility”). As so amended, the Revolving Credit Facility allows us to borrow up to $350.0 million of revolving loans, including the ability to issue up to $20.0 million in letters of credit. While our issuance of letters of credit does not increase our borrowings outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, it does reduce the amounts available under the Revolving Credit Facility. The Revolving Credit Facility matures on May 12, 2026 and bears interest at a rate equal to the base rate as defined in the agreement plus an applicable margin, which as of December 31, 2021, was based on LIBOR. Interest is due on the last business day of each March, June, September and December. On December 31, 2021, we had $32.5 million in outstanding borrowings and $317.5 million available for future borrowings on the Revolving Credit Facility. All outstanding principal and interest due under the Revolving Credit Facility are due at maturity.
In addition to the above, the amendment on September 1, 2021 included a provision to borrow up to $100.0 million under a term loan (the “Term Loan”). The proceeds from the Term Loan were used to fund the Chubbies acquisition. The Term Loan matures on September 1, 2026 and bears interest at 1.25% plus an applicable margin, which as of December 31, 2021 was based on LIBOR. We were required to make quarterly principal payments on the Term Loan beginning on December 31, 2021. On December 31, 2021, we had $99.4 million outstanding on the Term Loan. All outstanding principal and interest due on the Term Loan are due at maturity.
The recent changes in our working capital requirements generally reflect the growth in our business. Although we cannot predict with certainty all of our particular short-term cash uses or the timing or amount of cash requirements, we believe that our available cash on hand, along with amounts available under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, the continued growth of our business, including our expansion into international markets, may significantly increase our expenses (including our capital expenditures) and cash requirements. Furthermore, we will continue to seek possible brand and mission consistent acquisition opportunities that would require additional capital. In addition, the amount of our future product sales is difficult to predict, and actual sales may not be in line with our forecasts. As a result, we may be required to seek additional funds in the future from issuances of equity or debt, obtaining additional credit facilities, or loans from other sources.
Other Terms of the Revolving Credit Facility
We may request incremental term loans, incremental equivalent debt, or revolving commitment increases (we refer to each as an Incremental Increase) in amounts such that, after giving pro forma effect to such Incremental Increase, our total secured net leverage ratio (as defined in the Revolving Credit Facility) would not exceed the then-applicable cap under the Revolving Credit Facility. In the event that any lenders fund any of the Incremental Increases, the terms and provisions of each Incremental Increase, including the interest rate, shall be determined by us and the lenders, but in no event shall the terms and provisions, when taken as a whole and subject to certain exceptions, of the applicable Incremental Increase, be more favorable to any lender providing any portion of such Incremental Increase than the terms and provisions of the loans provided under the Revolving Credit Facility unless such terms and conditions reflect market terms and conditions at the time of incurrence or issuance thereof as determined by us in good faith.
The Revolving Credit Facility is (a) jointly and severally guaranteed by the Guarantors and any future subsidiaries that execute a joinder to the guaranty and related collateral agreements and (b) secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of our and the Guarantors’ assets, subject to certain customary exceptions.
The Revolving Credit Facility requires us to comply with certain financial ratios, including:
•at the end of each fiscal quarter, a total net leverage ratio (as defined in the Revolving Credit Facility) for the four quarters then ended of not more than: 4.00 to 1.00, for each quarter ending in 2021, 2022, and on June 30, 2023; 3.75 to 1.00, for each quarter ending June 30, 2023 through March 31, 2024; and 3.50 to 1.00, for each quarter ending June 30, 2024 or thereafter;
•at the end of each fiscal quarter commencing with the quarter ending September 30, 2021, an interest coverage ratio (as defined in the Revolving Credit Facility) for the four quarters then ended of not less than 3.00 to 1.00.
In addition, the Revolving Credit Facility contains customary financial and non-financial covenants limiting, among other things, mergers and acquisitions; investments, loans, and advances; affiliate transactions; changes to capital structure and the business; additional indebtedness; additional liens; the payment of dividends; and the sale of assets, in each case, subject to certain customary exceptions. The Revolving Credit Facility contains customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, defaults under other material debt, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, failure of any guaranty or security document supporting the Revolving Credit Facility to be in full force and effect, and a change of control of our business. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021.
Subordinated Debt - Related Party
On October 9, 2020, Solo Brands, LLC entered into a Note Purchase Agreement, or the Summit Note Agreement, by and among itself, the guarantors party thereto from time to time, the purchasers party thereto, and Summit Partners Subordinated Debt Fund V-A, L.P., as the Purchaser Representative. Pursuant to the terms of the Summit Note Agreement, certain affiliates of Summit Partners, L.P. purchased from Solo Brands, LLC $30.0 million of senior subordinated notes, or the Summit Notes. On November 5, 2021, the Company repaid in full the Subordinated Debt - related party. The Summit Notes bore interest at a rate of 12% per annum, with an original maturity date of October 9, 2026. The Summit Notes were also subject to mandatory prepayment, plus accrued interest and related mandatory prepayment premium, upon the occurrence of certain liquidity events described in the Summit Note Agreement, including the initial public offering.
Senior Debt Facility
On November 6, 2020, we entered into a credit agreement with a bank (the “Senior Debt Facility”). Under the terms of this agreement, we borrowed $45 million under a term loan. The proceeds from the term loan were used to repay certain outstanding bridge indebtedness entered as part of the 2019 Agreement described in Note 1. We voluntarily repaid in full the principal amount and $1.0 million of accrued interest outstanding under the Senior Debt Facility on May 31, 2021, using proceeds from the Revolving Credit Facility described above. The Senior Debt Facility bore interest at a rate equal to a base rate defined in the agreement plus an applicable margin. At the time of the repayment, we wrote off $1.5 million of debt issuance costs associated with the Senior Debt Facility.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $10.2 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $32.7 million in the combined year ended December 31, 2020. The $42.9 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the following:
•changes in inventory decreased operating cash flow by $47.3 million, primarily driven by purchases of additional inventory to meet the increased demand of our products;
•changes in deferred revenue decreased operating cash flow by $38.1 million, primarily driven by shipments of previously backordered products;
•changes in accrued expenses and other current liabilities decreased operating cash flow by $21.3 million, primarily driven by a reduction in accruals for transaction related expenses related to the change in control transaction in 2020 as well as the payout of member distributions related to 2020;
•changes in accounts receivable decreased operating cash flow by $12.6 million, primarily driven by an increase in credit sales; and
•changes in prepaid expenses and other current assets decreased operating cash flow by $7.9 million, primarily driven by increases in prepaid insurance, marketing and software and deposits to vendors for materials and accessories.
Partially offsetting these decreases in cash provided by operating activities was net income, which increased operating cash flow by $80.7 million. Adjustments to net income for non-cash items, included decreases in operating cash flow of $19.1 million related to the change in fair value of contingent consideration and $3.1 million related to deferred income taxes, offset by amortization of intangible assets, which increased operating cash flow by $11.9 million, and equity-based compensation, which increased operating cash flow by $7.3 million.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $143.9 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to the assets and liabilities acquired in the Oru, ISLE, and Chubbies acquisitions. Cash used in investing activities was $274.1 million in the combined period for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the assets and liabilities acquired as a result of the change in control event. Additionally, capital expenditures decreased investing cash flow by $9.7 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the combined period for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the construction of our new global headquarters.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $146.5 million in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $281.1 million in the combined period for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $134.6 million decrease in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the following:
•A $97.9 million increase in payment of contingent consideration
•A $16.6 million increase in distributions to members and non-controlling interests
•Proceeds from the issuance of Class A units, net of underwriters’ discounts of $250.0 million in the combined period for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $229.0 million of proceeds from our initial public offering, net of underwriters’ discounts, commissions and offering costs in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021
Partially offsetting these decreases in cash provided by financing activities were $52.7 million of proceeds from long-term debt, net of repayments and issuance costs, in the Successor period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net proceeds from long-term debt of $49.0 million in the combined period for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1) Long-term debt consists of required principal payments on long-term debt.
(2) Interest payment obligations represent required interest payments on long-term debt. Amounts exclude amortization of debt issuance costs, debt discounts, and acquisition costs that would be included in interest expense in the consolidated financial statements.
(3) Operating leases represent required lease payments during the noncancelable lease term. Variable payments for occupancy-related costs, common area maintenance charges, real estate taxes, insurance and contingent rent are not included above.
(4) Inventory obligations represent binding commitments to purchase finished goods, raw materials and contract production that are payable upon shipment from the manufacturer.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates and could differ based upon other assumptions or conditions.
See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about our significant accounting policies, including our critical accounting policies. The critical accounting estimates that reflect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements include those noted below. Within the context of these critical accounting estimates, we are not currently aware of any reasonably likely events or circumstances that would result in materially different amounts being reported.
Revenue Recognition
The Company primarily engages in direct-to-consumer transactions, which is comprised of product sales directly from the brands’ websites, and business-to-business transactions, which is comprised of product sales to retailers, including where possession of the Company’s products is taken and sold by the retailer in-store or online.
There are no significant extended payment terms with our customers. Payment is due at the time of sale on our website for our direct-to-consumer transactions. Our business-to-business customers’ payment terms vary depending on the contract with each retailer, but the most common is net 30 or net 60 days.
Revenue is recognized for the amount of consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods to a customer. The consideration promised in a contract with a customer includes fixed and variable amounts. The fixed amount of consideration is the standalone selling price of the goods sold. Variable considerations, including cash discounts and rebates, are deducted from gross sales in determining net sales. Variable considerations also include the portion of goods that are expected to be returned and refunded. Any consideration received (or receivable) that the Company expects to refund to the customer will be recognized as a refund liability. Our refund liability is based on historical experience and trends. The actual amount of customer returns and refunds may differ from our estimates. Net sales include shipping costs charged to the customer and is recorded net of taxes collected from customers, which are remitted to government authorities.
Income Taxes
In determining the provision for income taxes for financial statement purposes, we make estimates and judgments which affect our evaluation of the carrying value of our deferred tax assets as well as our calculation of certain tax liabilities. We evaluate the carrying value of our deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis. In completing this evaluation, we consider all available positive and negative evidence. Such evidence includes historical operating results, the existence of cumulative earnings and losses in the most recent fiscal years, taxable income in prior carryback year(s) if permitted under the tax law, expectations for future pre-tax operating income, the time period over which our temporary differences will reverse, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. Estimating future taxable income is inherently uncertain and requires judgment. In projecting future taxable income, we consider our historical results and incorporate certain assumptions, including projected revenue growth, and operating margins, among others. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of this evidence, it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods.
We have recorded a valuation allowance against the capital loss resulting from the portion of the basis difference in our investments in Holdings, Oru, and Chubbies, that will only reverse upon the eventual sale of our interest in Holdings, Oru, and Chubbies, as well as certain state tax losses and foreign losses that are not expected to be utilized prior to expiration. As of December 31, 2021, we had $2.5 million of deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances. We expect to realize future tax benefits related to the utilization of these assets. However, since future financial results may differ from previous estimates, periodic adjustments to our valuation allowance may be necessary. If we determine in the future that we will not be able to fully utilize all or part of these deferred tax assets, we would record a valuation allowance through earnings in the period the determination was made, which would have an adverse effect on our results of operations and earnings in future periods.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is determined based upon the excess enterprise value of the Company over the estimated fair value of assets and liabilities assumed at acquisition date. Intangible assets are comprised of brand, patents, customer relationships, developed technology and trademark. Goodwill and intangible assets are recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Acquired definite-lived intangible assets subject to amortization are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, for more information about our accounting policies related to goodwill and intangible assets and Note 7, Intangible Assets, net, for further details regarding intangible asset balances and related amortization.
We review goodwill at the reporting unit level, which is one level below the operating segment, for impairment annually in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year and on an interim basis whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the fair value of such assets may be below their carrying value. In conducting our annual impairment test, we first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying value. If factors indicate that the fair value of the asset is less than its carrying value, we perform a quantitative assessment of the asset, analyzing the expected present value of future cash flows to quantify the amount of impairment, if any.
The Company has goodwill of $410.6 million, of which $289.1 million relates to one reporting unit. For our annual goodwill impairment tests in the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2020, we performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether the fair value of goodwill was more likely than not less than the carrying value for each reporting unit. Based on timing of change in control events, timing of acquisitions, economic conditions and industry and market considerations, we determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill was greater than its carrying value; therefore, the quantitative impairment test was not performed. As a result, there was no impairment charge recognized for the years 2021 and 2020.
Related to the Oru, ISLE and Chubbies acquisitions and the 2020 change in control, we engaged a third-party valuation specialist to determine the fair values of the intangible assets as of the acquisition date. The fair values were based on certain significant estimates and assumptions, including forecasted models projecting the operations of the business subsequent to the acquisition. Lower than expected results of operations could result in the need to review goodwill recorded as a result of these acquisitions for impairment, which could result in an impairment of goodwill when also considering economic conditions and industry and market conditions. See Note 4, Acquisitions, for further details of the acquisitions, including the fair values of the assets and liabilities acquired.
Inventory
Inventories are comprised primarily of finished goods and are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using average costing that approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Net realizable value is estimated based on our assumptions about market conditions and historically has remained above cost. As a result, we have not recorded any write-downs to inventory below cost, except as it relates to obsolete or slow-moving inventory. Based on our review of inventories, obsolete or slow-moving inventories were not material as of December 31, 2021. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional write-downs may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable than anticipated, inventory previously written down may be sold to customers, resulting in lower cost of sales and higher income from operations than expected in that period. Related to the 2020 change in control and the Oru, ISLE and Chubbies acquisitions, inventory was revalued to its fair value based on the market approach as of the acquisition dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, see “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Recently Issued Accounting Standards-Not Yet Adopted” in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
JOBS Act
We currently qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Accordingly, we are provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting guidance either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We have elected to adopt new or revised accounting guidance within the same time period as private companies, unless management determines it is preferable to take advantage of early adoption provisions offered within the applicable guidance. Our utilization of these transition periods may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the transition periods afforded under the JOBS Act.