ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Annual Report contains “forward-looking statements” that describe management’s beliefs and expectations about the future. We have identified forward-looking statements by using words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “may,” “expect,” and “intend,” or words of similar import. Although we believe these expectations are reasonable, our operations involve a number of risks and uncertainties, and actual results may be materially different than our expectations.
The following is a discussion of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended July 31, 2022, and 2021, and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements, the Notes thereto, and the other financial information included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. For purposes of the following discussion, FY 2022 or 2022 refers to the year ended July 31, 2022, and FY 2021 or 2021 refers to the year ended July 31, 2021.
Recent Activity
Acquisitions
On February 4, 2022, the Company closed on the acquisition of Next Level Internet, Inc. (“NextLevel”). NextLevel, based in San Diego, California, is engaged in the business of providing cloud communications, Unified Communications as a Service (“UCaaS”), collaboration, contact center, managed broadband connectivity and other voice and data services to the SMB market. The acquisition of NextLevel expands the Company’s growing nationwide footprint and adds a strong West Coast presence with nearly 1,000 SMB clients in California.
On December 31, 2021, the Company closed on the acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Skynet Telecom LLC (“Skynet”), a Texas-based provider of Voice Over Internet Protocol (“VoIP”) communication services, UCaaS, and broadband connectivity services to the SMB market. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company acquired the customer base, certain equipment, certain intellectual property, inventory, contract rights, software and other licenses, and miscellaneous assets used in connection with the operation of Skynet’s telecommunications business.
On November 17, 2020, the Company closed on the acquisitions of Nexogy, Inc. (“Nexogy”), and ActivePBX (“ActivePBX”), leading providers of cloud communication, UCaaS, and broadband solutions tailored for businesses.
As a combined business, NextLevel, Skynet, Nexogy, ActivePBX, and T3, will serve over 4,000 business customers and approximately 45,000 business users. The business model of the combined entities is supported by strong and predictable recurring revenue with high gross margins under contracts with business customers in various industries including banking, healthcare, financial services, legal, insurance, hotels, real estate, staffing, municipalities, food services, and education. We expect the acquisitions to have a positive impact on the revenues and operating income of the Company during the fiscal year that will end on July 31, 2023, due to the anticipated cost synergies and consolidation savings.
MEOA Business Combination
On August 30, 2022, Digerati entered into a Business Combination Agreement (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among Digerati, Minority Equality Opportunities Acquisition Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MEOA”), and Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of MEOA (“Merger Sub”).
The Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the board of directors of each of MEOA and Digerati.
The Business Combination Agreement provides, among other things, that Merger Sub will merge with and into Digerati, with Digerati as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, Digerati shall be a wholly-owned subsidiary of MEOA (the “Merger”). In addition, MEOA will be renamed Digerati Holdings, Inc. The Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Business Combination”. Other capitalized terms used, but not defined, herein, shall have the respective meanings given to such terms in the Business Combination Agreement.
The Business Combination is expected to close in the first calendar quarter of 2023, following the receipt of the required approval by the stockholders of MEOA and Digerati, approval by the Nasdaq Stock Market (“Nasdaq”) of MEOA’s initial listing application filed in connection with the Business Combination, and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to close the Business Combination or that it will approve by Nasdaq as per the stipulated timeline. If the Company is unable to complete the Business Combination as planned, the Company could be required to explore other options, currently there’s no other consideration being explored. For further information, please refer to Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Business Combination Agreement may be terminated under certain customary and limited circumstances at any time prior to the closing, including, without limitation, (i) by the mutual written consent of MEOA and Digerati; (ii) by MEOA, subject to certain exceptions, if any of the representations or warranties made by Digerati are not true and correct or if Digerati fails to perform any of its covenants or agreements under the Business Combination Agreement (including an obligation to consummate the closing) such that certain conditions to our obligations could not be satisfied and the breach (or breaches) of such representations or warranties or failure (or failures) to perform such covenants or agreements is (or are) not cured or cannot be cured within the earlier of (A) thirty (30) days after written notice thereof, and (B) February 25, 2023 (the “Termination Date”); (iii) by Digerati, subject to certain exceptions, if any of the representations or warranties made by our company or Merger Sub are not true and correct or if MEOA or Merger Sub fails to perform any of its covenants or agreements under the Business Combination Agreement (including an obligation to consummate the closing) such that the condition to the obligations of Digerati could not be satisfied and the breach (or breaches) of such representations or warranties or failure (or failures) to perform such covenants or agreements is (or are) not cured or cannot be cured within the earlier of (A) thirty (30) days after written notice thereof, and (B) the Termination Date; (iv) by either MEOA or Digerati, if the closing does not occur on or prior to the Termination Date, unless the breach of any covenants or obligations under the Business Combination Agreement by the party seeking to terminate proximately caused the failure to consummate the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement; (v) by either MEOA or Digerati, if (A) any governmental entity shall have issued an order or taken any other action permanently enjoining, restraining or otherwise prohibiting the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement and such order or other action shall have become final and non-appealable; or (B) if the Required MEOA Stockholder Consent is not obtained; (vi) by MEOA, if (A) Digerati does not deliver, or cause to be delivered to MEOA a Transaction Support Agreement duly executed by certain Digerati stockholders or (B) the Digerati stockholders meeting has been held, has concluded, the Digerati stockholders have duly voted, and Digerati stockholder approval was not obtained; (vii) by MEOA, if Digerati does not deliver, or cause to be delivered, to MEOA a duly executed copy of the PRG Resolution Agreement on or prior to October 15, 2022. The parties are currently negotiating an extension to this deadline. There can be no assurance that an agreement on this matter will be reached; (viii) by Digerati, should MEOA not have timely taken such actions as are reasonably necessary to extend the period of time to complete an initial business combination for an additional period of three months from November 30, 2022; provided, that it shall be the obligation of Digerati to timely make the deposit into the Trust Account in connection with such extension, and Digerati shall not have a right to terminate the Business Combination Agreement as a result of Digerati’s failure to make such deposit; (ix) by MEOA should Digerati not deposit into the Trust Account in a timely manner the funds necessary to extend the period for our company to complete an initial business combination for an additional period of three months from November 30, 2022, in accordance with, and as required pursuant to, the Business Combination Agreement; and (x) by MEOA should: (A) Nasdaq not approve the initial listing application for the combined company with Nasdaq in connection with the Business Combination; (B) the combined company not have satisfied all applicable initial listing requirements of Nasdaq; or (C) the common stock of the combined company not have been approved for listing on Nasdaq prior to the date of the closing.
If the Business Combination Agreement is validly terminated, none of the parties to the Business Combination Agreement will have any liability or any further obligation under the Business Combination Agreement other than customary confidentiality obligations, except in the case of a willful breach of any covenant or agreement under the Business Combination Agreement or fraud, provided, that (A) if MEOA terminates the Business Combination Agreement pursuant to clauses (ii), (vi), (vii) or (viii) of the preceding paragraph, Digerati shall pay to MEOA, promptly following such termination, and in any event within not less than five business days following delivery of notice of termination, a termination fee in the amount of $2,000,000, (B) if Digerati terminates the Business Combination Agreement pursuant to clauses (iii) or (ix) of the preceding paragraph, MEOA shall pay to Digerati promptly following such termination, and in any event within not less than five business days following delivery of notice of termination, a termination fee in the amount of $2,000,000 and (C) in the event of a termination by MEOA pursuant to clauses (ix) or (x) of the preceding paragraph, Digerati shall pay to us, promptly following such termination, and in any event within not less than five business days following delivery of notice of termination, a termination fee in the amount of $1,265,000.
Forbearance Agreement
On June 13, 2022, T3 Communications, Inc., a Nevada entity that is a majority owned subsidiary of the Company (“T3 Nevada”), four operating entities (Shift8 Networks, Inc., dba, T3 Communications (a Texas entity), T3 Communications, Inc. (a Florida entity), Nexogy Inc., and NextLevel) collectively referred to as the “Guarantors” (T3 Nevada and the Guarantors, collectively, the “Loan Parties”), Post Road Administrative LLC (the “Agent”) and its affiliate Post Road Special Opportunity Fund II LLP (collectively, with the Agent, “Post Road”), entered into a Forbearance Agreement and Third Amendment to Credit Agreement (“Forbearance Agreement”).
The Forbearance Agreement was entered into because certain events of default related to both the Credit Agreement (originally entered into in November 2020 and amended in December 2021 and February 2022) and the Joinder (entered into in February 2022) have occurred. The events of default related to financial covenants were failure to maintain a Senior Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of less than 4.05 to 1.00 and failure to comply with a Credit Agreement provision whereby the Loan Parties are not allowed to make annual Capital Expenditures (as defined in the Credit Agreement) greater than $379,190.
On October 17, 2022, and the Loan Parties and Post Road agreed to amend the Forbearance Agreement dated June 13, 2022, pursuant to an Amendment to Forbearance Agreement (the “Amendment”).
The Amendment was entered into because certain events of default related to both the Credit Agreement and the Joinder that had occurred prior to the parties’ entering into the Forbearance Agreement were continuing (the “Prior Existing Defaults”), certain additional events of default related to the Credit Agreement had occurred since the date of the Forbearance Agreement (the “Additional Existing Defaults”), and the parties anticipated that additional events of default with respect to the Credit Agreement will occur (the “Anticipated Defaults”).
The Additional Existing Defaults related to financial covenants were failure to maintain a Senior Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of less than 4.06 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ended July 31, 2022, and failure to maintain Minimum Liquidity (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of $2.0 million for the fiscal quarter ended July 31, 2022. The Anticipated Defaults related to financial covenants are failure to maintain a Senior Leverage Ratio of less than 4.05 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarter ending October 31, 2022, and failure to maintain Minimum Liquidity of $2.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending October 31, 2022.
The Additional Existing Defaults and Anticipated Defaults unrelated to financial covenants relate to the Loan Parties’ failure to deliver a compliance certificate for the fiscal quarter ended July 31, 2022, and ending October 31, 2022, respectively and, with respect to the Additional Existing Defaults, to timely deliver an executed copy of an amendment to a lease agreement.
Pursuant to the Amendment, Post Road agreed to forbear through the Amended Forbearance Period (as defined below) from (i) exercising its rights and remedies with regard to the Prior Existing Defaults, the Additional Existing Defaults, and the Anticipated Defaults and (ii) requiring compliance with the financial covenants set forth in Section 11.12 of the Credit Agreement. The “Amended Forbearance Period” is from June 13, 2022, through the earlier of (a) November 15, 2022, (b) the date on which any other event of default not enumerated in the Amendment occurs or is deemed to have occurred, or (c) the date of any failure of any Loan Party to comply with any term, condition, or provision of the Forbearance Agreement as amended by the Amendment. The Amendment does not constitute a waiver of the defaults enumerated therein nor does it impair the ability of Post Road to exercise its rights and remedies after the expiration of the Amended Forbearance Period.
The events of default unrelated to financial covenants were the Loan Parties’ failure to: (a) deliver certain certificates, financial information and projections, lease, landlord, and control agreements, and evidence of a UCC-3 filing; (b) close or consolidate certain bank accounts; (c) provide ten (10) business days’ notice prior to the Company filing certain filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and the Nevada Secretary of State; and (d) engage an industry consultant acceptable to the Agent to consult with the Loan Parties on integration strategy, future acquisitions, operating performance, and various business issues.
The Company anticipates implementing remedies by November 15, 2022, to resolve the financial covenants breaches and the breaches regarding delivering a compliance certificate, financial projections, and a landlord agreement along with engaging an industry consultant. The Company and Post Road have agreed to work in good faith to adjust the financial covenants set forth in Section 11.12 of the Credit Agreement to include the financial impact of the acquisition of Skynet and Next Level. As of the date of this filing, the Company cannot predict the final outcome of the negotiations with Post Road. For further information, please refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Key Performance indicators:
EBITDA from operations, as adjusted is a non-GAAP measure and should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, net income (loss), cash flow and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. In addition, this measure does not reflect cash available to fund requirements and excludes items, such as corporate expenses, transactional legal expenses, stock option expense, and depreciation and amortization, which are significant components in assessing the Company’s financial performance. The Company believes that the presentation of EBITDA from operations, as adjusted provides useful information regarding the Company’s operations and other factors that affect the Company’s reported results. Specifically, the Company believes that by excluding certain one-time or non-cash items such as transactional legal fees and depreciation and amortization, as well as potential distortions between periods caused by factors such as financing and capital structures, the Company provides users of its consolidated financial statements with insight into both its operations as well as the factors that affect reported results between periods but which the Company believes are not representative of its operations. As a result, users of the Company’s consolidated financial statements are better able to evaluate changes in the financial consolidated results of the Company across different periods
The following tables provide information regarding certain key performance indicators for Digerati for the years ended July 31, 2022, and 2021. Management utilizes these metrics to track and forecast revenue trends and expected results from operations:
Cloud software and service revenue increased by $11,738,000, or 95% from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. In addition, our gross margin increased by $7,527,000 from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase in revenue and gross margin between years is primarily attributed to the increase in total customers between years due to the acquisitions of Nexogy, ActivePBX, Skynet, and NextLevel.
EBITDA from operations, as adjusted increased from $1,518,000, or 75% from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The primary reason for the improvement in EBITDA from operations is due to the increase in gross margin of $7,527,000 between the year ended July 31,2021 and 2022. The improvement in gross margin was offset by the increase in total operational expenses of $6,009,000 between the years ended July 31, 2021, and 2022. EBITDA from operations, as adjusted is not intended to represent cash flows for the periods presented, nor have they been presented as an alternative to operating income or as an indicator of operating performance and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”).
Our total customers increased from 2,655 during the year ended July 31, 2021, to 4,023 for the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase in customers is attributed to the acquisitions and consolidation of Skynet and NextLevel during the year ended July 31, 2022. Going forward, absent further acquisitions, we expect a net increase in our number of customers of 1% to 5% each fiscal year.
Sources of revenue:
Cloud Software and Service Revenue: We provide UCaaS or cloud communication services and managed cloud-based solutions to small and medium size enterprise customers and to other resellers. Our Internet-based services include fully hosted IP/PBX services, SIP trunking, call center applications, auto attendant, voice and web conferencing, call recording, messaging, voicemail to email conversion, integrated mobility applications that are device and location agnostic, and other customized IP/PBX features in a hosted or cloud environment. Other services include enterprise-class data and connectivity solutions through multiple broadband technologies including cloud WAN or SD-WAN (Software-defined Wide Area Network), fiber, mobile broadband, and Ethernet over copper. We also offer remote network monitoring, data backup and disaster recovery.
Direct Costs:
Cloud Software and Service: We incur bandwidth and colocation charges in connection with our UCaaS or cloud communication services. The bandwidth charges are incurred as part of the connectivity between our customers to allow them access to our various services. We also incur costs from underlying providers for fiber, Internet broadband, and telecommunication circuits in connection with our data and connectivity solutions.
Results of Operations
Cloud Software and Service Revenue. Cloud software and service revenue increased by $11,738,000, or 95% from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase in revenue is primarily attributed to the increase in total customers between years due to the acquisitions of Nexogy, ActivePBX, Skynet and NextLevel. Our total number of customers increased from 2,655 for the year ended July 31, 2021, to 4,023 customers for the year ended July 31, 2022. As part of the acquisitions, our primary emphasis is on integrating the secured customers base, consolidating products and services, retaining the monthly recuring revenue, and providing exceptional customer support.
Cost of Services (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). The cost of services increased by $4,211,000, or 82% from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase in cost of services is primarily attributed to the consolidation of various networks and key vendors as part of the increase in total customers between periods due to the acquisitions of Nexogy, ActivePBX, Skynet and NextLevel. Our total number of customers increased from 2,655 for the year ended July 31, 2021, to 4,023 customers for the year ended July 31, 2022. However, our consolidated gross margin improved by $7,527,000 from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. We are not aware of any events that are reasonably likely to cause a material change in the relationship between our costs and our revenues.
Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses (exclusive of legal and professional fees and stock compensation expense). SG&A expenses increased by $5,815,000, from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase in SG&A is attributed to acquisition of Nexogy, ActivePBX, Skynet and NextLevel, as part of the consolidation, the Company absorbed all of the employees responsible for managing the customer base, technical support, sales, customer service, and administration.
Stock Compensation expense. Stock compensation expense decreased by $400,000, or 64% from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The decrease between periods is attributed to the Company only recognizing $97,863 in stock option expense associated with stock options awarded to various employees and recognized $125,250 in stock issued to consultants for professional services during the year ended July 31, 2022. In comparison, during the year ended July 31, 2021, the Company recognized stock option expense of $135,000 associated with stock options awarded to various employees, recognized $247,000 in stock compensation expense associated with the funding of the 401(K)-profit sharing plan, recognized $18,000 in stock compensation for stock issued in lieu of cash payments to a former employee, and recognized $223,000 in stock issued to consultants for professional services.
Legal and professional fees. Legal and professional fees increased by $2,142,000, or 240% from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase between periods is attributed to the recognition during the year ended July 31, 2022, of $1,850,000 in legal and professional fees related to due diligence, audits for the acquisitions, purchase price allocation, legal fees paid to counsel for Post Road, and investor relations.
Bad debt. Bad debt increased between the periods by $81,000. The increase is attributed to the recognition of $98,000 in bad debt during the year ended July 31, 2022, for accounts deemed uncollectable. During the year ended July 31, 2021, the Company recognized $17,000 in bad debt.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization increased by $1,167,000, from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase is primarily attributed to the acquisitions and related amortization of $2,414,000 for intangible assets, and the additional depreciation related to the depreciation for the assets acquired from Nexogy, ActivePBX, Skynet and NextLevel.
Operating loss. The Company reported an operating loss of $3,676,000 for the year ended July 31, 2022, compared to an operating loss of $2,398,000 for the year ended July 31, 2021. The increase in operating loss between periods is primarily due to the increase of SG&A of $5,815,000, legal fees of $2,142,000, bad debt of $81,000, and depreciation expense of $1,167,000. These increases were slightly offset by the increase in margin of $7,527,000 and the decrease in stock compensation expense of $400,000.
Gain (loss) on derivative instruments. Loss on derivative instruments decreased by $16,121,000 from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. We are required to re-measure all derivative instruments at the end of each reporting period and adjust those instruments to market, as a result of the re-measurement of all derivative instruments we recognized an increase between periods.
Gain (loss) on settlement of debt. Loss on settlement of debt increased by $6,041,000 from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. On December 20, 2021, the Company and our lender entered into an amendment to a Credit Agreement, as described in Note 10, in connection with the amendment, the Company recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt for the amendment fee of $1,419,000 and the debt discount associated with the note of $4,061,000 was also recognized as a loss on extinguishment of debt.
Income tax benefit (expense). During the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company recognized an income tax expense of $419,000. During the year ended July 31, 2021, the Company recognized an income tax expense of $183,000.
Other income (expense). Other expense decreased by $320,000 or 109% in the year ended July 31, 2022, compared to the year ended July 31, 2021.
Interest Income (expense). Interest income (expense) increased by $1,225,000 from the year ended July 31, 2021, to the year ended July 31, 2022. During the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company recognized amortization of debt discount of $2,064,000 related to the adjustment to the present value of various convertible notes and debt. Additionally, the Company recognized $2,400,000 in interest cash payments to Post Road, $75,000 in interest cash payments on various promissory notes, accrual of $147,000 for interest expense for various promissory notes and $64,000 fair value of shares issued as well as $1,195,000 added to the principal balance of various promissory notes, all charged to interest expense as consideration for extension of the maturity dates.
Net loss including noncontrolling interest. Net loss including noncontrolling interest for the year ended July 31, 2022, was $9,354,000, a decrease in net loss of $7,661,000, as compared to a net loss for the year ended July 31, 2021, of $17,015,000. The decrease in net loss including noncontrolling interest between periods is primarily due to the improvement in gain on derivative instruments of $16,121,000, increase in margin of $7,527,000, the decrease in stock compensation expense of $400,000 and increase in other income of $320,000. These improvements were slightly offset by the increase in SG&A of $5,815,000, the increase in legal fees of $2,142,000, increase in bad debt of $81,000, and the increase in depreciation and amortization of $1,167,000. In addition to the increase in interest expense of $1,225,000, increase of income tax expense of $236,000, and the loss on gain on settlement of debt of $6,041,000.
Net loss attributable to the noncontrolling interest. During the years ended July 31, 2022, and 2021, the consolidated entity recognized net loss in noncontrolling interest of $1,341,000 and $332,000, respectively. The noncontrolling interest is presented as a separate line item in the Company’s stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net loss attributable to Digerati’s shareholders. Net loss for the year ended July 31, 2022, was $8,013,000 compared to a net loss for the year ended July 31, 2021, of $16,683,000.
Deemed dividend on Series A Convertible Preferred Stock. Dividend declared on convertible preferred stock for the year ended July 31, 2022, was $19,000 compared to a deemed dividend on convertible preferred stock for the year ended July 31, 2021, of $20,000.
Net loss attributable to Digerati’s common shareholders. Net loss for the year ended July 31, 2022, was $8,032,000 compared to a net loss for the year ended July 31, 2021, of $16,703,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Position: We had a consolidated cash balance of $1,509,000 as of July 31, 2022. Net cash consumed by operating activities during the year ended July 31, 2022, was approximately $1,960,000, primarily as a result of operating expenses, that included $98,000 in stock compensation and warrant expense, stock issued for services of $126,000, bad debt expense of $78,000, amortization of debt discount of $2,064,000, gain on derivative liability of $6,186,000, depreciation and amortization expense of $2,916,000, accrued expense of $566,000, accounts receivable of $484,000 and deferred revenue of $911,000. Additionally, accounts payable $860,000, prepaid expenses and other current assets of $20,000, other assets of $131,000, inventory of $18,000, a loss on settlement of debt of $5,481,000, the recognition of $225,000 debt extension fee charged to interest expense, gain on ActivePBX contingent earnout recognized in other income of $24,000 and stock issued for debt extension of $65,000.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended July 31, 2022, was $12,885,000, which included $272,000 for the purchase of equipment, the cash paid of $12,791,000, net of cash received, for the acquisitions of VoIP assets from Skynet and NextLevel and the Company received $178,000 from Nexogy as an adjustment consideration for payables from the acquisition.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended July 31, 2022, was $14,865,000. The Company secured $806,000 from convertible notes, net of issuance costs and discounts. In addition, the Company secured $15,530,000 from promissory notes, net of issuance costs. (See Note 10) The Company made principal payments of $250,000 on various notes, principal payments of $425,000 on convertible notes and principal payments of 816,000 on related party notes. Overall, our net operating, investing, and financing activities during the year ended July 31, 2022, contributed approximately $20,000 of our available cash.
Digerati’s consolidated financial statements for the year ended July 31, 2022, have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. Since the Company’s inception in 1993, Digerati has incurred net losses and accumulated a deficit of approximately $113,393,000 and a working capital deficit of approximately $29,323,000 which raises substantial doubt about Digerati’s ability to continue as a going concern.
We are currently taking initiatives to reduce our overall cash deficiencies on a monthly basis. During fiscal 2023 we anticipate certain members of our management team to take a portion of their compensation in common stock to reduce the depletion of our available cash. To strengthen our business, we intend to adopt best practices from or recent acquisitions and invest in a marketing and sales strategy to grow our monthly recurring revenue; we anticipate utilizing our value-added resellers and channel partners to tap into new sources of revenue streams, we have also secured various agent agreements to accelerate revenue growth. In addition, we will continue to focus on selling a greater number of comprehensive services to our existing customer base. Further, in an effort to increase our revenues, we will continue to evaluate the acquisition of various assets with emphasis in VoIP Services and Cloud Communication Services. As a result, during the due diligence process we anticipate incurring significant legal and professional fees.
Our cash requirements to meet our interest payments to Post Road, capital expenditure needs, and operational cash flow needs over the next 18 months are estimated to be approximability $3,500,000. The Company anticipates issuing additional equity or entered into additional Convertible Notes to secure the funding required meet these cash needs. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional funds or raise them on acceptable terms. If the Company is unable to obtain financing on acceptable terms, the Company may not be able to meet its interest payments, capital expenditures and operational needs. As a result, the Company will be required to negotiate with its lender the terms of the current financing agreements, in addition to postponing the timing of deployment of its capital expenditures and extending the timing of the operational cash needs.
The Credit Agreement with Post Road contains affirmative and negative covenants with respect to operation of the business and properties of T3 Nevada as well as financial performance. Below are key covenants requirements, (measured quarterly):
1. Maximum Allowed - Senior Leverage Ratio of 4.06 to 1.00
2. Minimum Allowed - EBITDA of $3,719,589
3. Minimum Allowed - Liquidity of $2,000,000
4. Maximum Allowed - Capital Expenditures of $94,798 (Quarterly)
5. Minimum Allowed - Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of 1.5 to 1.00
6. Maximum Allowed - Churn of 3.00% at any time
While Digerati, the parent company of T3 Nevada, is not subject to these financial covenants, they have had and will continue to have a material impact on T3 Nevada’s expenditures and ability to raise funds.
In addition, our Term Loan C Note with Post Road with a maturity date of August 4, 2023, requires a full principal payment (currently $10,000,000) and accrued interest by the maturity date. We will work with our equity partners to secure additional financings to meet this obligation by the maturity date. In addition, we will work with our lender on the current terms to the Term Loan C Note, to extend the maturity date or restructure the terms of the note. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional funds or raise them on acceptable terms to meet the cash payment requirements on the Term Loan C Note. In addition, there can be no assurance that we will be able to restructure the terms or extend the maturity date of the Term Loan C Note with Post Road. If the Company is not able to restructure the financing or repay the Term Loan C Note by the August 4th maturity date and Post Road declares an event of default, it would have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition, including the possibility of Post Road foreclosing on some or all of our assets.
Management believes that available resources as of July 31, 2022, will not be sufficient to fund the Company’s operations, debt service and corporate expenses over the next 12 months. The Company’s ability to continue to meet its obligations and to achieve its business objectives is dependent upon, and other things, raising additional capital, issuing stock-based compensation to certain members of the executive management team in lieu of cash, or generating sufficient revenue in excess of costs. At such time as the Company requires additional funding, the Company will seek to secure such best-efforts funding from various possible sources, including equity or debt financing, sales of assets, or collaborative arrangements. If the Company raises additional capital through the issuance of equity securities or securities convertible into equity, stockholders will experience dilution, and such securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of the holders of common stock or convertible senior notes. If the Company raises additional funds by issuing debt, the Company may be subject to limitations on its operations, through debt covenants or other restrictions. If the Company obtains additional funds through arrangements with collaborators or strategic partners, the Company may be required to relinquish its rights to certain technologies. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional funds or raise them on acceptable terms. If the Company is unable to obtain financing on acceptable terms, it may be unable to execute its business plan, the Company could be required to curtail its operations, and the Company may not be able to pay off its obligations, if and when they come due.
Our current cash expenses are expected to be approximately $1,300,000 per month, including wages, rent, utilities, corporate expenses, and legal professional fees associated with potential acquisitions. As described elsewhere herein, we are not generating sufficient cash from operations to pay for our corporate and ongoing operating expenses, or to pay our current liabilities. As of July 31, 2022, our total liabilities were approximately $67,503,000, which included $10,588,000 in derivative liabilities. We will continue to use our available cash on hand to cover our deficiencies in operating expenses.
We have been successful in raising debt capital and equity capital in the past and as described in Notes 10, 11, and 12 to our consolidated financial statements. We have financing efforts in place to continue to raise cash through debt and equity offerings. Although we have successfully completed financings and reduced expenses in the past, we cannot assure you that our plans to address these matters in the future will be successful.
Critical Accounting Policies
Revenue Recognition. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenues from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606).
The Company recognizes cloud-based hosted services revenue, mainly from subscription services for its cloud telephony applications that includes hosted IP/PBX services, SIP trunking, call center applications, auto attendant, voice and web conferencing, call recording, messaging, voicemail to email conversion, integrated mobility applications that are device and location agnostic, and other customized applications. Other services include enterprise-class data and connectivity solutions through multiple broadband technologies including cloud WAN or SD-WAN (Software-defined Wide Area Network), fiber, and Ethernet over copper. We also offer remote network monitoring, data backup and disaster recovery services. The Company applies a five-step approach in determining the amount and timing of revenue to be recognized: (1) identifying the contract with a customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognizing revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied. Substantially all of the Company’s revenue is recognized at the time control of the products transfers to the customer.
Service Revenue
Service revenue from subscriptions to the Company’s cloud-based technology platform is recognized over time on a ratable basis over the contractual subscription term beginning on the date that the platform is made available to the customer. Payments received in advance of subscription services being rendered are recorded as deferred revenue. Usage fees, either bundled or not bundled, are recognized when the Company has a right to invoice. Professional services for configuration, system integration, optimization, customer training and/or education are primarily billed on a fixed-fee basis and are performed by the Company directly. Alternatively, customers may choose to perform these services themselves or engage their own third-party service providers. Professional services revenue is recognized over time, generally as services are activated for the customer
Product Revenue
The Company recognizes product revenue for telephony equipment at a point in time, when transfer of control has occurred, which is generally upon delivery. Sales returns are recorded as a reduction to revenue estimated based on historical experience.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets, and Long-Lived Assets. Goodwill is carried at cost and is not amortized. The Company tests goodwill for impairment on an annual basis at the end of each fiscal year, relying on a number of factors including operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and marketplace data. Company management uses its judgment in assessing whether goodwill has become impaired between annual impairment tests according to specifications set forth in ASC 350. The Company completed an evaluation of goodwill at July 31, 2022 and determined that there was no impairment.
The fair value of the Company’s reporting unit is dependent upon the Company’s estimate of future cash flows and other factors. The Company’s estimates of future cash flows include assumptions concerning future operating performance and economic conditions and may differ from actual future cash flows. Estimated future cash flows are adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from the Company’s market capitalization plus a suitable control premium at date of the evaluation.
The financial and credit market volatility directly impacts the Company’s fair value measurement through the Company’s weighted average cost of capital that the Company uses to determine its discount rate and through the Company’s stock price that the Company uses to determine its market capitalization. Therefore, changes in the stock price may also affect the amount of impairment recorded.
The Company recognizes an acquired intangible asset apart from goodwill whenever the intangible asset arises from contractual or other legal rights, or when it can be separated or divided from the acquired entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented or exchanged, either individually or in combination with a related contract, asset or liability. Such intangibles are amortized over their useful lives. Impairment losses are recognized if the carrying amount of an intangible asset subject to amortization is not recoverable from expected future cash flows and its carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
The Company reviews its long-lived assets, including property and equipment, identifiable intangibles, and goodwill annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. To determine recoverability of its long-lived assets, the Company evaluates the probability that future undiscounted net cash flows will be less than the carrying amount of the assets.
Intangible Assets. Our intangible assets consist of customer relationships, developed technologies, trademarks and trade name. The Company recognizes an acquired intangible asset apart from goodwill whenever the intangible asset arises from contractual or other legal rights, or when it can be separated or divided from the acquired entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented, or exchanged, either individually or in combination with a related contract, asset, or liability. The intangible assets are amortized following the patterns in which the economic benefits are consumed or straight-line over the estimated useful life. We periodically review the estimated useful lives of our intangible assets and review these assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. The determination of impairment is based on estimates of future undiscounted cash flows. If an intangible asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of the impairment will be equal to the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the asset.
Long-Lived Assets. The Company reviews its long-lived assets, including property and equipment and identifiable intangibles annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. To determine recoverability of its long-lived assets, the Company evaluates the probability that future undiscounted net cash flows will be less than the carrying amount of the assets.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. Digerati reviews the carrying value of its long-lived assets annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the value of an asset may no longer be appropriate. Digerati assesses recoverability of the carrying value of the asset by estimating the future net cash flows expected to result from the asset, including eventual disposition. If the future net cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset, an impairment loss is recorded equal to the difference between the asset’s carrying value and fair value.
Business combinations. Each investment in a business is being measured and determined whether the investment should be accounted for as a cost-basis investment, an equity investment, a business combination, or a common control transaction. An investment in which the Company do not have a controlling interest and which the Company is not the primary beneficiary but where the Company has the ability to exert significant influence is accounted for under the equity method of accounting. For those investments that we account for in accordance ASC 805, Business Combinations, the Company records the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at management’s estimate of their fair values on the date of the business combination. The assessment of the estimated fair value of each of these can have a material effect on the reported results as intangible assets are amortized over various lives. Furthermore, according to ASC 805-50-30-5, when accounting for a transfer of assets or exchange of shares between entities under common control, the entity that receives the net assets or the equity interests shall initially measure the recognized assets and liabilities transferred at their carrying amounts in the accounts of the transferring entity at the date of transfer.
Stock-based compensation. The Company accounts for its share-based awards under ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Employee and non-employee stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period. During FY 2022 and 2021, the Company issued 1,500,000 common shares and 7,858,820 common shares, respectively, to professionals for exchange of services and various employees as part of our profit sharing-plan contribution and stock in lieu of cash. During FY 2022 and 2021 we recognized stock-based compensation expense of $125,250 and $264,712, respectively, equivalent to the market value of the shares issued calculated based on the share’s closing price at the grant dates. During FY 2022 we recognized stock-based compensation expense of $97,863 related to stock options previously issued to various employees.
Treasury Shares. As a result of entering into various convertible debt instruments which contained a variable conversion feature with no floor, warrants with fixed exercise price, and convertible notes with fixed conversion price or with a conversion price floor, we reserved 30,000,000 treasury shares for consideration for future conversions and exercise of warrants. The Company will evaluate the reserved treasury shares on a quarterly basis, and if necessary, reserve additional treasury shares. As of July 31, 2022, we believe that the treasury shares reserved are sufficient for any future conversions of these instruments. As a result, these debt instruments and warrants are excluded from derivative consideration.
Derivative financial instruments. Digerati does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. However, Digerati analyzes its convertible instruments and free-standing instruments such as warrants for derivative liability accounting.
For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date. Any changes in fair value is recorded as non-operating, non-cash income or expense for each reporting period. For derivative notes payable conversion options Digerati uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument is probable within the next 12 months from the balance sheet date.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. A fair value hierarchy is used which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The fair value hierarchy based on the three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value are as follows:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are financial instruments whose values are determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, or similar techniques, as well as instruments for which the determination of fair value requires significant judgment or estimation.
For certain of our financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses, the carrying amounts approximate fair value due to the short maturity of these instruments. The carrying value of our long-term debt approximates its fair value based on the quoted market prices for the same or similar issues or the current rates offered to us for debt of the same remaining maturities.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets include the cost of the acquired business in excess of the fair value of the tangible net assets recorded in connection with an acquisition. Other intangible assets include customer relationships, non-compete agreements, and trademarks. The Company uses a third-party specialty valuation firm to value its intangible assets acquired in its business combination and asset acquisitions.
During the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company acquired Skynet Telecom LLC and Next Level Internet, Inc. the acquisitions were accounted for under the purchase method of accounting, with the Company identified as the accounting acquirer. Accordingly, the purchase prices of acquired tangible and intangible assets and liabilities were recorded and allocated at fair value on a relative basis as of acquisition dates. The Company based its estimates on historical experience, discounted cash flows and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in the circumstances at the time of acquisition, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the fair value of the intangible assets acquired that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results from these acquisitions may differ from these estimates.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of July 31, 2022, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.