ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus for its Public Offering filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on April 19, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is DTRT Health Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the Public Offering was declared effective on September 1, 2021. On September 7, 2021, we consummated the Public Offering of 23,000,000 units, which includes the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 3,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13,300,000, of which approximately $8,100,000 was for deferred underwriting commissions and approximately $71,000 was for offering costs allocated to derivative warrant liabilities.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 11,200,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $11,200,000.
Upon the closing of the Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, $234,600,000 ($10.20 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the Public Offering and of the Private Placement Warrants were placed in the Trust Account and invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7
under the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $342,000 in our operating bank account and a working capital of approximately $893,000.
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to purchase the Founder Shares and a loan from our sponsor of $300,000 under a promissory note. We repaid the promissory note in full on September 7, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Public Offering, our liquidity will be satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants held outside of the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” we have determined that the mandatory liquidation date and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to complete a business combination by December 7, 2022 (unless such period is extended as described herein), then we will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. Over this time period, we have used, and will be using, these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021, was in preparation for the Public Offering, and since the Public Offering, our search for a prospective target business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from April 19, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $4,900,000, which consisted of $17,000 of interest income from investments held in the Trust Account, approximately $9,600,000 change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, offset by approximately $4,300,000 loss upon issuance of the Private Placement Warrants, approximately $41,000 offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $350,000 of general and administrative expenses and approximately $139,000 of franchise tax expense.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day
option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Public Offering to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Public Offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment on September 7, 2021.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $4,600,000 in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Public Offering. In addition, the underwriters were entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or approximately $8,100,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, will be re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, the Company recognizes the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities will be subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value will be recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was determined using Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liabilities may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities will be classified as non-current
liabilities as their liquidation will not be reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 23,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Effective with the closing of the Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net loss per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 22,700,000 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period from April 19, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
“Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
on April 19, 2021 (inception) using the modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06
did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.