Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Dune Acquisition Corporation, except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on June 18, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Our Sponsor is Dune Acquisition Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company.
The registration statement for our initial public offering became effective on December 17, 2020. On December 22, 2020, we consummated the initial public offering of 17,250,000 units, including 2,250,000 additional units to cover the over-allotment units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $172.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $10.0 million, inclusive of approximately $6.0 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 4,850,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant to our Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $4.9 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, $172.5 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was held in the trust account, located in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a business combination within 18 months from the closing of the initial public offering, or June 22, 2022, (the “Combination Period”) and our stockholders have not amended the Certificate of Incorporation to extend such Combination Period, we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and which interest shall be net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
On October 12, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub, Merger Sub II, and TradeZero. In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement, at the Closing, (i) each issued and outstanding share of TradeZero Common Stock will automatically be converted into a number of shares of New TradeZero Common Stock equal to the Exchange Ratio, which will be determined by dividing (A) the quotient of (x) $500,000,000 divided by (y) the number of shares of TradeZero Common Stock immediately prior to the Closing (including the shares of TradeZero Common Stock subject to any restricted stock unit awards of TradeZero) by (B) $10.00 per share, (ii) all of the outstanding TradeZero restricted stock unit awards will be converted into New TradeZero restricted unit awards on the same terms and conditions as the existing awards (including with respect to vesting and acceleration, if any) to be governed by the Incentive Plan, and with respect to a number of shares of New TradeZero Common Stock equal to the product of (1) the number of shares of TradeZero Common Stock underlying the original award and (2) the Exchange Ratio and (iii) and all of the outstanding TradeZero stock option awards will be converted into New TradeZero stock option awards on the same terms and conditions as the existing award (including with respect to vesting and acceleration, if any) to be governed by the Incentive Plan and with respect to a number of shares of New TradeZero Common Stock equal to the product of (aa) the number of shares of TradeZero Common Stock underlying the original award and (bb) the Exchange Ratio and an exercise price per share of New TradeZero Common Stock subject to the award equal to (i) the existing exercise price of the award divided by (ii) the Exchange Ratio.
In addition, immediately prior to the Closing, holders of TradeZero Common Stock immediately prior to Closing will receive a cash disbursement from TradeZero’s cash balance at Closing equal to the lesser of (a) the difference between TradeZero’s cash balance at Closing and $10,000,000 and (b) $30,000,000. On or as soon as practicable following the Closing, New TradeZero will grant RSU Earn Out Awards, and the holders of TradeZero Common Stock immediately prior to the Closing and the holders of the RSU Earn Out Awards will have the right to receive a pro-rata share of up to 9,000,000 additional shares of New TradeZero Common Stock upon the occurrence of certain earn-out triggering events, as follows: (i) 3,000,000 shares upon the date on which the volume weighted average closing sale price of the New TradeZero Common Stock as reported on the New York Stock Exchange (or the stock exchange on which the New TradeZero Common Stock is then listed) for a period of 20 trading days out of 30 consecutive trading days (as equitably adjusted as appropriate to reflect any stock splits, reverse stock splits, stock dividends (including any dividend or distribution of securities convertible into New TradeZero Common Stock), extraordinary cash dividend, reorganization, recapitalization, reclassification, combination, exchange of shares or other like change or transaction with respect to New TradeZero Common Stock) is equal to or greater than $12.00 per share at any time during the Earn Out Period; (ii) 3,000,000 shares upon the date on which the Share Price is equal to or greater than $15.00 per share during the Earn Out Period; and (iii) 3,000,000 shares upon the date on which the Share Price is equal to or greater than $18.00 per share during the Earn Out Period.
On January 26, 2022, we entered into the First Amendment with Merger Sub, Merger Sub II and TradeZero. Pursuant to the First Amendment, the Merger Agreement was amended to (i) clarify that, upon the occurrence of a sale during the Earn Out Period of more than 50% of the total voting power of New TradeZero or all or substantially all of the assets of New TradeZero, the dilutive effect of any Earn Out Shares to be issued in connection with such sale must be taken into account when calculating the Share Price to determine if any triggering events for Earn Out Shares have been achieved, (ii) provide that if any Earn Out Shares are forfeited pursuant to the terms of any applicable RSU Earn Out Awards, such Earn Out Shares shall not be redistributed to the holders of TradeZero Common Stock and (iii) clarify that each of Charter Amendment Proposal B and Charter Amendment Proposal C from the Merger Agreement are not Condition Precedent Proposals (as such term is defined in the Merger Agreement).
For additional information regarding the Merger Agreement, see the Company’s Current Reports on Form 8-K filed by us on October 12, 2021 and January 26, 2022 and the Company’s preliminary proxy statement (as amended), initially filed with the SEC on January 26, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $116,000 in our operating bank account and a working capital deficit of approximately $1,521,000 (excluding tax obligations of approximately $160,000 that may be paid using investment income earned from the trust account).
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the initial public offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to purchase founders shares (as defined below), and loan proceeds from the Sponsor of approximately $31,000 under the Note. We repaid the loan in full on December 22, 2020. Subsequent from the consummation of the initial public offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the initial public offering and the private placement (as defined below) held outside of the trust account.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until June 22, 2022 to consummate a business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Management intends to complete the business combination prior to the liquidation date.
No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after June 22, 2022. We intend to complete the proposed business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by June 22, 2022.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of December 31, 2021. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the initial public offering, and since the closing of the initial public offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest earned on cash equivalents held in trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $5.5 million, which consisted of approximately $8.0 million in non-operating gain from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $110,000 in income on investments held in the trust account, partially offset by approximately $2.2 million in general and administrative expenses, $120,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, and approximately $204,000 in franchise tax.
For the period from June 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $2.3 million, which consisted of approximately $33,000 in general and administrative expenses, $10,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, approximately $107,000 in franchise tax, approximately $1.7 million in non-operating loss from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $469,000 in financing costs - derivative liabilities, partially offset by approximately $11,000 in income on investments held in trust account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On July 10, 2020, the Sponsor purchased 3,737,500 founder shares for an aggregate price of $25,000. On December 17, 2020, pursuant to the amended and restated certificate of incorporation, each founder share outstanding immediately prior to December 17, 2020 was converted into one and two-thirteenths (12/13) founder shares, resulting in an aggregate of 4,312,500 founder shares outstanding. Our initial stockholders agreed to forfeit up to 562,500 founder shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the founder shares would represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the initial public offering. The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on December 22, 2020; thus, these 562,500 founder shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
Our initial stockholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial business combination or earlier if, subsequent to the initial business combination, the closing price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial business combination, and (B) the date following the completion of the initial business combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their Class A common stock for cash, securities or other property. Any permitted transferees will be subject to the same restrictions and other agreements of the initial stockholders with respect to any founder shares.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 4,850,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $4,850,000. Each private placement warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the private placement warrants to the Sponsor was added to the proceeds from the initial public offering to be held in the trust account such that at closing of the initial public offering, $172,500,000 was placed in the trust account.
The private placement warrants (including the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the private placement warrants) are not transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination and they are non-redeemable and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the initial purchasers of the private placement warrants or their permitted transferees. If the private placement warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers of the private placement warrants or their permitted transferees, the private placement warrants will be redeemable by us and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the warrants included in the units sold in the initial public offering. Otherwise, the private placement warrants have terms and provisions that are identical to those of the warrants sold as part of the Units in the initial public offering and have no net cash settlement provisions.
If we do not complete a business combination within 18 months of the initial public offering, then the proceeds will be part of the liquidating distribution to the public stockholders and the warrants issued to the Sponsor will expire worthless.
Related Party Loans
On June 18, 2020, the Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $200,000 to cover expenses related to the initial public offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the initial public offering. We borrowed approximately $31,000 under the Note and fully repaid the Note in full on December 22, 2020.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us working capital loans. If we complete a business combination, we will repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans, but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under working capital loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on Nasdaq until the earlier of our consummation of a Business Combination or our liquidation, we agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from June 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had incurred $120,000 and $10,000 in administrative services expenses under this agreement, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had no balance outstanding for services in connection with such agreement on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
The Sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to the Sponsor, directors, officers or directors, or any of their affiliates. There were approximately $31,000 due to related parties as of December 31, 2021. There was no outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, (and any underlying securities) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional units to cover any over-allotments, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On December 22, 2020 we issued 2,250,000 units in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of the over-allotment option in full. We paid an underwriting discount of $3,450,000 ($0.20 per unit sold) to the underwriters at the closing of the initial public offering on December 22, 2020, with an additional fee (the “Deferred Discount”) of $6,037,500 ($0.35 per unit sold) payable upon our completion of an initial business combination. The Deferred Discount will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When our investments held in the trust account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the trust account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income on investments held in the trust account in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the trust account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, a total of 17,250,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 13,475,000 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net income per share is the same as basic net income per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The public warrants and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. The initial fair value of the public warrants has been measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Subsequent to the public warrants being traded on an active market, the fair value of the public warrants has been based on the observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the private placement warrants was estimated using Black-Scholes. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.