Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Form 10-K and other reports filed by the Company from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, the Company’s management as well as estimates and assumptions made by Company’s management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. When used in the filings, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to the Company or the Company’s management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the current view of the Company with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including the risks contained in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, relating to the Company’s industry, the Company’s operations and results of operations, and any businesses that the Company may acquire. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned.
Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, the Company cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, the Company does not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our consolidated financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We intend for this discussion to provide information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements.
Plan of Operation
The Company’s growth strategy includes expansion of its technology base through organic development efforts, strategic partnerships, and strategic acquisitions where appropriate. The Company provides its broad range of technology solutions with an emphasis on the Vision Technology market sector and, more specifically, the Machine Vision subsector. Machine Vision companies provide imaging-based automatic inspection and analysis for process control for industry with potential expansion into other markets. Duos is currently developing industry solutions for its target markets which will address rail, trucking, aviation and other vehicle-based processes. Duos initial offering, the Railcar Inspection Portal (RIP), provides both freight and transit railroad customers and select government agencies the ability to conduct fully automated railcar inspections of trains while they are moving at full speed.
Specifically, based upon the current and anticipated business growth, the Company is investing in resources to focus on execution within its target markets. We continue to evaluate key requirements within those markets and add development resources to allow us to compete for additional projects to drive additional revenue growth.
Prospects and Outlook
The Company made significant changes to its senior management team in 2020 and further changes in 2021 to improve operational effectiveness. In addition to new “C” level personnel, the Company replaced its software and AI team with stronger talent including promoting one of the senior leaders to the position of Chief Technology Officer. The Company’s Board of Directors was strengthened with the addition of two very experienced leaders. The first is a retired Chief Operating Officer for a Class 1 railroad with more than 50 years of experience in the rail industry. The second is a retired Army General Officer and former CEO of a large, global security and training company contracting with multiple U.S. Government Agencies.
The new leadership team’s focus is to improve operational and technical execution which will in turn enable the commercial side of the business to expand our product set into existing customers and to expand and diversify our current customer base. The issues surrounding COVID-19 are expected to diminish over the course of 2022 and the Company’s primary customers have indicated readiness to order more equipment and services should the Company execute as expected on key deliverables over the next few months.
Additionally, the new CEO has directed that the Company make engineering and software upgrades to the RIP to meet anticipated Federal Railroad Association (FRA), Transport Canada and Association of American Railroad (AAR) standards. The Company is expanding its focus in the rail industry to encompass passenger transportation and is currently in the last stages of a bid for a large, multi-year contract with a national rail carrier. If successful, the Company is expected to deliver at least two RIP solutions along with a long-term services agreement in late 2022 or early 2023.
In addition, the Company is currently investigating other possible market expansion including Aviation, Trucking and Edge Data Centers.
Although the Company’s prospects and outlook are anticipated to be favorable for 2022, investing in our securities involves risk and careful consideration should be made before deciding to purchase our securities. There are many risks that affect our business and results of operations, some of which are beyond our control and unexpected macro events can have a severe impact on the business.
Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth a summary of our Consolidated Statements of Operations that is used in the following discussions of our results of operations:
Revenues
For the full year 2021, there was a 3% overall increase in revenues compared to 2020. The increase was driven by new revenues being recorded after lengthy delays in receiving “notices to proceed” for anticipated new contracts earlier in the year pushed delivery dates into the second half of this year and into 2022. There was a slight decrease in revenue from systems which was more than offset by a 15% increase in services revenue, most of which is recurring in nature. The Company is focusing on increasing its business from services and the increase is the result of new contracts for existing and new systems. This trend is expected to continue into 2022. While anticipated orders continue to be delayed, we are encouraged by the breadth and scope of recent bids in which we have participated, indicating an expected increase in orders in the early months of 2022. As previously discussed, management cautions that because of the delays in anticipated start dates, certain installations may produce revenues towards the end of 2022, some of which may ultimately be recorded in 2023. Additionally, although the industries in which we operate are showing early signs of recovery from the delays as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, other macro-economic effects are anticipated to impact us, including inflation and the current supply chain issues which are extending deadlines for shipment of key components used in our technology systems. The effect of this will be to push some revenue recognition later in the year or into 2023 as previously mentioned. The effects if inflation are not quantifiable at the current time but are beginning to be evident in increased costs for materials and labor and may result in higher costs for project implementation that cannot be wholly or even partially passed on to our customers and thus resulting in delaying our progress towards profitability.
The Company’s capital structure continues to allow us to weather the unexpected delays without significant operational impact and enables us to pursue large projects requiring the ability to deploy major resources. It should be noted that the Company recently increased its working capital to account for an increase in pre-contract procurement activities to avoid a slowdown in revenues caused by delays in receiving certain components. The Company undertook a major review of operations during 2021 and made significant changes in staffing including additional engineering staff and revamping its software development and Artificial Intelligence staffing. Although in early 2021 the Company implemented a “rapid development” initiative which was intended to be able to respond to market driven demand more quickly, this effort has been somewhat negated by ongoing supply chain issues. Where this effort has shortened delivery times on major projects and was expected to result in significant revenue growth in the last six months of the year and beyond, the previously discussed supply chain issues have not allowed the anticipated benefits to be realized at this time. The Company is monitoring the situation and is continuing to procure materials ahead of contract award.
The Company also expects to continue the growth with new revenue from other existing customers which we expect to be coming on-line in the next several months. As previously noted, the slight decrease in technology systems revenues was offset by an increase in services revenue as the result of new maintenance contracts being established as well as renewals of existing contracts and a shift to the next generation of technology systems which are currently being installed. The services portion of revenues are driven by successful completion on projects and represent services and support for those installations. The Company expects to continue the growth with new, long term recurring revenue from existing customers which will be coming on-line in the next several months.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues largely comprises equipment, labor and overhead necessary to support the implementation of new systems and support and maintenance of existing systems. Cost of revenues on technology systems increased during the period compared to the equivalent period in 2020 by a greater amount than the increase in revenues. The main reason for the continuing high level of cost is the result of additional work being necessary on certain of the Company’s installations to resolve newly identified quality issues which are now mostly resolved as well as higher costs of materials due to supply chain disruptions. There was also a significant increase in cost related to the new deployment of an undercarriage technology. Many of these costs were not envisioned by the original scope of work. However, the costs are expected to be much lower going forward as a percentage of the overall system price. As previously noted, the Company’s organization and related cost structure was realigned to give the capability to manufacture, install and support multiple production systems simultaneously. Prior to this realignment, the Company’s organization was focused on primarily research and development with implementation resources being allocated as necessary. In accordance with this shift in structure, certain staff were re-assigned or replaced, and new staff added in key areas, particularly software engineering, IT and AI.
In conjunction with this change, increased costs are now being recognized against project and support revenues with a similar reduction in costs previously recognized for research and development, engineering development and internal support. In concert with this, there is a continued focus on construction costs and savings through efficiency, but the Company has elected to expand its key employees in anticipation of expected sales growth in technology systems and services in 2022. As previously discussed in the first quarter of 2021, certain expenses related to installed equipment upgrades were greater than anticipated for a variety of reasons including cost overruns on the first installation of new technologies and certain implementation inefficiencies related to Covid-19 restrictions such as extended quarantines and additional contract staff necessary to complete projects on time. These changes had a negative impact on the gross margin (see below), but this is expected to be a short-term impact, offset by increases in revenue later in 2022. It is also expected to have positive long-term impact as the Company is prepared to deliver a higher number of systems in a given period, with a shorter time of implementation and with better quality and reliability as the operations become standardized in anticipation of expected higher demand for systems, particularly in the rail industry.
Cost of revenues increased on services and consulting versus the increase in revenues on services and consulting. The overall positive trend on service and consulting revenue is expected to continue as more of the Company’s business is from recurring revenue. Costs of service are expected to increase in future years but at a slower rate than revenue growth. The Company focused on streamlining support operations in 2021 and despite the additional resources allocated to these activities in anticipation of higher recurring revenue in 2022 and beyond we expect higher gross margins as the Company grows. As discussed previously, the impact of inflation may negatively affect the costs of revenues such that we may experience higher costs for materials and labor, including higher employee and sub-contractor costs that cannot be passed along in all cases. Management is continuing to monitor this situation and expects to take actions as the full impact of these cost increases is understood. This may take the form of higher prices and continued evaluation of costs to attempt to reduce the overall costs of a system to offset the additional expenses, although this is not assured.
Gross Margin
As previously discussed, the Company has revamped its operations to support an anticipated increase in the number of new systems going forward. The resultant additional cost of revenues, while somewhat offset by decreases in G&A expenses, was not covered by a comparable increase in revenues as of the third quarter 2021. However, there was an improvement in the fourth quarter of 2021 which is part of an overall improving trend in this area. The overall negative gross margin was $2,559,170 versus 2020 which was a positive $235,836. The small increase in year over year revenues, more than 50% of which came in the fourth quarter is a positive trend. The main reason for the continuing high level of cost is the result of additional development work being necessary on certain of the Company’s more complex installations as well as higher costs of materials due to supply chain disruptions. There was also a significant increase in cost related to the new deployment of an undercarriage technology. Many of these costs were not envisioned by the original scope of work. These higher costs are anticipated to be offset in by higher revenues in 2022 with the net result being a move to a positive gross margin as the business expands. In addition, we anticipate an improvement in the overall gross margin for the full year reporting in 2022, with much of the improvement coming in the second half of the year. As previously discussed, certain macro-economic factors including the current supply chain issues could delay that improvement into 2023.
Operating Expenses
Overall operating expenses were lower by 29% in 2021 offsetting some of the increased costs previously discussed. A 72% increase in sales and marketing costs was more than offset by a 44% decrease in overall administration costs. This decrease was partially due to the recording of the ex-CEO’s separation agreement during the same period in 2020 and other overall reductions in cost as part of the restructuring of the business. Additionally, certain costs to support the organization as it operated at that time were eliminated as an offset to the increases in operations staff as described previously.
Loss From Operations
The losses from operations for the years ended, December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $7,456,951 and $6,634,428, respectively. The increase in losses from operations during the year was the result of mostly flat revenues, higher cost of sales related to the recent organizational changes and certain cost overruns on the initial deployment of some newly developed systems. The combination of these resulted in negative gross margin for the year, partially offset by lower total operating expenses. The Company previously expected to achieve profitability in the fourth quarter through improvements in gross margin from higher revenues and lower operating costs although the Company did not achieve breakeven as the result of unanticipated additional costs for implementations for certain new complex technologies being installed for the first time. Due to contract and manufacturing delays earlier in 2021, implementation was delayed until late in the year and took place in locations with harsh weather conditions requiring additional staffing. The Company is expecting improvements in operating margins in 2022 although it does not expect to breakeven on an operating basis until 2023 or thereafter depending upon the impacts of supply chain and inflation.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $20,268 and $150,137, respectively. The reduction in interest expense was primarily due to the Company’s equity financing actions in 2020 reducing or eliminating debt. This was partially offset by interest earned from substantial additional capital held in reserve (see Other Income).
Other Income
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $1,468,318 and $37,130, respectively. The increase is mainly due to the PPP loan forgiveness recorded in the first quarter of 2021.
Net Loss
The net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $ 6,008,901 and $6,747,435, respectively. The decrease in net loss is primarily attributable to the effect of the PPP loan forgiveness offset by the increases in project expenses as previously described. Net loss per common share was $1.63 and $2.03 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a cash balance of $893,720.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the major components of our statements of cash flows data for the periods presented:
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $6,579,378 and $4,231,439, respectively. The increase in net cash used in operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was the result of higher expenditures related to current projects as previously discussed as well as expenditures related to future project execution in anticipation of new projects starting in the fourth quarter of 2021. In addition, there are several changes in assets and liabilities that increased the use of cash in operations including charges related to the new building that the company now occupies including a $600,000 security deposit. Notable changes are an increase in deferred revenue as the result of an increase in pre-paid service contracts offset by decreases in contract liabilities. Additionally, $1,410,270 in funding from the CARES Act PPP loan program plus deferred interest was forgiven. The Company accrued interest in the amount of $648 during 2021 and $10,577 during 2020. The effects of other changes were largely neutral.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $552,940 and $287,331, respectively. The Company continues to invest in computing and lab equipment as reflected in the increase in 2021.
Net cash provided in financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4,056,938 and $8,431,621, respectively. Cash flows provided by financing activities during 2021 were primarily attributable to proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock to two shareholders in the amount of $4,500,000.
During 2021, we funded our operations through the sale of our equity (or equity linked) securities, and through revenues generated and cash received from ongoing project execution, services and associated maintenance revenues. As of March 28, 2022, we have cash on hand of approximately $5,700,000. We have approximately $165,500 in monthly lease and other mandatory payments, not including payroll and ordinary expenses which are due monthly.
On a long-term basis, our liquidity is dependent on the continuation and expansion of operations and receipt of revenues. Our current capital and revenues are sufficient to fund such expansion although we are now less dependent on timely payments by our customers for projects and work in process, however we expect such timely payments to continue. Material cash requirements will be satisfied within the normal course of business including substantial upfront payments from our customers prior to starting projects. In some limited cases, the Company may elect to purchase materials and supplies in advance of contract award but where there is a high probability of that award. Most, if not all, high value items that are pre-purchased, can be re-purposed if necessary. The maximum amount of material cash requirements not currently supported by up-front customer deposits is expected to be less than $1million.
Demand for the products and services will be dependent on, among other things, market acceptance of our products and services, the technology market in general, and general economic conditions, which are cyclical in nature. In as much as a major portion of our activities is the receipt of revenues from the sales of our products and services, our business operations may be adversely affected by our competitors and prolonged recession periods although these are not considered to be a factor at present.
Liquidity
Under Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, 2014-15, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern (Subtopic 205-40) (“ASC 205-40”), the Company has the responsibility to evaluate whether conditions and/or events raise substantial doubt about its ability to meet its future financial obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. As required by ASC 205-40, this evaluation shall initially not take into consideration the potential mitigating effects of plans that have not been fully implemented as of the date the financial statements are issued. Management has assessed the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern in accordance with the requirement of ASC 205-40.
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had a negative working capital of $651,381 and an accumulated deficit of $45,497,051 at December 31, 2021. During the same period in 2020, the Company had a positive working capital of $2,167,058 and an accumulated deficit of $39,488,150. In a previous financial report, the Company had raised substantial doubt about continuing as a going concern. This was principally due to a lack of working capital prior to an underwritten offering which was completed during the first quarter of 2022 (the “2022 Offering”).
As previously noted, the Company raised $4,500,000 from existing shareholders through the issuance of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock. Although additional investment is not assured, the Company is comfortable that it would be able to raise sufficient capital to support expanded operations based on an anticipated increase in business activity. In the long run, the continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent upon the ability of the Company to continue executing the plan described above, generate enough revenue, and attain consistently profitable operations. Although the current global pandemic related to the coronavirus (Covid-19) has affected our operations, particularly in supply chain, we now believe that this is expected to be an ongoing issue and our working capital assumptions reflect this new reality. The Company cannot currently quantify the uncertainty related to the pandemic and its effects on our customers in the coming quarters. We have analyzed our cash flow under “stress test” conditions and have determined that we have sufficient liquid assets on hand to maintain operations for at least twelve months from the date of this report. A notable recent success is the approval of the Company for “bonding” in the amount of approximately$8 million for an upcoming major project.
The Company was successful in securing a loan of $1,410,270 during the second quarter of 2020 from the Small Business Administration via the PPP/CARES Act program which further bolstered the Company’s cash reserves. This loan was forgiven in the first quarter of 2021 and leaves the Company essentially debt free. The Company has also been successful in increasing its working capital surplus after receiving proceeds from the 2021 Offering of $4,500,000 and more recently, in the first quarter of 2022, receiving net proceeds of approximately $5,500,000 from the successful takedown of the Company’s “shelf registration” S3. This gives us the capital required to fund the fundamental business changes that we undertook in the last quarter of 2020, further changes throughout 2021 and maintenance of our business strategy overall. In addition, management has been taking and continues to take actions including, but not limited to, elimination of certain costs that do not contribute to short term revenue, and re-aligning both management and staffing with a focus on improving certain skill sets necessary to build growth and profitability and focusing product strategy on opportunities that are likely to bear results in the relatively short term. During 2021, management took further significant actions including reorganizing our engineering and technical teams and selectively improving organizational efficiency to effectively grow the business as the expected order flow resumes in 2022. Upon completion of the 2022 Offering, management has raised sufficient working capital to meet its needs for the next 12-months without the need to raise further capital. Since the advent of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Company has experienced a significant slowdown in closing new projects due to cautious actions by current and potential clients. We continue to be successful in identifying new business opportunities and are focused on re-establishing a backlog of projects.
Management believes that, at this time, the conditions in our market space with ongoing contract delays, the consequent need to procure certain materials in advance of a binding contract and the additional time needed to execute on new contracts previously reported have put a strain on our cash reserves. However, recent events including a $5.5M injection of funds from a sale of securities, significant recent orders and the overall stabilization of the business indicate that there is no longer substantial doubt for the Company to continue as a going concern for a period of twelve months from the issuance of this report. We continue executing the plan to grow our business and achieve profitability without the requirement to raise additional capital for existing operations for 2022 although we may do so to fund selective opportunities that may arise. Management has extensively evaluated our requirements for the next 12 months and has determined that the Company currently has sufficient cash to operate for at least that period.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. The most significant estimates in the accompanying consolidated financial statements include the allowance on accounts receivable, valuation of deferred tax assets, valuation of intangible and other long-lived assets, estimates of net contract revenues and the total estimated costs to determine progress toward contract completion, valuation of warrants issued with debt and valuation of stock-based awards. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the accounting policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations.
Revenue Recognition and Contract Accounting
The Company generates revenue from four sources: (1) Technology Systems; (2) Technical Support; (3) Consulting Services and (4) AI Technologies.
Technology Systems
The Company constructs intelligent technology systems consisting of materials and labor under customer contracts. Revenues and related costs on project revenue are recognized based on ASC 606-10-25-27, where control of a good or service transfers over time if the entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date including a profit margin or reasonable return on capital. Control is deemed to pass to the customer instantaneously as the goods are manufactured and revenue is recognized accordingly.
In addition, the Company has adopted ASC 606-10-55-21 such that if the cost incurred is not proportionate to the progress in satisfying the performance obligation, we adjust the input method to recognize revenue only to the extent of the cost incurred. Therefore, the Company will recognize revenue at an equal amount to the cost of the goods to satisfy the performance obligation. To accurately reflect revenue recognition based on the input method, the Company has adopted the implementation guidance as set out in ASC 606-10-55-187 through 192.
Under this method, contract revenues are recognized over the performance period of the contract in direct proportion to the costs incurred. Costs include direct material, direct labor, subcontract labor and other allocable indirect costs. All un-allocable indirect costs and corporate general and administrative costs are also charged to the periods as incurred. Any recognized revenues that have not been billed to a customer are recorded as an asset in “contract assets”. Any billings of customers more than recognized revenues are recorded as a liability in “contract liabilities”. However, in the event a loss on a contract is foreseen, the Company will recognize the loss when such loss is determined.
AI Technologies
The Company has begun to derive revenue from applications that incorporate artificial intelligence (AI) in the form of predetermined algorithms to provide important operating information to the users of our systems. The revenue generated from these applications of AI consists of an annual application maintenance fee which will be recognized ratably over the year, plus fees for the design, development, testing and incorporation of new algorithms into the system which will be recognized upon completion of each deliverable.
Technical Support
Maintenance and technical support services are provided on both an as-needed and extended-term basis and may include providing both parts and labor. Maintenance and technical support provided outside of a maintenance contract are on an as-requested basis, and revenue is recognized as the services are provided. Revenue for maintenance and technical support provided on an extended-term basis is recognized ratably over the term of the contract.
For sales arrangements that do not involve multiple elements such as professional services, which are of short-term duration, revenues are recognized when services are completed.
Consulting Services
The Company’s consulting services business generates revenues under contract with customers from three sources: (1) Professional Services (consulting and auditing); (2) Software licensing with optional hardware sales; and (3) Customer Service (training and maintenance support).
For sales arrangements that do not involve performance obligations:
(1) Revenues for professional services, which are of short-term duration, are recognized when services are completed;
(2) For all periods reflected in this report, software license sales have been one-time sales of a perpetual license to use our software product and the customer also has the option to purchase third-party manufactured handheld devices from us if they purchase our software license. Accordingly, the revenue is recognized upon delivery of the software and delivery of the hardware, as applicable, to the customer;
(3) Training sales are one-time upfront short-term training sessions and are recognized after the service has been performed; and
(4) Maintenance/support is an optional product sold to our software license customers under one-year contracts. Accordingly, maintenance payments received upfront are deferred and recognized over the contract term.
Multiple Elements
Arrangements with customers may involve multiple elements including project revenue and maintenance services in our Intelligent Technology Systems business. Maintenance will occur after the project is completed and may be provided on an extended-term basis or on an as-needed basis. In our consulting services business, multiple elements may include any of the above four sources. Training and maintenance on software products may occur after the software product sale while other services may occur before or after the software product sale and may not relate to the software product. Revenue recognition for a multiple element arrangement is as follows:
Each element is accounted for separately when each element has value to the customer on a standalone basis and there is Company specific objective evidence of selling price of each deliverable. For revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables, the Company allocates the total customer arrangement to the separate units of accounting based on their relative selling prices as determined by the price of the items when sold separately. Once the selling price is allocated, the revenue for each element is recognized using the applicable criteria under GAAP as discussed above for elements sold in non-multiple element arrangements. A delivered item or items that do not qualify as a separate unit of accounting within the arrangement are combined with the other applicable undelivered items within the arrangement. The allocation of arrangement consideration and the recognition of revenue is then determined for those combined deliverables as a single unit of accounting. The Company sells its various services and software and hardware products at established prices on a standalone basis which provides Company specific objective evidence of selling price for purposes of multiple element relative selling price allocation. The Company only sells maintenance services or spare parts based on its established rates after it has completed a system integration project for a customer. The customer is not required to purchase maintenance services. All elements in multiple element arrangements with Company customers qualify as separate units of account for revenue recognition purposes.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are stated at estimated net realizable value. Accounts receivable are comprised of balances due from customers net of estimated allowances for uncollectible accounts. In determining the collections on the account, historical trends are evaluated, and specific customer issues are reviewed to arrive at appropriate allowances. The Company reviews its accounts to estimate losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required payments. Any required allowance is based on specific analysis of past due accounts and also considers historical trends of write-offs. Past due status is based on how recently payments have been received from customers.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of its property, equipment, and other long-lived assets in accordance with FASB ASC 360-10-35-15 “Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets”, which requires recognition of impairment of long-lived assets in the event the net book value of such assets exceed the estimated future undiscounted cash flows attributable to such assets or the business to which such intangible assets relate. This guidance requires that long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.