Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-looking statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, contains statements that are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws and as such are intended to be covered by the safe harbor for "forward-looking statements" provided by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements could include, among other things, DaVita's response to and the expected future impacts of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), including statements about our balance sheet and liquidity, our expenses and expense offsets, revenues, billings and collections, potential need, ability or willingness to use any funds under government relief programs, availability or cost of supplies, treatment volumes, mix expectation, such as the percentage or number of patients under commercial insurance, the availability, acceptance, impact, administration and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines, treatments and therapies, the continuing impact on the U.S. and global economies, unemployment and labor market conditions, and overall impact on our patients and teammates, as well as other statements regarding our future operations, financial condition and prospects, expenses, strategic initiatives, government and commercial payment rates, expectations related to value-based care, integrated kidney care and Medicare Advantage plan enrollment and our ongoing stock repurchase program. All statements in this report, other than statements of historical fact, are forward-looking statements. Without limiting the foregoing, statements including the words "expect," "intend," "will," "could," "plan," "anticipate," "believe," and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on DaVita's current expectations and are based solely on information available as of the date of this report. DaVita undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of changed circumstances, new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required by law. Actual future events and results could differ materially from any forward-looking statements due to numerous factors that involve substantial known and unknown risks and uncertainties. These risks and uncertainties include, among other things:
•the continuing impact of the dynamic and evolving COVID-19 pandemic, including, without limitation, on our patients, teammates, physician partners, suppliers, business, operations, reputation, financial condition and results of operations; the government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including, among other things, federal, state and local vaccine mandates or surveillance testing requirements and the extent to which they may ultimately be applicable to us; the pandemic's continuing impact on the U.S. and global economies, unemployment, labor market conditions, inflation and evolving monetary policies; the availability, acceptance, impact and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines, treatments and therapies; further spread or resurgence of the virus, including as a result of the emergence of new strains of the virus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants; the continuing impact of the pandemic on our revenue and non-acquired growth due to lower treatment volumes; COVID-19's impact on the chronic kidney disease (CKD) population and our patient population including on the mortality of these patients; any potential negative impact on our commercial mix or the number of our patients covered by commercial insurance plans; continued increased COVID-19-related costs; supply chain challenges and disruptions, including with respect to our clinical supplies; and higher salary and wage expense driven in part by labor market conditions and a high demand for our clinical personnel, any of which may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks and uncertainties discussed below, and in many cases, lead to impacts that persist even after the pandemic subsides;
•the extent to which the ongoing implementation of healthcare reform, or changes in or new legislation, regulations or guidance, enforcement thereof or related litigation result in a reduction in coverage or reimbursement rates for our services, a reduction in the number of patients enrolled in higher-paying commercial plans or that are enrolled in or select Medicare Advantage plans or other material impacts to our business or operations; or our making incorrect assumptions about how our patients will respond to any such developments;
•risks arising from potential changes in laws, regulations or requirements applicable to us, such as potential and proposed federal and/or state legislation, regulation, ballot, executive action or other initiatives, including without limitation those related to healthcare and/or labor matters, such as AB 290 in California;
•the impact of the political environment and related developments on the current healthcare marketplace and on our business, including with respect to the Affordable Care Act, the exchanges and many other core aspects of the current healthcare marketplace, as well as the composition of the U.S. Supreme Court and the current presidential administration and congressional majority;
•legal and compliance risks, such as our continued compliance with complex, and at times, evolving government regulations and requirements;
•noncompliance by us or our business associates with any privacy or security laws or any security breach by us or a third party involving the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized use or disclosure of confidential information;
•the concentration of profits generated by higher-paying commercial payor plans for which there is continued downward pressure on average realized payment rates, and a reduction in the number or percentage of our patients under such plans, including, without limitation, as a result of restrictive plan designs, restrictions or prohibitions on the use and/or availability of charitable premium assistance, which may result in the loss of revenues or patients, or our making incorrect assumptions about how our patients will respond to any change in financial assistance from charitable organizations;
•our ability to successfully implement our strategies with respect to integrated kidney care and value-based care initiatives and home based dialysis in the desired time frame and in a complex, dynamic and highly regulated environment, including, among other things, maintaining our existing business; meeting growth expectations; recovering our investments; entering into agreements with payors, third party vendors and others on terms that are competitive and, as appropriate, prove actuarially sound; structuring operations, agreements and arrangements to comply with evolving rules and regulations; finding, training and retaining appropriate staff; and further developing our integrated care and other capabilities to provide competitive programs at scale;
•a reduction in government payment rates under the Medicare End Stage Renal Disease program, state Medicaid or other government-based programs and the impact of the Medicare Advantage benchmark structure;
•changes in pharmaceutical practice patterns, reimbursement and payment policies and processes, or pharmaceutical pricing, including with respect to hypoxia inducible factors, among other things;
•our ability to develop and maintain relationships with physicians and hospitals, changing affiliation models for physicians, and the emergence of new models of care or other initiatives introduced by the government or private sector that, among other things, may erode our patient base and impact reimbursement rates;
•our ability to complete acquisitions, mergers, dispositions, joint ventures or other strategic transactions that we might announce or be considering, on terms favorable to us or at all, or to integrate and successfully operate any business we may acquire or have acquired, or to successfully expand our operations and services in markets outside the United States, or to businesses outside of dialysis;
•our ability to attract, retain and motivate teammates and our ability to manage operating cost increases or productivity decreases whether due to union organizing activities, legislative or other changes, demand for labor, volatility and uncertainty in the labor market, the current challenging labor market conditions, or other reasons;
•our aspirations, goals and disclosures related to environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters, including evolving regulatory requirements affecting ESG standards, measurements and reporting requirements; the availability of suppliers that can meet our sustainability standards; and our ability to recruit, develop and retain diverse talent in our labor markets;
•continued increased competition from dialysis providers and others, and other potential marketplace changes, including increased investment in and availability of funding to new entrants in the dialysis and pre-dialysis marketplace;
•the variability of our cash flows, including without limitation any extended billing or collections cycles; the risk that we may not be able to generate or access sufficient cash in the future to service our indebtedness or to fund our other liquidity needs; and the risk that we may not be able to refinance our indebtedness as it becomes due, on terms favorable to us or at all;
•factors that may impact our ability to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase program and the timing of any such stock repurchases, as well as our use of a considerable amount of available funds to repurchase stock;
•risks arising from the use of accounting estimates, judgments and interpretations in our financial statements;
•impairment of our goodwill, investments or other assets; and
•the other risk factors, trends and uncertainties set forth in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the other risks and uncertainties discussed in any subsequent reports that we file or furnish with the SEC from time to time.
The following should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements.
Company overview
Our principal business is to provide dialysis and related lab services to patients in the United States, which we refer to as our U.S. dialysis business. We also operate our U.S. ancillary services and strategic initiatives and our international operations, which we collectively refer to as our ancillary services, as well as our corporate administrative support. Our U.S. dialysis business is a leading provider of kidney dialysis services in the U.S. for patients suffering from chronic kidney failure, also known as end stage renal disease (ESRD) or end stage kidney disease (ESKD).
On June 19, 2019, we completed the sale of our prior DaVita Medical Group (DMG) business to Collaborative Care Holdings, LLC, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group Inc. As a result of this transaction, DMG's results of operations have been reported as discontinued operations for all periods presented and DMG is not included below in this Management's Discussion and Analysis.
Notwithstanding the challenges of responding to the novel coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19), our year-over-year overall financial performance in 2021 benefited from increased revenue, which was primarily due to higher average revenue per treatment in our U.S. dialysis business and acquired growth in our international business. In addition our 2021 financial performance benefited from lower pharmaceutical unit costs and intensity, advocacy costs and COVID-19-related compensation expenses as compared to the prior year. These benefits were partially offset by a decline in treatment volume and increases in compensation expense, including labor costs (both operating and overhead) and health benefits expense.
Drivers of our financial performance in 2021 included the following:
•improved certain key clinical outcomes in our U.S. dialysis business, including exceeding our pre-pandemic level of patients receiving kidney transplants;
•revenue growth of 0.1% in U.S. dialysis and 19.9% in international operations;
•operating income growth of 3.0% in U.S. dialysis and 82.6% in international operations;
•a net increase of 18 international dialysis centers;
•provision of integrated kidney care to 16,000 patients in risk-based integrated care arrangements and an additional 7,000 patients in other integrated care arrangements;
•operating cash flows of $1.931 billion from continuing operations;
•repurchase of 13,877,193 shares of our common stock for aggregate consideration of $1.546 billion, and reduction of our share count by 11.5% year-over-year;
•completion of an unregistered add-on offering of $1 billion aggregate principal amount to the existing 4.625% senior notes due June 1, 2030 (the Additional 2030 Notes); and
•impact of COVID-19 as further discussed in Part I. Item 1 "Business" and under the heading "COVID-19 and its impact on our business" below.
In 2022, we expect that COVID-19 will continue to impact our business and financial performance though the magnitude of these impacts remains difficult to predict and subject to significant uncertainty due to a number of factors, as described in further detail below under the heading "COVID-19 and its impact on our business." On treatment volume, we continue to face pressure primarily driven by the impact of COVID-19 on mortality rates for dialysis patients due to recent surges of infections, which may be further compounded by any future surges, if such surges occur. We anticipate that this pressure also will be magnified by continued slowing industry growth and continued competitive activity in 2022. On reimbursement rate, we expect growth in aggregate, primarily due to the expected net market basket update for Medicare treatments as well as a continuing increase in anticipated Medicare Advantage enrollment due to the 21st Century Cures Act, albeit less than what we experienced in 2021, partially offset by the scheduled resumption of Medicare sequestration later in 2022. On cost, we continue to expect increasing inflationary pressure on wage rates and other costs, increased costs due to the challenging labor market conditions, and an increase in depreciation expenses due to the general release of our new clinical IT platform in 2022, partially offset by continued anticipated savings on pharmaceutical costs. We expect to incur elevated advocacy costs in 2022, in-line with our advocacy costs incurred in 2018 and 2020, respectively. We also expect to continue making investments to expand our ability to offer home-based dialysis service options and further advance our integrated care and value-based care initiatives in 2022. Finally, considerable uncertainty exists surrounding the continued development of the various governmental laws, regulations and other requirements that impact our business.
The discussion below includes analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, in its Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations".
References to the "Notes" in the discussion below refer to the notes to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K at Item 15, "Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules" as referred from Part II Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
COVID-19 and its impact on our business
As noted above, the continued impacts and disruptions to our business in connection with of the COVID-19 pandemic could have a material adverse impact on our patients, teammates, physician partners, suppliers, business, operations, reputation, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and/or liquidity.
Operational and Financial Impacts
During this time of great and continued challenge, we continue our focus on the health, safety and well-being of our patients, teammates and physician partners and helping to ensure that our patients have the ability to maintain continuity of care throughout this crisis, whether in the hospital, outpatient or home setting. To that end, we have dedicated and continue to dedicate substantial resources in response to COVID-19, including the implementation of additional protocols and initiatives to help safely maintain continuity of care for our patients and help protect our caregivers. For example, we implemented dedicated care shifts for patients with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 and other enhanced clinical practices, including procuring additional equipment and clinical supplies, such as personal protective equipment (PPE). These efforts are part of a wider Prepare, Prevent, Respond and Recover program that we have implemented in connection with the pandemic, which also includes operational protocols such as the redistribution of teammates, machines and supplies across the country as needed and continued investment in and utilization of telehealth capabilities and the administration of COVID-19 vaccines. We also have maintained business process continuity during the pandemic by enabling most back office teammates to work remotely. We carefully monitor the efficacy of our response protocols and their impact on our operations and strategic priorities as the pandemic continues. Certain temporary changes made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic could become permanent, which could have an adverse impact on our business.
Due in part to these protocols and initiatives, we have incurred costs related to COVID-19 in 2021, and we expect to continue to incur extended costs in the future in connection with our response to COVID-19, and the cumulative impact of these costs could be material. Among other things, our response to COVID-19 has resulted in higher salary and wage expense, and we have provided, and may provide in the future, substantial financial support to our teammates, which may include relief reimbursement. We also continued to experience significant cost inflation on PPE in 2021, though certain other costs related to our COVID-19 response have decreased since the peak of the COVID-19 surge in the fourth quarter of 2020. We believe that the cost of these medical supplies will remain elevated and as our COVID-19 response continues, we expect to continue to incur extended and significant additional costs for these supplies, and we expect that certain of these increased costs may persist due to the overall challenges and disruptions of global supply chains. These global supply chain challenges have impacted the availability of certain of our equipment and clinical supplies. Prolonged strain on global supply chains may result in additional equipment and clinical supply shortages, disruptions, delays or associated price increases that could impact our ability to provide dialysis services or the cost of providing those services, among other things. On the other hand, our COVID-19 response has reduced certain other expenses, such as those related to teammate travel, though it remains uncertain how much of these reductions, if any, will persist after the pandemic subsides and more teammates return to their respective office locations.
Our business is labor intensive and our financial and operating results have been and continue to be sensitive to variations in labor-related costs and productivity. We have historically faced and expect to continue to face costs and difficulties in hiring and retaining caregivers due to a nationwide shortage of skilled clinical personnel. These challenges have been heightened by the increased demand for and demand upon such personnel attributed to the ongoing pandemic. As referenced above, the labor market is challenging and continues to experience volatility, uncertainty and labor supply shortages, particularly in healthcare. In addition, federal and state agencies have announced or released rules relating to COVID-19 vaccination requirements that relate to our teammates, providers and patients. Certain of these regulations are subject to ongoing legal challenge as further described in Part I, Item 1. Business of this Form 10-K under the heading "Government Regulation-COVID-19 Response". The cumulative impact of these mandates, some of which have already gone into effect, contributes further to the volatility and uncertainty in the labor market and may ultimately further exacerbate labor shortages. These conditions have adversely impacted, and may continue to adversely impact, our ability to attract and retain employees, particularly clinical personnel. As part of our efforts in this highly competitive market, we have provided our teammates with additional compensation, among other things. In 2022, we expect to provide our teammates with higher than usual wage
increases, which will put additional pressure on our cost structure going forward. We have experienced staffing shortages and disruptions as a result of current labor market conditions and the current Omicron surge, and further staffing shortages or disruptions, if material, could lead to the unplanned closures of certain centers or adversely impact clinical operations, and may otherwise have a material adverse impact on our ability to provide dialysis services or the cost of providing those services, among other things. Prolonged volatility, uncertainty, labor supply shortages and other challenging labor market conditions, including, among other things, due to inflationary pressures or evolving monetary policies, could also have an adverse impact on our ability to execute on our strategic initiatives, and ultimately could have a material adverse impact on our labor costs, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
In 2021, treatment volumes reflected continued pressure primarily driven by the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on mortality rates for dialysis patients which has had a negative impact on our patient census. Because ESKD patients may be older than the average American and generally have comorbidities, several of which are risk factors for COVID-19, we believe the mortality rate of infected patients has been higher in the dialysis population than in the general population, and COVID-19 also could impact the CKD population differently. The recent surges associated with the Delta and Omicron variants led to a significant increase in COVID-19 cases in our patient population. At the peak of the most recent surge in January 2022, the new case count was more than two times as high as the peak from winter 2020. While the mortality rate associated with this latest surge preliminarily appears to be lower than in prior surges, it is too early to provide a comprehensive assessment. The fourth quarter of 2021 saw a slight decrease in incremental mortality on an absolute basis compared to the third quarter of 2021. Over the longer term, we believe that changes in mortality in both the CKD and ESKD populations due to COVID-19 will continue to depend primarily on the infection rate, case fatality rate, the age and health status of affected patients, and access to and continued efficacy of vaccinations or other treatments or therapies, as well as willingness to be vaccinated. We expect that the impact of COVID-19 is likely to continue to negatively impact our revenue and non-acquired growth for a period of time even as the pandemic subsides due to the compounding impact of mortalities, among other things. However, determining the extent to which these impacts should be directly attributable to COVID-19 is difficult due to testing and reporting limitations, and other factors that may drive treatment volumes and new admissions over time, such as the number of transplants or deferred admissions. Depending on the ultimate severity and duration of the pandemic, the magnitude of these cumulative impacts could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to contain the virus have impacted the global economy, resulting in, among other things, volatility and uncertainty in labor market conditions as noted above. These impacts could ultimately result in a materially reduced share of our patients being covered by commercial insurance plans, with more patients being covered by lower-paying government insurance programs or being uninsured. These effects may persist after the pandemic subsides as, among other things, our patients could experience permanent changes in their insurance coverage as a result of changes to their employment status. In the event such a material reduction occurs in the share of our patients covered by commercial insurance plans, it would have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. Despite the broader economic conditions in the U.S. for the year ended December 31, 2021, our commercial mix in 2021 slightly improved as compared to our commercial mix in 2020. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our commercial mix will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and difficult to predict.
Federal, State and Local Government Response
The government response to COVID-19 has been wide-ranging and will continue to develop over time. As a result, we may not be able to accurately predict the nature, timing or extent of the impact of such changes on the markets in which we conduct business or on the other participants that operate in those markets, or any potential changes to the extensive set of federal, state and local laws, regulations and requirements that govern our business, including for example, the COVID-19 vaccine mandates and similar state and local mandates referenced above.
We have worked with certain government agencies to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, and in certain cases have sought waivers of regulatory requirements. We have also contracted with the federal government to provide direct administration of COVID-19 vaccines to our patients and teammates at our clinics. Approximately 73% of our patients have received at least one dose of the COVID-19 vaccine and nearly all of our clinical teammates are fully vaccinated or have an exemption. Certain of these vaccines are currently available under emergency use authorizations, and there can be no assurance that our patients and caregivers will choose to receive a COVID-19 vaccine or that the vaccines will prove to be as safe and effective as currently understood by the scientific community, particularly as it may relate to variants of the virus. In addition, we may encounter difficulties with the availability and storage of the vaccines, or experience other complications related to administering the vaccines, some of which have multiple dose requirements, or may include the administration of "boosters". As of December 31, 2021, we had administered approximately 217,000 COVID-19 vaccines and boosters due in part to the state and federal vaccine allocations to dialysis providers. Certain state and federal agencies, including the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and CMS, have released requirements, or are in the process of modifying existing requirements associated with the continued protection of employees as it relates to COVID-19. These requirements related to,
among other things, initial and booster vaccines, PPE, fit-testing, surveillance testing of our teammates for COVID-19 and other increased obligations with which we must comply may further impact our costs, create operational challenges, negatively impact our ability to attract and retain employees and create a risk of non-compliance if we are not able to successfully implement such requirements. We operate in a complex and highly regulated environment, and the novel nature of our COVID-19 response, including, for example, with respect to regulatory waivers, our administration of the COVID-19 vaccines, and our efforts to comply with evolving rules and regulations, may increase our exposure to legal, regulatory and clinical risks.
In addition, federal COVID-19 relief legislation suspended the 2% Medicare sequestration from May 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021. The Protecting Medicare and American Farmers from Sequester Cuts Act, signed into law on December 10, 2021, extended the suspension of the 2% Medicare sequestration from December 31, 2021 through March 31, 2022, with 1% Medicare sequestration beginning April 1, 2022 through June 30, 2022 and 2% Medicare sequestration beginning July 1, 2022. While in effect, the suspension of sequestration has significantly increased, and will continue to significantly increase, our revenues.
We believe the ultimate impact of this public health crisis on the Company will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and difficult to predict, including among others the ultimate severity and duration of the pandemic; further spread or resurgence of the virus, including as a result of the emergence of new strains of the virus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants; COVID-19's impact on the chronic kidney disease (CKD) patient population and our patient population, including on the mortality of these patients; the availability, acceptance, impact and efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines, treatments and therapies; the pandemic’s continuing impact on our revenue and non-acquired growth due to lower treatment volumes, the U.S. and global economies, unemployment, labor market conditions, inflation and monetary policies; the potential negative impact on our commercial mix or the number of patients covered by commercial insurance plans; continued increased COVID-related costs; supply chain challenges and disruptions; the responses of our competitors to the pandemic and related changes in the marketplace; the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local government responses to the continuing pandemic; and any potential changes to the extensive set of federal, state and local laws, regulations and requirements that govern our business. In many cases, the impact of the pandemic on us may persist even after the pandemic subsidies.
For additional discussion of the COVID-19 pandemic and our response, including its impact on us and related risks and uncertainties, please see the discussion in Part I Item 1. Business under the headings, "COVID-19 and its impact on our business" and "Human Capital Management," as well as the risk factor in Part I Item 1A. Risk Factors under the heading "We face various risks related to the dynamic and evolving novel coronavirus pandemic, many of which may have a material adverse impact on us."
Consolidated results of operations
The following table summarizes our revenues, operating income and adjusted operating income by line of business. See the discussion of our results for each line of business following this table. When multiple drivers are identified in the following discussion of results, they are listed in order of magnitude:
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
(1)For a reconciliation of adjusted operating income (loss) by reportable segment, see the "Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures" section below.
U.S. dialysis business
As of December 31, 2021, our U.S. dialysis business is a leading provider of kidney dialysis services, operating 2,815 outpatient dialysis centers serving a total of approximately 203,100 patients, and contracted to provide hospital inpatient dialysis services in approximately 850 hospitals. We estimate that we have approximately a 36% share of the U.S. dialysis market based upon the number of patients we serve.
Approximately 91% of our 2021 consolidated revenues were derived directly from our U.S. dialysis business. The principal drivers of our U.S. dialysis revenues include :
•our number of treatments, which is primarily a function of the number of chronic patients requiring approximately three in-center treatments per week as well as, to a lesser extent, the number of treatments for home-based dialysis and hospital inpatient dialysis; and
•our average dialysis patient service revenue per treatment, including the mix of patients with commercial plans and government programs as primary payor.
Within our U.S. dialysis business, our home-based dialysis and hospital inpatient dialysis services are operationally integrated with our outpatient dialysis centers and related laboratory services. Our outpatient, home-based and hospital inpatient dialysis services comprise approximately 76%, 18% and 6% of our U.S. dialysis revenues, respectively.
In the U.S., government dialysis-related payment rates are principally determined by federal Medicare and state Medicaid policy. For 2021, approximately 68% of our total U.S. dialysis patient services revenues were generated from government-based programs for services to approximately 90% of our total U.S. patients. These government-based programs are principally Medicare and Medicare Advantage, Medicaid and managed Medicaid plans, and other government plans, representing approximately 58%, 7% and 3% of our U.S. dialysis patient services revenues, respectively.
On October 29, 2021, CMS issued a final rule to update the ESRD PPS payment rate and policies, as described further above. CMS estimates the final rule will affect ESRD facilities' average reimbursement by a productivity-adjusted market
basket increase of 1.9% in 2022. In addition, the Protecting Medicare and American Farmers from Sequester Cuts Act extended the suspension of the 2% Medicare sequestration from December 31, 2021 through March 31, 2022, with 1% Medicare sequestration beginning April 1, 2022 through June 30, 2022 and 2% Medicare sequestration beginning July 1, 2022.
Dialysis payment rates from commercial payors vary and a major portion of our commercial rates are set at contracted amounts with payors and are subject to intense negotiation pressure. On average, dialysis-related payment rates from contracted commercial payors are significantly higher than Medicare, Medicaid and other government program payment rates, and therefore the percentage of commercial patients in relation to total patients represents a significant driver of our total average dialysis patient service revenue per treatment. Commercial payors (including hospital dialysis services) represent approximately 32% of U.S. dialysis patient services revenues.
For discussion of government reimbursement, the Medicare ESRD bundled payment system, Medicare Advantage and commercial reimbursement, see the discussion in Part I. Item 1. Business under the heading "U.S. dialysis business - Sources of revenue-concentrations and risks." For a discussion of operational, clinical and financial risks and uncertainties that we face in connection with the Medicare ESRD bundled payment system, see the risk factor in Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors under the heading "Our business is subject to a complex set of governmental laws, regulations and other requirements and any failure to adhere to those requirements, or any changes in those requirements, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, could materially harm our stock price, and in some circumstances, could materially harm our reputation." For a discussion of operational, clinical and financial risks and uncertainties that we face in connection with commercial payors, see the risk factor in Item 1A. Risk Factors under the heading "If the number or percentage of patients with higher-paying commercial insurance declines, if the average rates that commercial payors pay us decline, if patients in commercial plans are subject to restriction in plan designs, if we are unable to maintain contracts with payors with competitive terms, including, without limitation, reimbursement rates, scope and duration of coverage and in-network benefits, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows."
Effective January 1, 2021, both oral and intravenous forms of calcimimetics were added to the ESRD PPS bundled payment, and as a result our operating income from calcimimetics was more stable in 2021 and will continue to be in the future as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 under the transitional drug add-on payment adjustment (TDAPA) model. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the oral and intravenous forms of calcimimetics were separately reimbursed through a TDAPA model based on a pass-through rate of the average sales price plus 0%, before sequestration.
Approximately 1% and 4% of our total U.S. dialysis patient services revenues for the years 2021 and 2020, respectively, were associated with the administration of separately-billable physician-prescribed pharmaceuticals, the majority of which relate to the administration of calcimimetics.
We anticipate that we will continue to experience increases in our operating costs in 2022 that may outpace any net Medicare, commercial or other rate increases that we may receive, which could significantly impact our operating results. In particular, we expect to continue experiencing increases in operating costs that are subject to inflation, such as labor and supply costs, including increases in maintenance costs, regardless of whether there is a compensating inflation-based increase in Medicare, commercial or other payor payment rates. We also continue to expect to incur additional COVID-19-related costs while the pandemic continues. In addition, we expect to continue to incur capital expenditures and associated depreciation and amortization to improve, renovate and maintain our facilities, equipment and information technology to meet evolving regulatory requirements and otherwise.
U.S. dialysis patient care costs are those costs directly associated with operating and supporting our dialysis centers, home-based dialysis programs and hospital inpatient dialysis programs, and consist principally of labor, benefits, pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and other operating costs of the dialysis centers.
The principal drivers of our U.S. dialysis patient care costs include:
•clinical hours per treatment, labor rates and benefit costs;
•vendor pricing and utilization levels of pharmaceuticals;
•business infrastructure costs, which include the operating costs of our dialysis centers; and
•medical supply costs.
Other cost categories that can present significant variability include insurance costs and professional fees. In addition, proposed ballot initiatives or referendums, legislation, regulations or policy changes could cause us to incur substantial costs to prepare for, or implement changes required. Any such changes could result in, among other things, increases in our labor costs
or limitations on the amount of revenue that we can retain. For additional information on risks associated with potential and proposed ballot initiatives, referendums, legislation, regulations or policy changes, see the risk factor in Item 1A. Risk Factors under the heading, "Changes in federal and state healthcare legislation or regulations could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows."
Our average clinical hours per treatment were relatively flat in 2021 compared to 2020. We are always striving for improved productivity levels, however, changes in things such as federal and state policies or regulatory billing requirements can lead to increased labor costs. In 2021, the demand for skilled clinical personnel continued, exacerbated by the nationwide shortage caused by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic on these resources. In 2021 and 2020, we experienced an increase in our clinical labor rates of approximately 3.9% and 3.0%, respectively, consistent with general industry trends. We expect to continue to see higher clinical labor rates in 2022 due to the labor market conditions and the continued competition for skilled clinical personnel. In 2021, our overall clinical teammate retention declined from 2020. We also continue to experience increases in the infrastructure and operating costs of our dialysis centers and general increases in rent and repairs and maintenance. In 2021, we continued to implement certain cost control initiatives to help manage our overall operating costs, including labor productivity and utilities expense, and we expect to continue these initiatives in 2022.
Our U.S. dialysis general and administrative expenses represented 8.7% and 9.0% of our U.S. dialysis revenues in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Increases in general and administrative expenses over the last several years were primarily related to strengthening our dialysis business and related compliance and operational processes, responding to certain legal and compliance matters, professional fees associated with enhancing our information technology systems and more recent advocacy costs in 2020 related to countering union policy efforts. We expect that these levels of general and administrative expenses will be impacted by higher advocacy costs in 2022 compared to 2021, continued investment in developing our capabilities and executing on our strategic priorities, among other things.
U.S. dialysis results of operations
Treatment volume:
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
(1)Normalized non-acquired treatment growth reflects year over year growth in treatment volume, adjusted to exclude acquisitions and other similar transactions, and further adjusted to normalize for the number and mix of treatment days in a given period versus the prior period.
Our U.S. dialysis treatment volume is directly correlated with our operating revenues and expenses. The decrease in our U.S. dialysis treatments was driven by approximately (0.6) fewer treatment days in 2021 compared to 2020 and a decrease in non-acquired treatments, partially offset by acquired treatment growth. Treatment volume in 2021 was negatively impacted by higher mortality and missed treatments than in 2020. We believe the increased mortality rate is largely attributable to the impact of COVID-19 on our patient population.
Revenues:
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
U.S. dialysis revenues were positively impacted by an increase in our average patient service revenue per treatment driven by favorable changes in government mix due to shifts to Medicare Advantage plans, favorable changes in government rate related to increased Medicare base rates in 2021 and the temporary suspension of Medicare sequestration, as well as an increase in commercial mix and hospital inpatient dialysis services revenue per treatment. This was partially offset by changes in our treatment volume, as described above.
Operating expenses and charges:
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers
(1)General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included advocacy costs of approximately $67 million incurred to counter union policy efforts, including a California ballot initiative.
Patient care costs. U.S. dialysis patient care costs are those costs directly associated with operating and supporting our dialysis centers and consist principally of compensation expenses including labor and benefits, pharmaceuticals, medical supplies and other operating costs of the dialysis centers.
U.S. dialysis patient care costs per treatment increased primarily due to increases in compensation expenses related to increased wages and health benefit expenses due to lower than normal claims volume in 2020 due to COVID-19, other direct operating expenses associated with our dialysis centers, medical supply expense and insurance expense. These increases were partially offset by decreases in pharmaceutical unit costs and intensity and COVID-19-related compensation expenses, utilities expense driven by our virtual power purchase arrangements and professional fees.
General and administrative expenses. U.S. dialysis general and administrative expenses decreased primarily due to decreases in advocacy costs and contributions to our charitable foundation, partially offset by increases in compensation expenses related to labor costs, health benefit expenses and payroll taxes, as well as increases in professional fees and long-term incentive compensation.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense is directly impacted by the number of dialysis centers and the information technology we develop and acquire. U.S. dialysis depreciation and amortization expense increased primarily due to the development of new centers and renovation of existing centers as well as accelerated depreciation for expected center closures.
Equity investment income. U.S. dialysis equity investment income decreased primarily due to a decline in profitability at our nonconsolidated joint ventures due to growth in development of new centers.
Operating income and adjusted operating income
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
(1)For a reconciliation of adjusted operating income by reportable segment, see the "Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures" section below.
U.S. dialysis operating income and adjusted operating income increased compared to 2020 primarily due to an increase in our average patient service revenue per treatment and decreases in pharmaceutical unit costs and intensity, COVID-19-related compensation expenses, advocacy costs, utilities expense, as described above, and contributions to our charitable foundation. These increases to operating income were partially offset by a decrease in dialysis treatments and increases in compensation expense, as described above, other direct operating expenses associated with our dialysis centers, medical supply expense, insurance expense and long-term incentive compensation.
Other - Ancillary services
Our other operations include ancillary services that are primarily aligned with our core business of providing dialysis services to our network of patients. As of December 31, 2021, these consisted primarily of our U.S. integrated care and disease management business (DaVita IKC), physician services, and clinical research programs (DaVita Clinical Research), as well as our international operations. These ancillary services, including our international operations, generated revenues of approximately $1.047 billion in 2021, representing approximately 9% of our consolidated revenues.
As of December 31, 2021, DaVita IKC provided integrated care and disease management services to approximately 16,000 patients in risk-based integrated care arrangements and to an additional 7,000 patients in other integrated care arrangements. We also expect to add additional service offerings to our business and pursue additional strategic initiatives in the future as circumstances warrant, which could include, among other things, healthcare services not related to dialysis.
As further described in the risk factor in Item 1A. Risk Factors under the heading, "The ancillary services and strategic initiatives and international operations that we operate or invest in now or in the future may generate losses and may ultimately be unsuccessful. In the event that one or more of these activities is unsuccessful, our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows may be negatively impacted and we may have to write off our investment and incur other exit costs," if any of our ancillary services, strategic initiatives or our international operations are unsuccessful, it may have a negative impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, and if we determine to exit that line of business we may incur significant termination costs. For discussion of risks and potential impacts specific to our integrated kidney care business and related growth strategy, see the risk factor under the heading "If we are not able to successfully implement our strategy with respect to our integrated kidney care and value-based care initiatives, including maintaining our existing business and further developing our capabilities in a complex and highly regulated environment, it could result in a loss of our investments and have a material adverse effect on our growth strategy, could adversely impact our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, and could materially harm our reputation." In addition, we have in the past and may in the future incur material write-offs or impairments of our investments, including goodwill, in one or more of these ancillary services.
As of December 31, 2021, our international dialysis business owned or operated 339 outpatient dialysis centers located in ten countries outside of the U.S. For 2021, total revenues generated from our international operations were approximately 6% of our consolidated revenues.
Ancillary services results of operations
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
(1)The reported operating income and adjusted operating income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, includes foreign currency gains (losses) embedded in equity method income recognized from our APAC joint venture of approximately $3 million and $(3) million, respectively.
(2)For a reconciliation of adjusted operating (loss) income by reportable segment, see the "Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures" section below.
Revenues:
Our U.S. ancillary services revenues decreased due to a decrease in revenues at our integrated care and disease management business primarily due to a reduction in members in our special needs plans, as well as a decrease in revenues related to completion of our ESCO programs in the first quarter of 2021 and decreased revenues related to the sale of our vascular access business, RMS Lifeline, Inc. (Lifeline), as described below, partially offset by an increase in revenues in our physician services business. Our international revenues increased primarily as a result of acquired treatment growth as we continue to expand our international business.
Charges impacting operating income:
Loss on changes in ownership interests, net. We sold 100% of the stock of Lifeline, our vascular access business, effective May 1, 2020 and recognized a loss of approximately $16 million on this transaction.
Operating loss and adjusted operating loss:
Our U.S. ancillary services operating loss and adjusted operating loss were impacted by the sale of Lifeline, as described above. These losses were also impacted by a decline in operating results at our integrated care and disease management business due to increased investments to build up our integrated care support function, partially offset by a one-time non-recurring benefit received in the fourth quarter, improved performance at our physicians services business and decreased expenses in our clinical research business. International operating results increased primarily due to acquisition-related growth in our international business.
Corporate administrative support
Corporate administrative support consists primarily of labor, benefits and long-term incentive compensation expense, as well as professional fees for departments which provide support to all of our various operating lines of business. In 2020, corporate support also included an accrual for legal matters. Corporate administrative support expenses are included in general and administrative expenses on our consolidated income statement.
Accruals for legal matters. During 2020, we recorded a net charge for legal matters of $35 million.
Corporate administrative support expenses decreased $35 million primarily driven by accruals for legal matters, as described above, as well as a decrease in severance accruals associated with our senior executive leadership transition in 2020, partially offset by increased legal fees in 2021.
Corporate-level charges
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
(1)For a reconciliation of our effective income tax rate from continuing operations attributable to DaVita Inc., see the "Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures" section below.
Debt expense
Debt expense decreased primarily due to a decrease in our overall weighted average effective interest rate on our debt, including a reduction in the LIBOR component of the interest rate on debt under our senior secured credit facilities and the repricing of our Term Loan B-1 as well as the refinancing our 5.125% senior notes and 5.0% senior notes with lower cost debt, partially offset by additional debt expense associated with the Additional 2030 Notes offering completed in February 2021. Our overall weighted average effective interest rate in 2021 was 3.28% compared to 3.59% in 2020. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further information on the components of our debt and changes in them since 2020.
Debt prepayment, refinancing and redemption charges
Debt prepayment, refinancing and redemption charges were $89 million in 2020 as a result of the redemption in full of both our $1.75 billion aggregate principal amount outstanding of 5.125% senior notes and our $1.50 billion aggregate principal amount outstanding of 5.0% senior notes. These 2020 charges represented debt redemption premium charges and deferred financing cost write-offs associated with our prior senior note debt that was paid in full. These charges recognized in 2020 also included $3 million of refinancing charges comprised partially of fees incurred on the repricing of our Term Loan B and partially of deferred financing costs written off for the portion of this debt considered extinguished and reborrowed. See further discussion of our 2020 debt prepayment, refinancing and redemption charges in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements.
Other income
Other income consists primarily of interest income on cash and cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments, realized and unrealized gains and losses recognized on investments, and foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Other income decreased primarily due to losses on certain investments that began trading in public markets during the second quarter of 2021 and a decrease in interest income on our holdings of cash and cash equivalents in 2021. These decreases were partially offset by a reduction in foreign currency transaction losses.
Provision for income taxes
The effective income tax rate and effective income tax rate from continuing operations attributable to DaVita Inc. decreased in 2021 primarily due to an increase in tax benefits from stock-based compensation deductions, reductions in nondeductible advocacy spending in 2021 and deferred tax benefits recognized with respect to our foreign provision which were partially offset by re-measurement of our federal deferred taxes in 2021. Additionally we recognized a benefit for a favorable settlement reached with state tax authorities which was partially offset by an accrual for our federal uncertain tax positions.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests
The increase in income attributable to noncontrolling interests in 2021 compared to 2020 was due to improved earnings at certain U.S. dialysis partnerships.
Accounts receivable
Our consolidated accounts receivable balances at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were $1.958 billion and $1.824 billion, respectively, representing approximately 62 days and 59 days of revenue (DSO), respectively. The increase in consolidated DSO was primarily due to an increase of two days of DSO in our U.S. dialysis business primarily due to temporary billing holds. Our DSO calculation is based on the most recent quarter’s average revenues per day. There were no significant changes during 2021 from 2020 in the carrying amount of accounts receivable outstanding over one year old or in the amounts pending approval from third-party payors.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our patient services accounts receivable balances that are more than six months old represents approximately 16% and 17%, respectively of our total accounts receivable balances outstanding. Substantially all revenue realized is from government and commercial payors, as discussed above. Less than 1% of our revenues in both periods were classified as patient pay.
Amounts pending approval from third-party payors associated with Medicare bad debt claims as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, other than the standard monthly billing, consisted of approximately $133 million and $154 million, respectively, and are classified as other receivables. A significant portion of our Medicare bad debt claims are typically paid to us before the Medicare fiscal intermediary audits the claims but are subject to subsequent adjustment based upon the actual results of those audits. Such audits typically occur one to four years after the claims are filed.
Liquidity and capital resources
The following table summarizes our major sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash:
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
(1)For a reconciliation of our free cash flow, see the "Reconciliations of Non-GAAP measures" section below.
Consolidated cash flows
Consolidated cash flows from operating activities for 2021 and 2020 were $1,931 million and $1,979 million, respectively. The decrease in cash flow from continuing operations was primarily driven by an increase in total DSO of approximately three days for 2021 compared to an increase of one day in 2020, combined with the net legal settlement payment partially offset by a decrease in cash interest paid.
Cash flows used for investing activities in 2021 decreased $40 million compared to 2020 primarily due to the final settlement payment made for the DMG sale in 2020, as well as a decrease in capital expenditures related to development partially offset by a reduction in proceeds from sale of assets. See below for additional information regarding the growth in our dialysis centers.
Cash flows used in financing activities decreased $764 million in 2021 compared to 2020. Significant sources of cash during 2021 included proceeds from the issuance of $1,000 million in aggregate principal amount of the Additional 2030 Notes as an add-on offering to our 4.625% senior notes due 2030 that were issued at an offering price of 101.750% of face amount in February 2021. Significant uses of cash during 2021 primarily consisted of the repayment in full of borrowings under our revolving line of credit, net payments of regularly scheduled mandatory principal payments under our senior secured credit facilities totaling approximately $88 million on Term Loan A and $27 million on Term Loan B-1 and additional required principal payments under other debt arrangements. In addition, we incurred bond issuance costs of approximately $9 million.
See further discussion in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements related to debt financing activities. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2021 we used cash to repurchase 13,877,193 shares of our common stock.
By comparison, in 2020 debt activity primarily consisted of issuances of $1,500 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.75% senior notes due 2031 in August 2020 and $1,750 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.625% senior notes due 2030 in June 2020, as well as a net draw of $75 million on our revolving line of credit. Significant uses of cash during 2020 included the subsequent redemptions in full of $1,500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.0% senior notes due 2025 in August 2020 and $1,750 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.125% senior notes due 2024 in July 2020. Other net payments during 2020 primarily consisted of regularly scheduled mandatory principal payments under our senior secured credit facilities totaling approximately $55 million on Term Loan A and $27 million on Term Loan B-1 and additional required principal payments under other debt arrangements. In addition, we incurred bond issuance costs of approximately $38 million, debt redemption premium charges related to the redemption of our senior notes due in 2024 and 2025 of approximately $67 million and costs of repricing our Term Loan B of approximately $3 million. See further discussion in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements related to debt financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020 we used cash to repurchase 16,477,378 shares of our common stock.
Dialysis center capacity and growth
We are typically able to increase our capacity by extending hours at our existing dialysis centers, expanding our existing dialysis centers, relocating our dialysis centers, developing new dialysis centers and by acquiring dialysis centers. The development of a typical new outpatient dialysis center generally requires approximately $2.3 million for leasehold improvements and other capital expenditures. Based on our experience, a new outpatient dialysis center typically opens within a year after the property lease is signed, normally achieves operating profitability in the second year after Medicare certification, and normally reaches maturity within three to five years. Acquiring an existing outpatient dialysis center requires a substantially greater initial investment, but profitability and cash flows are generally accelerated and more predictable. To a limited extent, we enter into agreements to provide management and administrative services to outpatient dialysis centers in which we own a noncontrolling interest or which are wholly-owned by third parties in return for management fees.
The table below shows the growth in our dialysis operations by number of dialysis centers owned or operated:
(1)Represents dialysis centers which we manage or provide administrative services to but in which we own a noncontrolling equity interest or which are wholly-owned by third parties, including our Asia Pacific joint venture centers.
(2)Represents dialysis centers that were sold and/or closed for which the majority of patients were not retained.
(3)Represents dialysis centers that were closed for which the majority of patients were retained and transferred to one of our other existing outpatient dialysis centers.
Stock repurchases
The following table summarizes our common stock repurchases during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)The aggregate amounts paid for shares repurchased pursuant to our tender offer for our shares during the year ended December 31, 2020, include its clearing price of $88.00 per share plus related fees and expenses of $2.5 million.
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, we have repurchased 1,437,107 shares of our common stock for $159 million at an average cost of $110.73 per share through February 9, 2022. We retired all shares of common stock held in treasury effective December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
See further discussion of our share repurchase activity and authorizations in Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements.
Available liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, our cash balance was $462 million and we held approximately $22 million in short-term investments. At that time we also had an undrawn $1.0 billion revolving line of credit under our senior secured credit facilities. Credit available under this revolving line of credit is reduced by the amount of any letters of credit outstanding thereunder, of which there were none as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 we separately had approximately $69 million in letters of credit outstanding under a separate bilateral secured letter of credit facility.
See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for components of our long-term debt and their interest rates.
The COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to prevent its spread have dramatically reduced global economic activity and driven increased volatility in the financial markets. We have maintained business process continuity during the COVID-19 pandemic by enabling most back office teammates to work remotely, and as of the date of this report, we have not experienced a material deterioration in our liquidity position as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. The ultimate impact of the pandemic will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and difficult to predict.
We believe that our cash flow from operations and other sources of liquidity, including from amounts available under our senior secured credit facilities and our access to the capital markets, will be sufficient to fund our scheduled debt service under the terms of our debt agreements and other obligations for the foreseeable future, including the next 12 months. Our primary recurrent sources of liquidity are cash from operations and cash from borrowings, which are subject to general, economic, financial, competitive, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, as described in Item 1A. Risk Factors under the heading "The level of our current and future debt could have an adverse impact on our business, and our ability to generate cash to service our indebtedness and for other intended purposes and our ability to maintain compliance with debt covenants depends on many factors beyond our control."
Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures
The following tables provide reconciliations of adjusted operating income (loss) to operating income (loss) as presented on a U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) basis for our U.S. dialysis reportable segment as well as for our U.S. ancillary services, our international business, and for our total ancillary services which combines them and is disclosed as our other segments category. These non-GAAP or "adjusted" measures are presented because management believes these measures are useful adjuncts to, but not alternatives for, our GAAP results.
Specifically, management uses adjusted operating income (loss) to compare and evaluate our performance period over period and relative to competitors, to analyze the underlying trends in our business, to establish operational budgets and forecasts and for incentive compensation purposes. We believe this non-GAAP measure is also useful to investors and analysts in evaluating our performance over time and relative to competitors, as well as in analyzing the underlying trends in our business. We also believe this presentation enhances a user's understanding of our normal operating income by excluding certain items which we do not believe are indicative of our ordinary results of operations.
In addition, our effective income tax rate on income from continuing operations attributable to DaVita Inc. excludes noncontrolling owners' income, which primarily relates to non-tax paying entities. We believe this adjusted effective income tax rate is useful to management, investors and analysts in evaluating our performance and establishing expectations for income taxes incurred on our ordinary results attributable to DaVita Inc.
Finally, our free cash flow from continuing operations represents net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations less distributions to noncontrolling interests and all capital expenditures (including development capital expenditures, routine maintenance and information technology), plus contributions from noncontrolling interests and proceeds from the sale of self-developed properties. Management uses this measure to assess our ability to fund acquisitions and meet our debt service obligations and we believe this measure is equally useful to investors and analysts as an adjunct to cash flows from operating activities from continuing operations and other measures under GAAP.
It is important to bear in mind that these non-GAAP "adjusted" measures are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered in isolation from, nor as substitutes for, their most comparable GAAP measures.
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
Certain columns or rows may not sum or recalculate due to the presentation of rounded numbers.
Off-balance sheet arrangements and aggregate contractual obligations
In addition to the debt obligations and operating lease liabilities reflected on our balance sheet, we have commitments associated with letters of credit, as well as certain working capital funding obligations associated with our equity investments in nonconsolidated dialysis ventures that we manage and some we manage that are wholly-owned by third parties.
We also have potential obligations to purchase the noncontrolling interests held by third parties in many of our majority-owned dialysis partnerships and other nonconsolidated entities. These obligations are in the form of put provisions that are exercisable at the third-party owners’ discretion within specified periods as outlined in each specific put provision. For additional information see Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements.
The following is a summary of these cash contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1)See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for components of our long-term debt and related interest rates.
(2)See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements for components of our leases and related interest rates.
(3)Represents amounts for which we are contractually committed, should the outside partner exercise its put option.
As of December 31, 2021 we have outstanding letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $69 million under a separate bilateral secured letter of credit facility.
In 2017, we entered into a Sourcing and Supply Agreement with Amgen USA Inc. (Amgen) that expires on December 31, 2022. Under the terms of the agreement, we will purchase EPO from Amgen in amounts necessary to meet no less than 90% of its requirements for erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) through the expiration of the contract. The actual amount of EPO that we will purchase will depend upon the amount of EPO administered during dialysis as prescribed by physicians and the overall number of patients that we serve.
As of December 31, 2021 we have outstanding purchase agreements with various suppliers to purchase set amounts of dialysis equipment, parts, and supplies. If we fail to meet the minimum purchase commitments under these contracts during any year, we are required to pay the difference to the supplier. For additional information see Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements.
We also have certain potential commitments to provide working capital funding, if necessary, to certain nonconsolidated dialysis businesses that we manage and in which we own a noncontrolling equity interest or which are wholly-owned by third parties. For additional information see Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements.
Additionally, we expect our 2022 capital expenditures to be in alignment with 2021 capital expenditures.
In addition, we have approximately $88 million of existing income tax liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, including interest, penalties and other long-term tax liabilities. We expect a significant portion of these settlements to be paid in 2022.
Contingencies
The information in Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report is incorporated by reference in response to this item.
Critical accounting policies, estimates and judgments
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. These accounting principles require us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets, liabilities, contingencies and noncontrolling interests subject to put provisions (redeemable equity interests). All significant estimates, judgments and assumptions are developed based on the best information available to us at the time made and are regularly reviewed and updated when necessary. Actual results will generally differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material. Changes in estimates are reflected in our financial statements in the period of change based upon on-going actual experience trends or subsequent settlements and realizations depending on the nature and predictability of the estimates and contingencies. Certain accounting estimates, including those concerning revenue recognition and accounts receivable, fair value estimates for goodwill and noncontrolling interests, accounting for income taxes, and loss contingencies are considered to be critical to evaluating and understanding our financial results because they involve inherently uncertain matters and their application requires the most difficult and complex judgments and estimates. For additional information, see Part II Item 15, "Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules" - Note 1 - "Organization and summary of significant accounting policies" as referred from Part II Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
U.S. dialysis revenue recognition and accounts receivable. There are significant estimating risks associated with the amount of U.S. dialysis revenue that we recognize in a given reporting period. Payment rates are often subject to significant uncertainties related to wide variations in the coverage terms of the commercial healthcare plans under which we receive payments. In addition, ongoing insurance coverage changes, geographic coverage differences, differing interpretations of contract coverage, and other payor issues complicate the billing and collection process. The measurement and recognition of revenue requires the use of estimates of the amounts that will ultimately be realized considering, among other items, retroactive adjustments that may be associated with regulatory reviews, audits, billing reviews and other matters.
Revenues associated with Medicare and Medicaid programs are recognized based on (a) the payment rates that are established by statute or regulation for the portion of the payment rates paid by the government payor (e.g., 80% for Medicare patients) and (b) for the portion not paid by the primary government payor, the estimated amounts that will ultimately be collectible from other government programs providing secondary coverage (e.g., Medicaid secondary coverage), the patient’s commercial health plan secondary coverage, or the patient. Our dialysis related reimbursements from Medicare are subject to certain variations under Medicare’s single bundled payment rate system whereby our reimbursements can be adjusted for
certain patient characteristics and other variable factors. Our revenue recognition depends upon our ability to effectively capture, document and bill for Medicare’s base payment rate and these other factors. In addition, as a result of the potential range of variations that can occur in our dialysis-related reimbursements from Medicare under the single bundled payment rate system, our revenue recognition is subject to a greater degree of estimating risk.
Commercial healthcare plans, including contracted managed-care payors, are billed at our usual and customary rates; however, revenue is recognized based on estimated net realizable revenue for the services provided. Net realizable revenue is estimated based on contractual terms for the patients covered under commercial healthcare plans with which we have formal agreements, non-contracted commercial healthcare plan coverage terms if known, estimated secondary collections, historical collection experience, historical trends of refunds and payor payment adjustments (retractions), inefficiencies in our billing and collection processes that can result in denied claims for payments, the estimated timing of collections, changes in our expectations of the amounts that we expect to collect and regulatory compliance matters. Determining applicable primary and secondary coverage for our approximately 203,100 U.S. dialysis patients at any point in time, together with the changes in patient coverages that occur each month, requires complex, resource-intensive processes. Collections, refunds and payor retractions typically continue to occur for up to three years or longer after services are provided.
We generally expect the range of our U.S. dialysis revenue estimating risk to be within 1% of revenue, which can represent as much as approximately 5% of our U.S. dialysis business’s adjusted operating income. Changes in estimates are reflected in the then-current financial statements based on on-going actual experience trends, or subsequent settlements and realizations depending on the nature and predictability of the estimates and contingencies. Changes in revenue estimates for prior periods are separately disclosed and reported if material to the current reporting period and longer term trend analyses, and have not been significant.
Revenues for laboratory services, which are integrally related to our dialysis services, are recognized in the period services are provided at the estimated net realizable amounts to be received.
Certain fair value estimates. Fair value measurements and estimates affect, or potentially affect, a variety of elements in the Company's financial statements. Two of the elements most significantly impacted by fair value estimates are the Company's goodwill impairment assessments and remeasurements of its noncontrolling interests subject to put provisions balance.
Goodwill is not amortized, but is assessed for impairment when changes in circumstances warrant and at least annually. An impairment charge is recorded when and to the extent a reporting unit's carrying amount is determined to exceed its estimated fair value. Changes in circumstance that may trigger a goodwill impairment assessment for one of our business units can include, among others, changes in the legal environment, addressable market, business strategy, development or business plans, reimbursement structure, operating performance, future prospects, relationships with partners, and/or market value indications for the subject business. We use a variety of factors to assess changes in the financial condition, future prospects and other circumstances for businesses subject to goodwill impairment assessment. However, these assessments and the related valuations can involve significant uncertainties and require significant judgment on various matters. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for a sensitivity summary on the Company's reporting units considered at risk of goodwill impairment as of December 31, 2021.
The Company is also required to remeasure its noncontrolling interests subject to put provisions to estimated fair value each reporting period. These estimates also require substantive judgment on meaningful uncertainties concerning this significant balance. See Notes 17 and 24 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of the Company's approach to these valuations, the variables and uncertainties involved, and the sensitivity of these valuations to changes in a primary aggregate valuation metric.
Accounting for income taxes. Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous state and foreign jurisdictions, and changes in tax laws or regulations may be proposed or enacted that could adversely affect our overall tax liability. The actual impact of any such laws or regulations could be materially different from our current estimates.
Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining our consolidated income tax expense. Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdictions from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, results of recent operations, and assumptions about the amount of future federal, state, and foreign pre-tax operating income adjusted for items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgments and are consistent with the plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying businesses. To the extent that recovery is not likely, a
valuation allowance is established. The allowance is regularly reviewed and updated for changes in circumstances that would cause a change in judgment about the realizability of the related deferred tax assets.
Loss contingencies. As discussed in Notes 1 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements, we operate in a highly regulated industry and are party to various lawsuits, claims, qui tam suits, governmental investigations and audits (including, without limitation, investigations or other actions resulting from our obligation to self-report suspected violations of law), contract disputes and other legal proceedings. Assessments of such matters can involve a series of complex judgments about future events and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. We record accruals for loss contingencies on such matters to the extent that we determine an unfavorable outcome is probable and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for further discussion.
Significant new accounting standards
See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in this report for information regarding certain recent financial accounting standards that have been issued by the FASB.