ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to, the period for which we estimate our cash resources are sufficient, the availability of additional funds, as well as those set forth under “Risk Factors” and those that may be identified from time to time in our reports and registration statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide an investor with a narrative of our financial results and an evaluation of our financial condition and results of operations. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes thereto set forth in “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Overview
We are a commercial stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing innovative vaccines. Our first marketed product, HEPLISAV-B® (Hepatitis B Vaccine (Recombinant), Adjuvanted) is approved in the United States and European Union for prevention of infection caused by all known subtypes of hepatitis B virus in adults age 18 years and older. We also manufacture and sell CpG 1018, the adjuvant used in HEPLISAV-B. We are working to develop CpG 1018 as a premier vaccine adjuvant through research collaborations and partnerships. Current collaborations are focused on adjuvanted vaccines for COVID-19, plague, Tdap, seasonal influenza, universal influenza and shingles.
In Phase 3 trials, HEPLISAV-B demonstrated faster and higher rates of protection with two doses in one month compared to another currently approved hepatitis B vaccine which requires three doses over six months, with a similar safety profile. HEPLISAV-B is the only two-dose hepatitis B vaccine for adults approved in the U.S. and the European Union.
We have worldwide commercial rights to HEPLISAV-B and we market it in the United States. There are three other vaccines approved for the prevention of hepatitis B in the U.S.: Engerix-B and Twinrix® from GlaxoSmithKline plc and Recombivax-HB® from Merck & Co. We received Marketing Authorization approval of HEPLISAV-B in February 2021 from the European Commission for prevention of infection caused by all known subtypes of hepatitis B virus in adults age 18 years and older. In May 2021, we entered into a commercialization agreement with Bavarian Nordic for the marketing and distribution of HEPLISAV-B in Germany.
All of our HEPLISAV-B sales are to certain wholesalers and specialty distributors in the U.S. whose principal customers include independent hospitals and clinics, integrated delivery networks, public health clinics and prisons, the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and retail pharmacies. For the year ended December 31, 2021, HEPLISAV-B product revenue, net was $61.9 million.
In January 2021, we entered into an agreement (the "CEPI Agreement") with Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (“CEPI”) for the manufacture and reservation of a specified quantity of CpG 1018 adjuvant. In May 2021, we entered into the first amendment (the “Amendment”) to the CEPI Agreement. The agreement enables CEPI to direct the supply of CpG 1018 adjuvant to CEPI partner(s). In exchange for reserving CpG 1018 adjuvant, CEPI has agreed to provide advance payments in the form of an interest-free, unsecured, forgivable loan of up to $176.4 million.
In July 2021, we entered into an agreement (the “Bio E Supply Agreement”) with Biological E. Limited (“Bio E”), for the commercial supply of CpG 1018 adjuvant, for use with Bio E’s subunit COVID-19 vaccine candidate, CORBEVAX™. Under the Bio E Supply Agreement, Bio E has committed to purchase specified quantities of CpG 1018 adjuvant, at pre-negotiated prices pursuant to the CEPI Agreement, for use in Bio E’s commercialization of its CORBEVAX vaccine with specified delivery dates in 2021 and the first quarter of 2022. The Bio E Supply Agreement also provides terms for Bio E to order additional quantities of CpG 1018 adjuvant beyond the quantities reserved by CEPI. In December 2021, CORBEVAX received approval for emergency use from the Drugs Controller General of India.
In June 2021, we entered into an agreement (the “Clover Supply Agreement”) with Zhejiang Clover Biopharmaceuticals, Inc. and Clover Hong Kong Inc. (collectively, “Clover”), for the commercial supply of CpG 1018 adjuvant, for use with its protein-based COVID-19 vaccine candidate, adjuvanted with our CpG 1018 adjuvant, SCB-2019. In September 2021, Clover reported that SCB-2019 achieved the primary and secondary efficacy endpoints, and with favorable safety profile, in a global Phase 2/3 clinical trial.
In February 2021, we entered into a Supply Agreement (“Medigen Supply Agreement”) with Medigen Vaccine Biologics (“Medigen”) to manufacture and supply specified quantities of CpG 1018 adjuvant for use in the development and commercialization of Medigen’s COVID-19 vaccine, adjuvanted with our CpG 1018 adjuvant, MVC-COV1901, for delivery in the first and second quarters of 2021. In August 2021, we entered into a second supply agreement (“Medigen Supply Agreement No. 2”) to manufacture and supply additional specified quantities of CpG 1018 adjuvant for delivery in the third and fourth quarter of 2021. In August 2021, Medigen launched MVC-COV1901 after Medigen received Taiwan Emergency Use Authorization and approval for inclusion in Taiwan's COVID-19 vaccine immunization program.
In the third quarter of 2020, we announced a commercial supply agreement (the “Valneva Supply Agreement”) with Valneva Scotland Limited (“Valneva”) to cover the supply of CpG 1018 adjuvant for its SARS-COV-2 vaccine candidate, VLA2001, in support of its supply agreement with the United Kingdom Government and subject to the terms of such agreement. In September 2021, Valneva received a termination notice from the United Kingdom Government in relation to such supply agreement. However, Valneva continues the clinical development of VLA2001 and the pivotal Phase 3 trial for VLA2001, COV-COMPARE, remains ongoing at Public Health England. In October 2021, Valneva reported that VLA2001 met both co-primary endpoints in the COV-COMPARE trial, and that VLA2001 was well-tolerated, demonstrating a statistically significant better tolerability profile compared to active comparator vaccine, AstraZeneca's AZD1222 (ChAdOx1-S).
In October 2021, we entered into a letter agreement (the “Valneva Amendment”), amending the Valneva Supply Agreement. Under the Valneva Amendment, we and Valneva agreed to the cancellation of the two then outstanding purchase orders for CpG 1018 adjuvant under the Valneva Supply Agreement that had not been fulfilled as of the date of the Valneva Amendment, while concurrently committing to purchase a reduced amount of CpG 1018 adjuvant under a new purchase order. We are entitled to retain the advance payments made by Valneva under such cancelled purchase orders to the extent such advance payments do not count towards the advance payment dues under the Valneva Amendment.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, CpG 1018 product revenue, net, was $375.2 million.
In September 2021, we entered into an agreement with the U.S. Department of Defense ("DoD") for the development of an improved recombinant plague vaccine adjuvanted with CpG 1018, whereby the DoD will provide funding of up to approximately $22.0 million over two and a half years. Under the agreement, we agreed to conduct a Phase 2 clinical trial combining our CpG 1018 adjuvant with the DoD's rF1V vaccine. We anticipate the Phase 2 trial will commence in 2022.
In May 2021, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.50% convertible senior notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”) in a private placement. The purchasers partially exercised their option to purchase additional Convertible Notes and we issued an additional $25.5 million of the Convertible Notes in May 2021. Total proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes, net of debt issuance and offering costs of $5.7 million, were $219.8 million. We used $190.2 million of the net proceeds to repay, in full, our outstanding debt and other obligations under the Loan Agreement and $27.2 million of the net proceeds to pay the costs of the capped call transactions described below.
In connection with the issuance of the Convertible Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with one of the initial purchasers and other financial institutions, totaling $27.2 million (the “Capped Calls”). The Capped Calls have an initial strike price and an initial cap price of $10.47 per share and $15.80 per share, respectively, subject to certain adjustments. The Capped Calls are expected to offset the potential dilution to our common stock as a result of any conversion of the Convertible Notes, subject to a cap based on the cap price.
In May 2021, we repaid the term loans and paid-in-kind interest (collectively “Term Loans Principal”) under the Loan Agreement with CRG Servicing LLC (“Loan Agreement”), in full, using the net proceeds from the Convertible Notes issuance described above. In connection with the early repayment of the Term Loans Principal, during the three months ended June 30, 2021, we recorded $5.2 million loss on debt extinguishment related to the amount we paid to terminate the Term Loans Principal in excess of its carrying value at the time of the repayment. Our final payment of $190.2 million to CRG Servicing LLC satisfied all of our obligations under the Loan Agreement. With the full repayment of the Term Loans Principal, all security interests, covenants, liens and encumbrances under the Loan Agreement were permanently released.
COVID-19 Update
The ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 virus or current or newly discovered variants, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. We continue to assess the potential evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations.
To date, we and our distribution partners have been able to continue to supply HEPLISAV-B throughout the United States, and currently do not anticipate any interruptions in supply. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic, most medical centers began restricting access to their facilities and focused on providing care to only the most severely affected patients, beginning in March 2020. As states began phasing out restrictions in the middle of 2020, medical centers have been operating under limited capacity or with strict social distancing rules. There has been a significant reduction in the utilization of adult vaccines (other than COVID-19 vaccines) since the end of the first quarter of 2020, including a reduction in the utilization of HEPLISAV-B which has impacted sales of HEPLISAV-B. While adult hepatitis B vaccine utilization rates have continued to stay below pre-pandemic levels, we are starting to see a recovery in such utilization from all-time lows. Additionally, HEPLISAV-B continues to gain market share in the U.S. hepatitis B adult vaccine market.
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and are taking proactive efforts to help protect the health and safety of our workforce, patients and healthcare professionals, and to continue our business operations and advance our goal of bringing important new vaccines to patients as rapidly as possible. We have implemented measures to help protect the health and safety of our workforce, including a mandatory work-from-home policy for employees who can perform their jobs offsite and continue to actively evaluate a return to the office at an appropriate time. In the conduct of our business activities, we are also taking actions to help protect the safety of patients and healthcare professionals. In the early stages of the pandemic, our field-based personnel reduced in-person customer interactions in healthcare settings and primarily used electronic communication, such as emails, phone calls and video conferences. Many health care and contracting professionals at hospitals and other medical institutions with whom our field-based personnel interact began conducting a greater proportion of their work from their homes and are facing additional demands on their time during the COVID-19 pandemic. While the different quality of electronic interactions as compared with in-person interactions, as well as the reduced quantity of interactions during the COVID-19 pandemic, impacted the effectiveness of our sales personnel, we have gradually moved back to in-person interactions in many cases. With the rise of new variants, and related precautions, however, our customers’ procurement activities and those of our collaborators continue to be impacted which could negatively affect our overall product sales. It is possible that we may have to limit in-person engagement again in the future.
Our HEPLISAV-B post-marketing follow-up has been completed. In April 2021, we announced the results of the post-marketing study assessing the rates of occurrence of acute myocardial infarction ("AMI") in persons receiving HEPLISAV-B compared with Engerix-B. The results provided evidence there is no increased risk of AMI associated with vaccination with HEPLISAV-B compared to Engerix-B. We expect data from the autoimmune portion of our observational study to be available in the first quarter of 2022. Our HEPLISAV-B dialysis study has also been completed. Final immunogenicity results included a seroprotection rate of 89.3% with high levels of anti-HBs antibodies. Safety data showed HEPLISAV-B was well tolerated and no safety concerns were observed.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ability to generate sales and revenues, our regulatory efforts, our corporate development objectives and the value of and market for our common stock, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence at this time. Because of the above and other factors, our results of operations may vary substantially from year to year and from quarter to quarter and, as a result, we believe that period-to-period comparisons of our operating results may not be meaningful and should not be relied upon as being indicative of our future performance. For additional information on the various current and future potential risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors, included herein.
We have been actively pursuing opportunities to collaborate with other organizations on the development of a COVID-19 vaccine, by leveraging CpG 1018 adjuvant, our toll-like receptor 9 (“TLR9”) agonist, which is also used in our HEPLISAV-B product. Since the first half of 2021, we announced multiple collaborations focused on COVID-19 and we continue to work to identify other programs where CpG 1018 adjuvant can be utilized to enhance the immune response to a coronavirus vaccine or other vaccines. To date, two of our collaborators have received emergency use authorizations for their
COVID-19 vaccines, and we anticipate that more will be announced during 2022. We and our contract manufacturers are developing plans to help scale-up activities to support pandemic-level of production of our CpG 1018 adjuvant, as necessary to support these and any future collaborations. There can be no assurance we will be successful in our efforts to help develop or supply adjuvanted COVID-19 vaccines or other vaccines.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. In doing so, we are required to make estimates and assumptions. Our critical accounting estimates are those estimates that involve a significant level of uncertainty at the time the estimate was made, and changes in them have had or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Actual results could differ materially from our estimates. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis.
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Product Revenue, Net - HEPLISAV-B
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of promised goods to the customer at the net sales price, which includes estimates such as product returns, chargebacks, discounts, rebates and other fees. While each item is more fully described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the following items reflect the more critical and significant estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Our estimates of such items are inherently uncertain and if we were to change any of these judgments or estimates, it could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of accounts receivable reserves or revenue reserves accrual that we report in a particular period.
Product Returns: Consistent with industry practice, we offer our customers a limited right of return based on the product’s expiration date for product that has been purchased from us. We estimate the amount of our product sales that may be returned by our customers and record this estimate as a reduction of revenue in the period the related product revenue is recognized. We consider several factors in the estimation of potential product returns including expiration dates of the product shipped, the limited product return rights, available information about our customers’ inventory and other relevant factors.
Chargebacks: Our customers subsequently resell our product to healthcare providers, pharmacies and others. In addition to distribution agreements with our customers, we enter into arrangements with qualified healthcare providers that provide for chargebacks and discounts with respect to the purchase of our product. Chargebacks represent the estimated obligations resulting from contractual commitments to sell product to qualified healthcare providers at prices lower than the list prices charged to customers who directly purchase the product from us. These reserves are established in the same period that the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and accounts receivable. Chargeback amounts are determined at the time of resale to the qualified healthcare providers by customers, and we issue credits for such amounts generally within a few weeks of the customer’s notification to us of the resale. Reserves for chargebacks consists of credits that we expect to issue for units that remain in the distribution channel inventories at each reporting period end that we expect will be sold to the qualified healthcare providers, and chargebacks for units that our customers have sold to the qualified healthcare providers, but for which credits have not been issued.
Rebates: Under certain contracts, customers may obtain rebates for purchasing minimum volumes of our product. We estimate these rebates based upon the expected purchases and the contractual rebate rate and record this estimate as a reduction in revenue in the period the related revenue is recognized.
Inventories, net
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value, on a first-in, first-out, or FIFO, basis. We primarily use actual costs to determine our cost basis for inventories. Our assessment of market value requires the use of estimates regarding the net realizable value of our inventory balances, including an assessment of excess or obsolete inventory. We determine excess or obsolete inventory based on multiple factors, including an estimate of the future demand for our products, product expiration dates and current sales levels. Our assumptions of future demand for our products are inherently uncertain and if we were to change any of these judgments or estimates, it could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of inventory reserves that we report in a particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
The fair value of stock options is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make estimates and assumptions. Our estimate of volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock price over the term of the awards. We derive the expected term assumption based on our historical settlement experience. Stock-based compensation cost is recognized only for awards ultimately expected to vest. Our estimate of the forfeiture rate is based primarily on our historical experience. In the future, as additional empirical evidence regarding these input estimates becomes available, we may change or refine our approach of deriving these input estimates. These changes could impact our fair value of stock options granted in the future.
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined using the enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not the future realization of all or some of the deferred tax assets will not be achieved. The evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance is performed on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis and includes a review of all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations.
Based on all available evidence, both positive and negative, and the weight of that evidence to the extent such evidence can be objectively verified, we believe that recognition of the deferred tax assets arising from the above-mentioned future tax benefits is currently not more likely than not to be realized and, accordingly, we have determined a need for a full valuation allowance. Given our current earnings, we believe that, within the next twelve months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a portion of the valuation allowance recorded against the deferred tax assets held may be reversed. A reversal would result in an income tax benefit for the quarterly and annual fiscal period in which we determine to release the valuation allowance. However, the exact timing and amount of a valuation allowance release are subject to change on the basis of the level of profitability that we actually achieve.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K) for information regarding recent accounting pronouncements that are of significance, or potential significance to us..
Results of Operations
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Revenues consist of amounts earned from product sales and other revenues. Product revenue, net, includes sales of HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018 adjuvant.
Revenue from HEPLISAV-B product sales is recorded at the net sales price, which includes estimates of product returns, chargebacks, discounts, rebates and other fees. We sell our CpG 1018 adjuvant to our collaboration partners for use in their development and/or potential commercialization of COVID-19 vaccines. Overall, product revenue, net, reflects our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract.
Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
The following is a summary of our revenues (in thousands, except for percentages):
2021 versus 2020
HEPLISAV-B product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to the same period in 2020. Approximately $21.4 million of the increase was due to higher volume driven by an increase in HEPLISAV-B demand and market share gains in the U.S. Approximately $4.5 million of the increase was due to higher net sales price.
In September 2020, we began selling our CpG 1018 adjuvant to our collaboration partners for their use in development and/or commercialization of COVID-19 vaccines. In 2021, we executed supply agreements with several major collaboration partners. The increase in CpG 1018 adjuvant product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was due to an increase sales volume as we continued to manufacture and ship CpG 1018 adjuvant pursuant to our supply and collaboration agreements.
The decrease in other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period of 2020, was due to the termination of an agreement with CEPI resulting in the recognition of $6.3 million in previously received reservation payments. We entered into a new agreement with CEPI in January 2021 (see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). The decrease was partially offset by an increase in other revenue due to the recognition of $1.2 million, in the third quarter of 2021, in connection with the termination of a certain grant agreement. Other revenue also includes grant revenue from our agreement with the U.S. Department of Defense and collaboration revenue related to services performed under a collaboration agreement with Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd.
Cost of Sales - Product
Cost of sales - product consists primarily of raw materials, certain fill, finish and overhead costs and any inventory adjustment charges for pre-filled syringes (“PFS”) of HEPLISAV-B and inventory costs to produce CpG 1018 adjuvant for our collaboration partners. Our HEPLISAV-B PFS finished goods inventory previously included components for which a portion of the manufacturing costs were expensed to research and development prior to the approval of the PFS presentation by the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in March 2018. Substantially all the inventory that was previously expensed to research and development has been sold to customers.
The following is a summary of our cost of sales - product (in thousands, except for percentages):
2021 versus 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, HEPLISAV-B cost of sales-product increased compared to the same period in 2020. Approximately $5.0 million of the increase was due to higher sales volume and approximately $3.7 million of the increase was due to higher unit costs. In addition, included in HEPLISAV-B cost of sales - product for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a $4.8 million of excess capacity charge in connection with an expansion project at our manufacturing facility in Düsseldorf. Additionally, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its prolonged impact on vaccine utilization and corresponding revisions to our sales forecast, we recorded an approximately $2.6 million write-off to cost of sales - product associated with HEPLISAV-B slow moving short-dated inventory that had been manufactured prior to the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to incur additional excess capacity charge in 2022 as the manufacturing facility expansion project in Düsseldorf continues.
In September 2020, we began selling our CpG 1018 adjuvant to our collaboration partners for their use in development and/or commercialization of COVID-19 vaccines. In 2021, we executed supply agreements with several major collaboration partners. The increase in CpG 1018 adjuvant cost of sales-product for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was due to an increase sales volume as we continued to manufacture and ship CpG 1018 adjuvant pursuant to our supply and collaboration agreements.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists, primarily, of compensation and related personnel costs (which include benefits, recruitment, travel and supply costs), outside services, allocated facility costs and non-cash stock-based compensation. Outside services consist of costs associated with clinical development, process development, preclinical discovery and development, regulatory filings and research, including fees and expenses incurred by contract research organizations, clinical study sites, and other service providers.
The following is a summary of our research and development expense (in thousands, except for percentages):
2021 versus 2020
Compensation and related personnel costs and non-cash stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased, compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to higher headcount to support vaccine clinical and development activities. In addition, non-cash stock-based compensation for year ended December 31, 2020 included reversal of expenses related to cancellation of certain equity grants.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, outside services decreased, compared to the same period in 2020, due to (i) approximately $2.3 million decrease due to winding down of our immuno-oncology study (ii) offset by approximately $1.8 million increase in vaccine clinical and development activities.
Facility costs, which primarily comprise of occupancy and related expenses, decreased, as compared to the same period in 2020, due to lower overhead allocation to research and development functions.
We expect research and development expenses to increase in 2022 as we continue to advance our product candidates with CpG 1018 adjuvant through pre-clinical and clinical collaborations and additional discovery efforts.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation and related costs for our commercial support personnel, medical education professionals and personnel in executive and other administrative functions, including legal, finance and information technology; costs for outside services such as sales and marketing, post-marketing studies of HEPLISAV-B, accounting, commercial development, consulting, business development, investor relations and insurance; legal costs that include corporate and patent-related expenses; allocated facility costs and non-cash stock-based compensation.
The following is a summary of our selling, general and administrative expenses (in thousands, except for percentages):
2021 versus 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compensation and related personnel costs increased, as compared to the same period in 2020, due to higher headcount in connection with the expansion of our field sales force in July 2021, increase in business travel as COVID-19 travel restrictions were easing and increase in recruiting expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, outside services increased, as compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to an overall increase in sales and marketing efforts, offset by $2 million decrease in the amount we paid to Symphony Dynamo, Inc. and Symphony Dynamo Holdings LLC in connection with the sale of our immuno-oncology compound, SD-101 in July 2020.
Facility costs, which primarily comprise of occupancy and related expenses, increased, as compared to the same period in 2020, due to higher overhead allocation to selling, general and administrative functions.
The increase in non-cash stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to higher headcount in connection with the expansion of our field sales force in July 2021. In addition, non-cash stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2020 included reversal of expenses related to cancellation of certain equity grants.
Gain on Sale of Assets
In July 2020, we sold assets related to our immuno-oncology compound, SD-101, which included intellectual property, clinical and non-clinical data, regulatory filings, clinical supply inventory and certain contracts to Surefire Medical Inc. d/b/a TriSalus Life Sciences (“TriSalus”). Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, we received $5 million upon closing of the transaction and $4 million in December 2020 as reimbursement for certain clinical trial expenses. In addition, we could receive up to an additional $250 million upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory, and commercial milestones and low double-digit royalties based on potential future net sales of product containing SD-101 compound. In the third quarter of 2020, we recognized a gain on sale of SD-101 assets of $6.9 million, net of transaction costs.
In September 2021, we received payment of $1 million from TriSalus for their meeting a pre-commercialization milestone which was recognized as a gain on sale of SD-101 assets our consolidated statements of operations.
Restructuring
On May 23, 2019, we implemented a strategic organizational restructuring, principally to align our operations around our vaccine business and significantly curtail further investment in our immuno-oncology business. In connection with the restructuring, we reduced our workforce by approximately 80 positions, or by approximately 36%, of U.S.-based personnel. We have completed our restructuring activities and recognized restructuring costs of $13.4 million in 2019.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest income is reported net of amortization of premiums and discounts on marketable securities and includes realized gains on investments. Interest expense includes the stated interest and accretion of discount and end of term fee related to our terminated long-term debt agreement and Convertible Notes. Sublease income is recognized in connection with our sublease of office and laboratory space. Loss on debt extinguishment reflects the amount we paid to terminate our long-term debt in excess of its carrying value at the time of the extinguishment. Change in fair value of warrant liability reflects the changes in fair value of warrants issued in connection with equity financing in August 2019. Other includes gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and disposal of property and equipment.
The following is a summary of our other income (expense) (in thousands, except for percentages):
NM = Not meaningful
2021 versus 2020
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to lower yields on our marketable securities portfolio. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased, as compared to the same period in 2020, due to the repayment of our long-term debt in May 2021, replaced by the issuance of Convertible Notes in May 2021 at a lower effective interest rate. In connection with the repayment of our long-term debt, we recorded a one-time loss on debt extinguishment of $5.2 million in the second quarter of 2021. The change in the fair value of warrant liability is primarily due to the increase in our stock price during the year ended December 31, 2021. The change in other is primarily due to foreign currency transactions and related fluctuations in the value of the Euro compared to the U.S. dollar.
Income Taxes
Our income tax expense and effective income tax rate were as follows (in thousands, except for percentages):
2021 versus 2020
We recorded income tax expense of $0.8 million for the year ended December, 31, 2021 resulting from taxable income compared to zero income tax expense in the years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019 where we recorded taxable losses. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 1.03% which is primarily comprised of net operating losses and research and development credits as well as changes in our valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $546.0 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Since our inception, we have relied primarily on the proceeds from public and private sales of our equity securities, borrowings, government grants and revenues from product sales and collaboration agreements to fund our operations. Our funds are currently invested in money market funds, U.S. treasuries, U.S. government agency securities and corporate debt securities. We currently anticipate that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, and anticipated revenues from HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018 will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of this filing.
Advanced payments received from CEPI to reserve a specified quantity of CpG 1018 are initially accounted for as long-term deferred revenue. When we deliver CpG 1018 adjuvant to CEPI partner(s) or when we receive payment from CEPI partner(s), we reclassify the advanced payments from long-term deferred revenue to accrued liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, advance payments totaling $5.4 million were included in other long-term liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021, advance payments totaling $128.8 million was recorded as CEPI accrual in our consolidated balance sheets.
As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate principal amount of our Convertible Notes was $225.5 million, excluding debt discount of $5.0 million. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.50% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on November 15, 2021. The Convertible Notes mature on May 15, 2026, unless converted, redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net cash proceeds of $28.2 million resulting from sales of 2,878,567 shares of our common stock pursuant to a 2020 At Market Sales Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (“2020 ATM Agreement”). All of these shares were sold during the three months ended March 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had $120.5 million remaining under the 2020 ATM Agreement.
Prior to January 1, 2021, we incurred net losses in each year since our inception. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded net income of $76.7 million. We cannot be certain that sales of our products, and the revenue from our other activities are sustainable. Further, we expect to continue to incur substantial expenses as we continue to invest in commercialization of HEPLISAV-B, development of our CpG 1018 adjuvant and clinical trials and other development. If we cannot generate a sufficient amount of revenue from product sales, we will need to finance our operations through strategic alliance and licensing arrangements and/or future public or private debt and equity financings. Raising additional funds through the issuance of equity or debt securities could result in dilution to our existing stockholders, increased fixed payment obligations, or both. In addition, these securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock and could include covenants that would restrict our operations.
Our ability to raise additional capital in the equity and debt markets, should we choose to do so, is dependent on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the market demand for our common stock, which itself is subject to a number of development and business risks and uncertainties, our creditworthiness and the uncertainty that we would be able to raise such additional capital at a price or on terms that are favorable to us. In addition, our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by deteriorating global economic conditions and the recent or future disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise. Adequate financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available when needed, we may need to significantly reduce our operations while we seek strategic alternatives, which could have an adverse impact on our ability to achieve our intended business objectives.
2021 versus 2020
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $335.5 million of cash from our operations primarily due to our net income of $76.7 million, of which $82.4 million consisted of non-cash items which included change in fair value of warrant liability, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of right-of-use assets, inventory write-off, non-cash interest expense and accretion and amortization on marketable securities. By comparison, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $92.3 million of cash for our operations primarily due to our net loss of $75.2 million, of which $21.6 million consisted of non-cash items which included stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, change in fair value of warrant liability, amortization of right-of-use assets, non-cash interest expense, amortization of
intangible assets and accretion and amortization on marketable securities. Cash provided by our operations during 2021 increased by $427.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received advance payments from collaboration partners totaling $371.9 million to manufacture and supply CpG 1018 adjuvant for delivery in future dates. We classified such payments as deferred revenue until we satisfy our performance obligation to transfer control of CpG 1018 adjuvant to collaboration partners. We invested approximately $130.2 million in prepaid manufacturing. We expect prepaid manufacturing to be converted into CpG 1018 adjuvant inventory within the next twelve months. Net cash provided by operating activities is also impacted by changes in our operating assets and liabilities due to timing of cash receipts and expenditures.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $14.2 million compared to $26.5 million of cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 included $22.7 million of net proceeds from maturities of marketable securities during 2021 compared to $22.3 million of net purchases of marketable securities during 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid $7.0 million of sublicense payment to Merck. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we received $1 million and $6.9 million, respectively, from sale of SD-101 assets, net of transaction costs. Cash used in net purchases of property plant and equipment increased by $5.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was, primarily, due to the ongoing manufacturing facility expansion project in Düsseldorf during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $55.8 million and $109.5 million, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included net proceeds of $219.8 million from the issuance of our Convertible Notes, $28.2 million from our 2020 ATM Agreement, $17.8 million from warrants exercised, $7.4 million from options exercised and employee stock purchase plan, offset by $190.2 million repayment of our long-term debt and $27.2 million purchases of capped call options. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included net proceeds of $75.4 million from our underwritten public offering in May 2020, $32.3 million from our, now terminated, 2017 ATM Agreement and $0.8 million from our 2020 ATM Agreement.
Contractual Obligations
We lease our facilities in Emeryville, California and Düsseldorf, Germany.
In July 2019, we entered into an agreement to sublease 23,976 square feet of office space located at 2100 Powell Street, Emeryville, California for our new global headquarters. This sublease agreement will continue until June 30, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we are obligated to make lease payments totaling $0.6 million within the next 12 months, plus any operating expenses and taxes.
In September 2018, we entered into an agreement to lease 75,662 square feet of laboratory and office space located at 5959 Horton Street, Emeryville, California at the rate of $4.75 per square foot, paid on a monthly basis (“Horton Street Lease”). As of December 31, 2021, we are obligated to make lease payments totaling $4.7 million within the next 12 months and $44.3 million beyond the next 12 months, plus any operating expenses and taxes over the Horton Street Lease term. In July 2019, we entered into an agreement to sublease the entire 75,662 square feet to a third party at the rate of $5.50 per square foot, paid on a monthly basis (“Horton Street Sublease”). Both the Horton Street Lease and the Horton Street Sublease will continue until March 31, 2031.
In September 2021, we entered into a commercial lease agreement in Düsseldorf, Germany (the "New Düsseldorf Lease"). The New Düsseldorf Lease is for the same space that we currently lease in Düsseldorf, Germany and with the same landlord. Our existing lease will continue until December 31, 2021, at which point the New Düsseldorf Lease will be in effect. As of December 31, 2021, we are obligated to make lease payments totaling $0.5 million within the next 12 months and $7.3 million beyond the next 12 months, plus any operating expenses and taxes over the lease term.
In May 2021, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.50% convertible senior notes due 2026 in a private placement. The purchasers also partially exercised their option to purchase additional Convertible Notes in May 2021 and we issued an additional $25.5 million of the Convertible Notes. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate principal amount of our Convertible Notes was $225.5 million, excluding debt discount of $5.0 million. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.50% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning on November 15, 2021. The Convertible Notes mature on May 15, 2026, unless converted, redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their terms prior to such date.
In May 2021, we repaid the principal on the term loans (the "Term Loans") under the term loan agreement (“Loan Agreement”) with CRG Servicing LLC in full. With the full repayment of the Term Loans, all security interests, covenants, liens and encumbrances under the Loan Agreement were permanently released.
In November 2013, we entered into a Commercial Manufacturing and Supply Agreement with Baxter Pharmaceutical Solutions LLC (“Baxter”) that was amended in September 2021 (as amended, the “Baxter Agreement”). Baxter provides formulation, fill and finish services and produces pre-filled syringes (“PFS”) of HEPLISAV-B for commercial use. Pursuant to the Baxter Agreement, we are obligated to purchase an annual minimum number of batches of PFS for each of the next five calendar years, and there are certain limits on the number of batches that Baxter is required to produce. As of December 31, 2021, our aggregate minimum commitment under the Baxter Agreement was $3.2 million within the next 12 months and $43.4 million beyond the next 12 months, which is included in the material non-cancelable purchase commitments below.
We have entered into material purchase commitments with commercial manufacturers for the supply of HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018 adjuvant. As of December 31, 2021, our material non-cancelable purchase commitments, for the supply of HEPLISAV-B and CpG 1018 adjuvant totaled $52.1 million within the next 12 months.
In addition to the non-cancelable commitments noted above, we have entered into contractual arrangements that obligate us to make payments to the contractual counterparties upon the occurrence of future events. In addition, in the normal course of operations, we have entered into license and other agreements and intend to continue to seek additional rights relating to compounds or technologies in connection with our discovery, manufacturing and development programs. Under the terms of the agreements, we may be required to pay future up-front fees, milestones and royalties on net sales of products originating from the licensed technologies, if any, or other payments contingent upon the occurrence of future events that cannot reasonably be estimated.
We also rely on and have entered into agreements with research institutions, contract research organizations and clinical investigators as well as clinical material manufacturers. These agreements are terminable by us upon written notice. Generally, we are liable only for actual effort expended by the organizations at any point in time during the contract through the notice period.
In conjunction with our agreement with Holdings in November 2009, we agreed to make contingent cash payments to Holdings equal to 50% of the first $50 million from any upfront, pre-commercialization milestone or similar payments received by us from any agreement with any third party with respect to the development and/or commercialization of cancer and hepatitis C therapies originally licensed to Symphony Dynamo, Inc., including SD-101. In July 2020, we sold assets related to our SD-101 compound to TriSalus. We are obligated to pay Holdings 50% of the contingent pre-commercialization milestone payments that we may receive under the Asset Purchase Agreement. We paid $2.5 million to Holdings in August 2020 and $0.5 million in September 2021. No liability has been recorded under this agreement as of December 31, 2021.