Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 11, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the placement units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Development
On October 20, 2021, we entered into a Merger Agreement with Merger Sub, TMTG, our sponsor, in the capacity as our representative for certain stockholders, and TMTG’s Chief Legal Officer, in the capacity as the representative for stockholders of TMTG.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, (i) upon the Closing, Merger Sub will merge with and into TMTG, with TMTG continuing as the surviving corporation in the Merger and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. In the Merger, (i) all shares of TMTG Stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (other than those properly exercising any applicable dissenters rights under Delaware law) will be converted into the right to receive the Merger consideration; (ii) each outstanding option to acquire shares of TMTG Stock (whether vested or unvested) will be assumed by the Company and automatically converted into an option to acquire shares of the Company’s common stock, with its price and number of shares equitably adjusted based on the conversion ratio of the shares of TMTG Stock into the Merger consideration and (iii) each outstanding restricted stock unit of TMTG shall be converted into a restricted stock unit relating to shares of the Company’s common stock. At the Closing, the Company will change its name to “Trump Media & Technology Group Corp.”
Consummation of the TMTG Business Combination is subject to customary conditions of the respective parties, including regulatory approval and the approval of the Merger by our stockholders in accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the completion of a redemption offer whereby we will be providing our public stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their shares of our common stock for cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount on deposit in our trust account. The Merger Agreement can be terminated by either party if any of the closing conditions have not been satisfied or waived by September 20, 2022 (the “Outside Date”), provided that the Company shall have the right to extend the Outside Date if it obtains an extension of the deadline by which it must complete its business combination (an “Extension”) for the shortest of (i) three months, (ii) the period ending on the last day for the Company to consummate a business combination after such Extension and (iii) such period as determined by the Company. As of the date of this Report, the Company anticipates that the TMTG Business Combination will be consummated on or before the Outside Date.
On December 4, 2021, in support of the TMTG Business Combination, the Company entered into certain SPAs with certain PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of the Company’s Series A Convertible Preferred Stock for a purchase price of $1,000 per share for an aggregate commitment of up to $1,000,000,000 in a PIPE” to be consummated concurrently with the TMTG Business Combination. The shares are currently convertible into 29,761,905 shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to upward adjustment. The PIPE is conditioned on the concurrent closing of the TMTG
Business Combination and other customary closing conditions and is terminable by the PIPE Investors if the TMTG Business Combination has not closed by the Outside Date. For more information on the TMTG Business Combination and the PIPE Investment, see “Item 1. Business.”
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, on December 31, 2021, we had approximately $327,731 in cash. We have incurred and continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering and the search for targets for our initial business combination, including the proposed Merger with TMTG. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence in connection with our search for targets for our initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,391,593, which consists primarily of formation and operating expenses.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19
pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B common stock by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
On September 8, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 28,750,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $287,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 1,133,484 placement units at a price of $10.00 per placement unit in a private placement to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $11,334,840.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the placement units, a total of $293,250,000 was placed in a U.S.-based trust account, maintained by Continental, acting as trustee. We incurred $15,668,029 in transaction costs, including $3,593,750 of underwriting fees, $10,062,500 of deferred underwriting fees, fair value of representative shares of $1,437,500 and $574,279 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,114,081 and was primarily comprised of a net loss of $1,391,593.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $293,257,098 held in the trust account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $327,731 outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the placement units. In November 2021, our sponsor committed to provide loans of up to an aggregate of $1,000,000 to the Company through September 8, 2022, which loans will be non-interest
bearing, unsecured and will be payable upon the consummation of a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Management believes that the Company has sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using the funds held outside of the trust account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space,
administrative and support services to us. We will incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $10,062,500 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our condensed interim balance sheets.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are initially recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. The Company accounts for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40. The Company has determined that the warrants qualify for equity treatment in the Company’s financial statements.