ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors including, but not limited to, those disclosed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in other documents filed with the SEC and otherwise publicly disclosed. Please refer to “Forward-Looking Statements” contained within this Item 7 for additional information. This discussion also contains non-GAAP financial measures, which are discussed in the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”.
For a complete description of our business including our operating policies, investment philosophy and strategy, financing and hedging strategies, and other important information, please refer to Item 1 of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Economic conditions continued to improve in 2021 from the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic as evidenced by an increase in real GDP in the U.S. to 5.7% versus a decline of 3.4% in 2020. Throughout 2021, Federal Reserve policy was highly accommodative, keeping short-term interest rates low and providing strong demand for risk assets, particularly Agency MBS, in order to aid economic recovery. The combination of the impact on supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy contributed to inflation levels well above the Federal Reserve’s target of 2.0% throughout 2021. The Federal Reserve initially characterized these elevated levels as transitory and continued to provide substantial monetary stimulus. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Federal Reserve signaled a reduction in in asset purchases, citing an improving economy, elevated inflation, and further improvement in the labor market. The improving economy combined with monetary policy and fiscal stimulus translated to a somewhat unpredictable interest rate environment during 2021, which saw a sharp steepening in the first quarter led by the mid-range and longer-term portion of the curve, followed by modest flattening through the second and third quarters as longer-term interest rates declined slightly, and further flattening led by the mid-range of the curve in the fourth quarter as markets began adjusting to shifts in the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy announced toward the end of 2021.
The charts below show the highest and lowest U.S. Treasury and swap rates during the year ended December 31, 2021 as well as the rates as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Spreads on risk assets owned by the Company were volatile as well during 2021. While Agency RMBS, CMBS, and CMBS IO all experienced significant tightening in the first quarter, higher coupon Agency RMBS spreads widened in the second quarter while CMBS and CMBS IO spreads experienced further tightening during the same period. In the third quarter, Agency RMBS tightened again while the majority of CMBS and CMBS IO modestly widened. By the end of the fourth quarter after the Federal Reserve announced plans to begin tapering their purchases, spreads on most Agency assets widened again, almost to where they began the year. The table below shows the market spreads in basis points as of the end of each quarter in 2021 for certain investment types in our MBS portfolio:
(1)Negative amounts represent spreads below the benchmark risk free rate and positive amounts represent spreads above the benchmark risk free rate.
(2)Option adjusted spreads are based on Company estimates using third-party models and market data.
(3)Data represents the spread to swap rate on newly issued securities and is sourced from JP Morgan.
Our 2021 Performance
To manage through the interest rate environment experienced throughout 2021, we focused on actively managing our investment portfolio and hedge position, reducing leverage, and raising capital in preparation for opportunities to expand our balance sheet in anticipation of the Federal Reserve ending its purchases of Agency RMBS and U.S. Treasuries. Active portfolio management allowed us to take advantage of volatility in credit spreads during 2021 as we realized gains by selling MBS when spreads tightened and reinvested the sale proceeds into lower coupon MBS at lower premiums when spreads widened. We shifted our portfolio allocation further into lower coupon Agency RMBS and TBA securities because lower coupons are typically impacted less by duration extension and credit spread widening relative to higher coupon assets in an increasing interest rate environment. We increased our investment in TBA securities during most of 2021 because they allowed us more flexibility in managing leverage due to their higher liquidity relative to specified pools and also offer better risk-adjusted returns due to lower financing costs (implied through the use of dollar roll transactions) versus the repurchase agreement borrowings we typically use to finance purchases of specified pools.
Hedge selection and positioning also played an important role in managing our interest rate risk throughout 2021. The loss in fair value of our investment portfolio (including TBA securities), net of gains from our interest rate hedges was $(0.2) million. We protected our portfolio from duration risk in the increasing interest rate environment by significantly increasing our hedge position over the course of the year, ending 2021 with a notional of $4.4 billion in primarily short positions in ten-year U.S. Treasury futures. For the year ended December 31, 2021, total economic return to our common shareholders(1) was $0.47 per common share, or 2.5% of beginning book value. While book value per common share declined $(1.09) during the year, we believe the volatility in interest rates noted above could have led to larger losses without our active portfolio management and hedge positioning.
During 2021, we continuously worked to raise capital through at-the-market and other public offerings, ending the year with additional common equity capital of almost $237.0 million, net of issuance costs. Our capital raising contributed significantly to our ability to maintain a high level of liquidity and lower leverage. As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $533.1 million in cash and unencumbered Agency MBS, and our leverage, including TBA securities at cost, was 5.7 times shareholders’ equity.
Current Outlook
We believe markets are transitioning to a more favorable environment to add higher yielding assets to our investment portfolio. As the Federal Reserve reduces its purchases of Agency RMBS and tightens monetary policy by
(1) Total economic return to common shareholders is comprised of dividends declared of $1.56 per common share less the decline in book value of $(1.09) per common share during the year ended December 31, 2021.
raising the Federal Funds Rate, we expect higher risk-adjusted returns on our target investments as private capital replaces the Federal Reserve as the predominant buyers in the market, which we believe will more than offset our borrowing costs which are likely to increase in 2022. While we also expect credit spreads will widen further, we believe we are well positioned to navigate the book value risk to wider spreads due to our low leverage, our hedge positioning, and our lower coupon Agency RMBS. As mortgage rates continue to increase, and especially as the Federal Reserve exits its buying program, we expect the supply of higher coupons will increase and bear the brunt of future spread widening while lower coupon MBS will experience limited spread widening due to its seasoning and lack of new supply. As the supply of higher coupons increase and prices fall, we believe we will be able to take advantage of opportunities to acquire these assets at better risk-adjusted returns because we have excess capital to deploy and room to increase leverage.
We remain cautious, however, as the pace and scope of monetary policy tightening in 2022 in the U.S. and abroad is highly uncertain, and we expect significant moves in the shape of the yield curve and the level of yields across the curve. Furthermore, the global economy continues to evolve to a post-pandemic environment with rising complexities across economic, social and political factors, including, but not limited to:
•high and unsustainable debt levels which pose a risk to economic growth;
•elevated global inflation levels, reflecting pandemic supply and demand dynamics;
•uncertainties regarding ongoing hostilities between Russia and the Ukraine and the related impacts on macroeconomic conditions, including, among other things, interest rates;
•global labor market imbalances, exposing widening gaps in skills, education, healthcare, and digital access;
•shifting demographics, human conflict, and climate change; and
•fast-paced changes in technology and increased cyber-risk.
In summary, our decisions regarding leverage targets and the pace at which we expand our investment portfolio in the near term will depend on many factors including, but not limited to, the pace of tapering of purchases by the Federal Reserve, the pace at which the Federal Reserve reduces its balance sheet and the resulting impact on credit spread widening for Agency RMBS, the shape of the yield curve, and the level of interest rates, including the rate at which the Federal Reserve decides to increase the Federal Funds target rate. We remain flexible, patient, consistent, and disciplined in our approach to investment, financing, and hedging decisions as we continue to seek to generate above average returns for our shareholders.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Investment Portfolio
As of December 31, 2021, our investment portfolio is predominantly comprised of lower coupon Agency RMBS and TBA securities. The following chart compares the composition of our MBS portfolio including TBA securities as of the dates indicated:
(1) Includes TBA securities at their implied market value, as if settled, of $1.5 billion and $1.6 billion as of the periods indicated, respectively. TBA securities are recorded within “derivative assets (liabilities)” on our consolidated balance sheet at their net carrying value, which represents the difference between the implied market value and the implied cost basis of the TBA security as of the date indicated.
RMBS. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we have remained invested in primarily lower coupon securities which limited our exposure to duration extension and credit spread widening as interest rates rose throughout the year. Furthermore, most lower coupon Agency RMBS issued during the year were purchased by the Federal Reserve as part of their open market purchase operations, further limiting the risk of wider spreads. We believe lower coupon Agency RMBS will continue to provide higher risk-adjusted returns due to their seasoning, the lack of new supply in the higher rate environment, and the large ownership position of the Federal Reserve. In addition, our lower coupon investments also mitigate the risk of loss of premiums due to their lower cost basis and slower prepayment speeds relative to higher coupon assets.
We continued investing in TBA securities during the year ended December 31, 2021 because implied financing rates for dollar roll transactions continued to be lower than the financing rates for repurchase agreement borrowings we typically use to finance specified pools. Because TBA securities have higher relative liquidity than specified pools, these investments also allowed more flexibility to manage our capital allocation and leverage.
The following tables compare our fixed-rate Agency RMBS investments including TBA dollar roll positions as of the dates indicated:
(1) Implied cost basis of TBAs represents the forward price to be paid for the underlying Agency MBS.
(2) Fair value of TBAs is the implied market value of the underlying Agency security as of the end of the period.
(3) TBAs are included on the consolidated balance sheet within “derivative assets/liabilities” at their net carrying value which is the difference between their implied market value and implied cost basis. Please refer to Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(4) TBAs are excluded from this calculation as they do not have a defined weighted-average loan balance or age until mortgages have been assigned to the pool.
(5) Constant prepayment rate (“CPR”) represents the 3-month CPR of Agency RMBS held as of date indicated. Securities with no prepayment history are excluded from this calculation.
(6) Duration measures the sensitivity of a security's price to the change in interest rates and represents the percent change in price of a security for a 100-basis point increase in interest rates. We calculate duration using third-party financial models and empirical data. Different models and methodologies can produce different estimates of duration for the same securities.
CMBS.
We sold the majority of our Agency CMBS in 2020 as risk spreads declined sharply, leading to higher prices and diminishing returns on this type of investment. In 2021, we did not reinvest in newer issue CMBS because we believed the risk-adjusted return profile to be less favorable relative to Agency RMBS. The CMBS remaining in our investment portfolio consist mainly of seasoned investments with a higher probability of appreciation in the underlying collateral versus newer issue bonds. The following table presents information about our CMBS investments by year of origination as of the dates indicated:
(1) Months to estimated maturity is an average weighted by the amortized cost of the investment.
(2) The weighted average coupon (“WAC”) is the gross interest rate of the security weighted by the outstanding principal balance.
(3) The Company has one non-Agency CMBS originally issued in 1998 with an amortized cost and fair value of less than $1.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
CMBS IO.
The following tables present our CMBS IO investments by year of origination as of the dates indicated:
(1) Remaining weighted average life (“WAL”) represents an estimate of the number of months of contractual cash flows remaining for the investments by year of origination.
Non-Agency-issued securities are generally expected to have a higher risk of default than Agency CMBS IO. We mitigate this risk by investing in senior tranches of mostly AAA-rated securities where we have evaluated the credit profile of the underlying loan pool and can monitor credit performance. All of our non-Agency CMBS IO were originated prior to 2018, the majority of which we believe have had underlying property value appreciation. Non-Agency issued CMBS IO are backed by loans secured by a number of different property types, which are shown in the table below as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Other property types collateralizing non-Agency CMBS IO do not comprise more than 5% individually.
Because effective yields on CMBS IO securities are dependent upon the performance of the underlying loans, our return on these investments may be negatively impacted if the loans default, resulting in foreclosures or liquidations of the loan collateral. When the economic impacts of COVID-19 began in 2020, servicers reported an increase in delinquencies on loans underlying our non-Agency CMBS IO and responded by taking loss mitigation actions, such as loan forbearance or allowing the borrower to make loan payments using replacement reserve or similar property related funds. Most of the increases in delinquencies were in the retail and hotel sectors with a nominal impact on cash flows and yields on the securities. Considering the characteristics of our non-Agency CMBS IO, such as seasoning, loan-to-value ratio, and geographic location of the collateral, as well as the actions taken by servicers to
work with borrowers through various relief measures, we have not seen evidence of and do not currently expect a material adverse effect on our future cash flows for non-Agency CMBS IO. In addition, more recently, our servicers have begun reporting lower delinquencies, and they are now more in line with the level we experienced prior to the onset of the economic impacts of the pandemic. However, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on the global economy and on the loans underlying any of our securities remains uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
Repurchase Agreements
We maintained lower leverage throughout 2021 in order to reduce risk given volatility in the market and the lower marginal returns available due to credit spread tightening. As such, we partially financed investments we purchased during 2021 with repurchase agreement borrowings, which increased $0.4 million, or approximately 17%, to $2.8 billion as of December 31, 2021 in conjunction with a portion of the proceeds received from common equity capital we raised during the year. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we worked with our repurchase agreement counterparties to extend the maturities of our borrowings further into 2022 in order to lock in low financing rates over a longer term in light of possible near term increases in the Federal Funds Rate by the Federal Reserve. Please refer to Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” contained within this Item 7 for additional information relating to our repurchase agreement borrowings.
Derivative Assets and Liabilities
We use derivative instruments to economically hedge our exposure to adverse changes in interest rates resulting from our ownership of primarily fixed-rate investments financed with short-term repurchase agreements. We regularly monitor and frequently adjust our hedging portfolio in response to many factors including, but not limited to, changes in our investment portfolio as well as our expectation of future interest rates, including the absolute level of rates and the slope of the yield curve versus market expectations.
During 2021, we increased our short positions in U.S. Treasury futures in the 10-year portion of the curve in order to protect our portfolio from duration risk in the increasing interest rate environment. We significantly reduced our notional balance of interest rate swaptions and removed options on U.S. Treasury futures from our hedging portfolio because our lower coupon assets have less convexity risk to hedge in a rising interest rate environment. Please refer to Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details on our interest rate derivative instruments as well as “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk” in Part II,