ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS ("MD&A") OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The purpose of the MD&A is to present information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and cash flows for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 and our financial condition as of March 31, 2022. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our financial statements and notes.
The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
•Background
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Estimates
The following discussion includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021. A comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” on Form 10-K filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 28, 2021.
Background
DXC helps global companies run their mission critical systems and operations while modernizing IT, optimizing data architectures, and ensuring security and scalability across public, private and hybrid clouds. The world’s largest companies and public sector organizations trust DXC to deploy services across the Enterprise Technology Stack to drive new levels of performance, competitiveness, and customer experience.
We generate revenue by offering a wide range of information technology services and solutions primarily in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. We operate through two segments: Global Business Services ("GBS") and Global Infrastructure Services ("GIS"). We market and sell our services directly to customers through our direct sales offices around the world. Our customers include commercial businesses of many sizes and in many industries and public sector clients.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data for fiscal 2022 and 2021:
Fiscal 2022 Highlights
Fiscal 2022 financial highlights include the following:
•Fiscal 2022 revenues were $16,265 million, a decrease of 8.3% as compared to fiscal 2021. See "Revenues” below for additional information.
•Fiscal 2022 net income and diluted income per share were $736 million and $2.81, respectively, compared to net loss and diluted loss per share of $146 million and $0.59, respectively, for fiscal 2021. Net income increased by $882 million during fiscal 2022 as compared to the prior fiscal year. The increase was primarily due to increases in non-service components of net periodic pension income attributable to changes in mark-to-market actuarial assumptions and asset valuations, cost optimization realized in the current period, lower costs after the dispositions of the HPS and HHS businesses, lower transaction, separation and integration-related costs, a reduction in restructuring activities, and decreases in depreciation and amortization, partially offset by a reduction in revenue, an increase in debt extinguishment costs, and the gain on disposition of the HHS business during the third quarter fiscal 2021. Net income included the cumulative impact of certain items totaling $171 million during fiscal 2022, reflecting restructuring costs, transaction, separation and integration-related costs, amortization of acquired intangible assets, gains on dispositions, impairment losses, debt extinguishment costs, pension and other post-retirement benefit ("OPEB") actuarial and settlement gains, and a tax adjustment.
•Fiscal 2022 income tax expense decreased significantly compared to fiscal 2021 as a result of the gain on disposition of the HHS business, which included the impact of non-tax deductible goodwill in fiscal 2021.
•Our cash and cash equivalents were $2,672 million at March 31, 2022.
•We generated $1,501 million of cash from operations during fiscal 2022, as compared to $124 million during fiscal 2021.
Revenues
During fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, the distribution of our revenues across operating segments and geographies were as follows:
(1) Constant currency revenues are a non-GAAP measure calculated by translating current period activity into U.S. dollars using the comparable prior period’s currency conversion rates. This information is consistent with how management views our revenues and evaluates our operating performance and trends. For more information, see "Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
The decrease in revenues for fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021, reflects the disposition of the HPS business during the first quarter of fiscal 2022, in addition to disposition of the HHS business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021. Project completions, project terminations, and contractual price adjustments also contributed to the decrease in revenues. The decrease in revenues was partially offset by additional services provided to new and existing customers, increased pass-through revenue associated with the resale of hardware and software, and increased run-rate project volumes. Fiscal 2022 revenues included a favorable foreign currency exchange rate impact of 0.8%, primarily driven by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the British Pound, Canadian Dollar, and Australian Dollar.
For a discussion of risks associated with our foreign operations, see Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors subsections titled, "Our ability to compete in certain markets we serve is dependent on our ability to continue to expand our capacity in certain offshore locations. However, as our presence in these locations increases, we are exposed to risks inherent to these locations which may adversely affect our revenue and profitability." and “Our international operations are exposed to risks, including fluctuations in exchange rates, which may be beyond our control."
Global Business Services
Our GBS revenues were $7.6 billion for fiscal 2022, a decrease of 8.9% compared to fiscal 2021. GBS revenue in constant currency decreased 9.3% compared to fiscal 2021. The decrease in GBS revenues was primarily due to the disposition of the HPS business at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2022, the disposition of the HHS business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021, and project completions. The decrease in GBS revenues was partially offset by an increase in run-rate project volumes and additional services provided to new and existing customers.
Global Infrastructure Services
Our GIS revenues were $8.7 billion for fiscal 2022, a decrease of 7.7% compared to fiscal 2021. GIS revenue in constant currency decreased 8.9% compared to fiscal 2021. The decrease in GIS revenues reflects project completions, project terminations, a decrease in run-rate project volumes, and contractual price adjustments. The decrease in GIS revenues was partially offset by additional services provided to new and existing customers and increased pass-through revenue associated with the resale of hardware and software.
During fiscal 2022, GBS and GIS had contract awards of $9.4 billion and $8.7 billion, respectively, compared with $11.0 billion and $8.8 billion, respectively, during fiscal 2021.
Costs and Expenses
Our total costs and expenses were as follows:
The 330 basis point decrease in total costs and expenses as a percentage of revenue for fiscal 2022 primarily reflects cost optimization realized in the current period, lower costs after the dispositions of the HPS and HHS businesses, lower transaction, separation and integration-related costs, a reduction in restructuring activities, decreases in depreciation and amortization and an increase in other (income) expense attributed to income from non-service components of net periodic pension (income) expense, partially offset by a decrease in gain on disposition of businesses and an increase in debt extinguishment costs.
Costs of Services
Cost of services, excluding depreciation and amortization and restructuring costs ("COS"), was $12.7 billion for fiscal 2022, as compared to $14.1 billion in fiscal 2021. COS decreased $1.4 billion compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease in COS was primarily due to cost optimization savings realized during fiscal 2022 and reduced costs resulting from the dispositions of the HPS business during the first quarter of fiscal 2022 and the HHS business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021. COS as a percentage of revenue decreased 1.7% as compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease was primarily driven by cost reductions exceeding the associated decline in revenue compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense, excluding depreciation and amortization and restructuring costs ("SG&A"), was $1.4 billion for fiscal 2022, as compared to $2.1 billion in fiscal 2021. SG&A decreased $0.7 billion compared to the prior fiscal year. The decrease in SG&A was primarily driven by lower transaction, separation and integration-related costs, cost optimization savings realized during fiscal 2022, and reduced costs resulting from the dispositions of the HPS business during the first quarter of fiscal 2022 and the HHS business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
Transaction, separation and integration-related costs, included in SG&A, were $26 million during fiscal 2022, as compared to $358 million during fiscal 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation expense was $625 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $754 million in fiscal 2021. Depreciation expense decreased $129 million primarily due to a reduction in assets due to impairment of un-deployed assets in the prior year, and asset retirements.
Amortization expense was $1,092 million for fiscal 2022, as compared to $1,216 million in fiscal 2021. Amortization expense decreased $124 million primarily due to a decrease in customer related intangibles related to the disposition of the HHS business during the third quarter of fiscal 2021 and a reduction in transition and transformation contract cost amortization due to contract completions.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs represent severance related to workforce optimization programs and expense associated with facilities and data center rationalization.
During fiscal 2022, management approved global cost savings initiatives designed to better align our workforce and facility structures. Total restructuring costs recorded, net of reversals, during fiscal 2022 and 2021 were $318 million and $551 million, respectively.
See Note 22 - "Restructuring Costs" for additional information about our restructuring actions.
Interest Expense and Interest Income
Interest expense for fiscal 2022 was $204 million, as compared to $361 million in fiscal 2021, a decrease of 43%. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a reduction in bonds and term loans and the Company's refinancing of its high coupon debt during fiscal 2022, decreased amounts drawn on our revolving credit facility, and decreases to finance leases and asset financing.
Interest income for fiscal 2022 was $65 million, as compared to $98 million in fiscal 2021. The decrease in interest income was primarily driven by lower income from our multicurrency cash pools and money market accounts as well as decreases in lease interest income.
Debt Extinguishment Costs
Debt extinguishment costs for fiscal 2022 were $311 million, as compared to $41 million in fiscal 2021. Debt extinguishment costs for fiscal 2022 include costs related to the full redemption of our Euro-denominated term loan facility, two series of 4.45% senior notes due fiscal 2023, 4.25% senior notes due fiscal 2025, 2.75% senior notes due fiscal 2025, 4.125% senior notes due fiscal 2026, 4.75% senior notes due fiscal 2028, 7.45% senior notes due fiscal 2030, extinguishment of debt associated with asset financing, and costs related to the decrease in our revolving credit facility limit from $4 billion to $3 billion.
Debt extinguishment costs for fiscal 2021 consisted primarily of costs related to the redemption of 4.00% senior notes due fiscal 2024.
Gain on Dispositions
During the first quarter of fiscal 2022, DXC sold its HPS business for $551 million which resulted in an estimated pre-tax gain on sale of $331 million, net of closing costs. Insignificant businesses were also sold during fiscal 2022 that resulted in a gain of $53 million. This was partially offset by $13 million in sales price adjustments related to prior year dispositions, which resulted from changes in projected closing net working capital.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, DXC sold its HHS business for $5.0 billion which resulted in an estimated pre-tax gain on sale of $2,014 million, net of closing costs. Insignificant businesses were also sold during fiscal 2021 that resulted in a loss of $10 million.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net comprises non-service cost components of net periodic pension (income) expense, movement in foreign currency exchange rates on our foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities and the related economic hedges, equity earnings of unconsolidated affiliates and other miscellaneous gains and losses.
The components of other (income) expense, net for fiscal 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
The $1,183 million increase in other income, net, for fiscal 2022, as compared to the prior fiscal year, was due to a year-over-year increase of $1,176 million in non-service components of net periodic pension income attributable to changes in mark-to-market actuarial assumptions and asset valuations, a $6 million increase in other gains from sales of non-operating assets, and a year-over-year favorable foreign currency impact of $1 million.
Taxes
Our effective tax rate ("ETR") on income (loss) from continuing operations, before taxes, for fiscal 2022 and 2021 was 35.5% and 122.3%, respectively. A reconciliation of the differences between the U.S. federal statutory rate and the ETR, as well as other information about our income tax provision, is provided in Note 13 - "Income Taxes."
In fiscal 2022, the ETR was primarily impacted by:
•Income Tax and Foreign Tax Credits, which decreased income tax expense and decreased the ETR by $174 million and 15.2%, respectively.
•Changes in Luxembourg losses that increased the ETR by $1,609 million and 141.0%, respectively, with an offsetting decrease in the ETR due to a decrease in the valuation allowance of the same amount.
•Adjustments to uncertain tax positions that increased the overall income tax expense and the ETR by $78 million and 6.8%, respectively.
In fiscal 2021, the ETR was primarily impacted by:
•Impact of the HHS and other business divestitures, which increased tax expense and increased the ETR $344 million and 52.6%, respectively. The HHS tax gain increased tax expense and the ETR as the tax basis of assets sold, primarily goodwill, was lower than the book basis.
•Continued losses in countries where we are recording a valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets, primarily in Belgium, Denmark, Italy, France, Luxembourg, and U.S., and an impairment of the full German deferred tax asset, which increased income tax expense and increased the ETR by $1,565 million and 239.3%, respectively.
•An increase in Income Tax and Foreign Tax Credits, which decreased income tax expense and decreased the ETR by $319 million and 48.7%, respectively.
•Local losses on investments in Luxembourg that increased the foreign rate differential and decreased the ETR by $1,226 million and 187.5%, respectively, with an offsetting increase in the ETR due to an increase in the valuation allowance of the same amount.
•The Company recognized adjustments to uncertain tax positions that increased the overall income tax expense and the ETR by $112 million and 17.2%, respectively.
The Internal Revenue Service (the “IRS”) has examined, or is examining, the Company’s federal income tax returns for fiscal 2008 through the tax year ended October 31, 2018. With respect to CSC’s fiscal 2008 through 2017 federal tax returns, the Company participated in settlement negotiations with the IRS Office of Appeals. The IRS examined several issues for these tax years that resulted in various audit adjustments. The Company and the IRS Office of Appeals have an agreement in principle as to various audit adjustments, and we disagree with the IRS’ disallowance of certain losses and deductions resulting from restructuring costs and tax planning strategies in previous years. As we believe we will ultimately prevail on the technical merits of the disagreed items and are challenging them in the IRS Office of Appeals or the U.S. Tax Court, these matters are not fully reserved and would result in a federal and state tax expense of approximately $458 million (including estimated interest and penalties) for the unreserved portion of these items and related cash cost if we do not prevail. We have received notices of deficiency with respect to fiscal 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2013 and have timely filed petitions with the U.S. Tax Court. We do not expect the U.S. Tax Court matters to be resolved in the next 12 months.
The Company has agreed to extend the statute of limitations for fiscal years 2008 through 2010 to April 30, 2022, for fiscal years 2014 through fiscal 2017 to February 28, 2023, and for the tax years ended October 31, 2017, and October 31, 2018, to September 30, 2023. The statute of limitations on assessments for fiscal years 2011 through 2013 has expired, with the exception of a $6 million refund claim for 2012 for which the statute remains open. However, as previously noted, fiscal years 2011 and 2013 are in the U.S. Tax Court and consequently these years will remain open until the U.S. Tax Court proceedings have concluded.
The Company expects to reach resolution with regard to disagreed items for fiscal years 2009 through 2013 no earlier than fiscal 2025, and to reach resolution for fiscal years 2014 through 2017, within 12 months.
The Company may settle certain other tax examinations for different amounts than the Company has accrued as uncertain tax positions. Consequently, the Company may need to accrue and ultimately pay additional amounts or pay lower amounts than previously estimated and accrued when positions are settled in the future. The Company believes the outcomes that are reasonably possible within the next 12 months to result in a reduction in its liability for uncertain tax positions, excluding interest, penalties, and tax carry-forwards, would be approximately $44 million.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Diluted earnings (loss) per share for fiscal 2022 was $2.81, as compared to $(0.59) in fiscal 2021. The earnings per share increase was due to an increase of $882 million in net income.
Diluted earnings per share for fiscal 2022 includes $0.99 per share of restructuring costs, $0.07 per share of transaction, separation and integration-related costs, $1.35 per share of amortization of acquired intangible assets, $0.09 per share of impairment losses, $(0.93) per share of net gains on dispositions, $(1.99) per share of pension and OPEB actuarial and settlement gains, $0.93 per share of debt extinguishment costs, and $0.17 per share of tax adjustments primarily relating to tax adjustments to impair or recognize certain deferred tax assets and adjustments for changes in tax legislation.
Diluted loss per share for fiscal 2021 includes $1.79 per share of restructuring costs, $1.06 per share of transaction, separation and integration-related costs, $1.59 per share of amortization of acquired intangible assets, $0.55 per share of impairment losses, $(4.22) per share of net gains on dispositions, $1.57 per share of pension and OPEB actuarial and settlement losses, $0.12 per share of debt extinguishment costs, and $0.55 per share of tax adjustment relating to a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets offset by changes in outside basis related to held for sale classification of the HPS business.
Ukraine / Russia Update
Subsequent to the end of the quarter, DXC exited its domestic Russian business. This action achieves a significant portion of our commitment to exit Russia. The sale of this business has provided continuing employment opportunities for many former DXC employees who have chosen to stay in Russia. The exit of this market will reduce revenues by approximately $140 million annually. The company is transitioning global business previously serviced by our DXC Russian colleagues to international teams and expects to complete this process by the end of the second quarter.
DXC's Ukraine business supported approximately $250 million of revenue, predominantly serving international customers. Despite the ongoing conflict, these revenues have only seen a minor impact stemming from the conflict. Our global teams have worked to augment their Ukrainian colleagues, and to continue to deliver for our customers through the conflict.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present non-GAAP financial measures of performance which are derived from the statements of operations of DXC. These non-GAAP financial measures include earnings before interest and taxes (“EBIT”), adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income before income taxes, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP net income attributable to DXC common stockholders, and non-GAAP EPS, and constant currency revenues.
We believe EBIT, adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income before income taxes, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP net income attributable to DXC common stockholders, and non-GAAP EPS provide investors with useful supplemental information about our operating performance after excluding certain categories of expenses.
We believe constant currency revenues provides investors with useful supplemental information about our revenues after excluding the effect of currency exchange rate fluctuations for currencies other than U.S. dollars in the periods presented. See below for a description of the methodology we use to present constant currency revenues.
One category of expenses excluded from adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income before income tax, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP net income attributable to DXC common stockholders, and non-GAAP EPS, incremental amortization of intangible assets acquired through business combinations, if included, may result in a significant difference in period over period amortization expense on a GAAP basis. We exclude amortization of certain acquired intangible assets as these non-cash amounts are inconsistent in amount and frequency and are significantly impacted by the timing and/or size of acquisitions. Although DXC management excludes amortization of acquired intangible assets primarily customer-related intangible assets, from its non-GAAP expenses, we believe that it is important for investors to understand that such intangible assets were recorded as part of purchase accounting and support revenue generation. Any future transactions may result in a change to the acquired intangible asset balances and associated amortization expense.
Another category of expenses excluded from adjusted EBIT, non-GAAP income before income tax, non-GAAP net income, non-GAAP net income attributable to DXC common stockholders, and non-GAAP EPS is impairment losses, which, if included, may result in a significant difference in period over period expense on a GAAP basis. We exclude impairment losses as these non-cash amounts reflect generally an acceleration of what would be multiple periods of expense and are not expected to occur frequently. Further assets such as goodwill may be significantly impacted by market conditions outside of management’s control.
There are limitations to the use of the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this report. One of the limitations is that they do not reflect complete financial results. We compensate for this limitation by providing a reconciliation between our non-GAAP financial measures and the respective most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes between companies. Selected references are made on a “constant currency basis” so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, thereby providing comparisons of operating performance from period to period. Financial results on a “constant currency basis” are non-GAAP measures calculated by translating current period activity into U.S. dollars using the comparable prior period’s currency conversion rates. This approach is used for all results where the functional currency is not the U.S. dollar. Please see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Fiscal 2022 Highlights.”
Certain non-GAAP financial measures and the respective most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP include:
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our non-GAAP adjustments include:
•Restructuring costs - includes costs, net of reversals, related to workforce and real estate optimization and other similar charges.
•Transaction, separation and integration-related (“TSI”) costs - includes costs related to integration, planning, financing and advisory fees and other similar charges associated with mergers, acquisitions, strategic investments, joint ventures, and dispositions and other similar transactions.(1)
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets - includes amortization of intangible assets acquired through business combinations.
•Gains and losses on dispositions - gains and losses related to dispositions of businesses, strategic assets and interests in less than wholly-owned entities.(2)
•Pension and OPEB actuarial and settlement gains and losses - pension and OPEB actuarial mark to market adjustments and settlement gains and losses.
•Debt extinguishment costs - costs associated with early retirement, redemption, repayment or repurchase of debt and debt-like items including any breakage, make-whole premium, prepayment penalty or similar costs as well as solicitation and other legal and advisory expenses.(3)
•Impairment losses - impairment losses on assets classified as long-term on the balance sheet.(4)
•Tax adjustments - reflects discrete tax adjustments to impair or recognize certain deferred tax assets and adjustments for changes in tax legislation. Income tax expense of merger and divestitures is separately computed based on the underlying transaction. Income tax expense of all other (non-discrete) non-GAAP adjustments is computed by applying the jurisdictional tax rate to the pre-tax adjustments on a jurisdictional basis.(5)
(1) TSI-Related Costs for both periods presented include fees and other internal and external expenses associated with legal, accounting, consulting, due diligence, investment banking advisory, and other services, as well as financing fees, retention incentives, and resolution of transaction related claims in connection with, or resulting from, exploring or executing potential acquisitions, dispositions and strategic investments, whether or not announced or consummated.
The TSI-Related costs for fiscal 2022 include $14 million of costs to execute dispositions (including $2 million for the sale of HHS which closed in October 2020 and $12 million for the sale of HPS which closed on April 1, 2021); $2 million legal costs and a $(12) million credit towards Perspecta Arbitration settlement; $5 million in expenses related to integration projects resulting from the CSC - HPE ES merger (including costs associated with continuing efforts to separate certain IT systems) and $17 million of costs incurred in connection with activities related to other acquisitions and divestitures.
The TSI-Related costs for fiscal 2021 include $250 million of costs to execute dispositions (including $142 million for the sale of HHS which closed in October 2020 and $61 million for the sale of the healthcare software business which closed on April 1, 2021); $42 million in expenses related to integration projects resulting from the CSC - HPES merger (including costs associated with continuing efforts to separate certain IT systems) and $66 million of costs incurred in connection with activities related to other acquisitions and divestitures.
(2) Gains and losses on dispositions for fiscal 2022 include a $331 million gain on sale of the HPS business, gains of $23 million on other dispositions and loss of $13 million on adjustments relating to the sale of the HHS business.
Gains and losses on dispositions for fiscal 2021 includes a $2,014 million gain on sale of the HHS business, a gain of $5 million on sales of other insignificant businesses, and a $15 million loss on equity securities without readily determinable fair value, which were adjusted to fair value following receipt of a bona fide offer to purchase.
(3) Debt extinguishment costs adjustments for fiscal 2022 includes $18 million to fully redeem two series of our 4.45% senior notes due fiscal 2023, $7 million associated with asset financing, $1 million to fully redeem our Euro-denominated term loan facility, $41 million to fully redeem our 4.25% senior notes due fiscal 2025, $26 million to fully redeem our 2.75% senior notes due fiscal 2025, $58 million to fully redeem our 4.125% senior notes due fiscal 2026, $87 million to fully redeem our 4.750% senior notes due fiscal 2028, $71 million to fully redeem our 7.45% senior notes due fiscal 2030, and $2 million related to the decrease in our revolving credit facility limit.
Debt extinguishment costs adjustments for fiscal 2021 includes $34 million to fully redeem our 4.00% senior notes due fiscal 2024 and $7 million to partially redeem two series of our 4.45% senior notes due fiscal 2023 via tender offer.
(4) Impairment losses for fiscal 2022 includes a $10 million impairment charge of capitalized TSI related property and equipment and a $21 million impairment charge of loan receivable and stock warrants associated with a strategic investment.
Impairment losses for fiscal 2021 were $190 million. This includes $165 million impairment for assets pre-purchased through preferred vendor agreements and determined un-deployable, $12 million partial impairment of acquired software, $7 million partial impairment of internally developed software intended for internal use and external sale, and $6 million of capitalized transition and transformation contract costs.
(5) Tax adjustment for fiscal 2022 includes a $50 million net revaluation of deferred taxes resulting from changes in non-US jurisdiction tax rates, and $(7) million of adjustment to the transition tax.
Tax adjustment for fiscal 2021 includes $175 million for the impairment of the German deferred tax asset via a valuation allowance, $9 million for tax expense relating to the USPS spin-off, offset by $35 million tax benefit related to the held for sale classification of the Healthcare Provider Software business, and $7 million tax benefit related to prior restructuring charges. The German tax asset was created from multiple periods of losses in Germany that, if not for certain non-GAAP adjustments of restructurings, pension mark to market loss, and impairments, would not have required the asset to be impaired and a valuation allowance established.
A reconciliation of reported results to non-GAAP results is as follows:
* The net periodic pension cost within net income includes $441 million of actual return on plan assets, whereas the net periodic pension cost within non-GAAP net income includes $581 million of expected long-term return on pension assets of defined benefit plans subject to interim remeasurement.
* The net periodic pension cost within net loss includes $1,401 million of actual return on plan assets, whereas the net periodic pension cost within non-GAAP net income includes $659 million of expected long-term return on pension assets of defined benefit plans subject to interim remeasurement.
Reconciliations of net income to adjusted EBIT are as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Cash Flows
As of March 31, 2022, our cash and cash equivalents ("cash") was $2.7 billion, of which $1.3 billion was held outside of the U.S. We maintain various multi-currency, multi-entity, cross-border, physical and notional cash and pool arrangements with various counterparties to manage liquidity efficiently that enable participating subsidiaries to draw on the Company’s pooled resources to meet liquidity needs.
A significant portion of the cash held by our foreign subsidiaries is not expected to be impacted by U.S. federal income tax upon repatriation. However, a portion of this cash may still be subject to foreign and U.S. state income tax consequences upon future remittance. Therefore, if additional funds held outside the U.S. are needed for our operations in the U.S., we plan to repatriate these funds not designated as indefinitely reinvested.
We have $0.2 billion in cash held by foreign subsidiaries used for local operations that is subject to country-specific limitations which may restrict or result in increased costs in the repatriation of these funds. In addition, other practical considerations may limit our use of consolidated cash, including cash of $0.6 billion held in a German financial services subsidiary subject to regulatory requirements, and $0.2 billion held by majority owned consolidated subsidiaries where third-parties or public shareholders hold minority interests. During the third quarter of fiscal 2022, we entered into an agreement to sell our German financial services subsidiary.
The following table summarizes our cash flow activity:
Operating cash flow
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2022 was $1,501 million as compared to $124 million during fiscal 2021. The increase of $1,377 million was primarily due to an increase in net income, net of adjustments of $1,578 million, partially offset by a $201 million unfavorable change in working capital due to higher working capital outflows during fiscal 2022.
The following table contains certain key working capital metrics:
Investing cash flow
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities was $(60) million during fiscal 2022 as compared to $4,665 million during fiscal 2021. The decrease of $4,725 million was primarily due to a decrease in business dispositions of $4,414 million, the absence of proceeds from acquisitions and cash collections related to deferred purchase price receivables of $184 million and $159 million in fiscal 2021, and a decrease in proceeds from sale of assets of $64 million. This was partially offset by proceeds from short-term investing of $24 million in fiscal 2022.
Financing cash flow
Net cash used in financing activities during fiscal 2022 was $(1,818) million as compared to $(5,476) million during fiscal 2021. The $3,658 million decrease in cash used was primarily due to decreased net repayments on long-term debt of $2,624 million and net draws on commercial paper of $529 million. In addition, net repayments totaling $1,500 million were made during fiscal 2021 on lines of credit that were not drawn against during fiscal 2022 and dividends of $53 million were paid in fiscal 2021, but not paid during fiscal 2022. This was partially offset by share repurchases of $628 million in fiscal 2022, an increase in payments for debt extinguishment costs of $303 million, an increase in payments on capital leases and borrowings for asset financing of $60 million, and an increase in payments for other financing activities, net, of $58 million, primarily due to an $85 million repayment of liability resulting from a financing transaction entered in fiscal 2017.
Debt Financing
The following table summarizes our total debt:
The $0.5 billion decrease in total debt during fiscal 2022 was primarily attributed to the retirement of all the remaining $319 million of the 4.45% senior notes due fiscal 2023 using the proceeds from the sale of our HPS Business, and the repurchase of the $33 million of the 4.125% senior notes due fiscal 2026. More than $550 million of net finance lease liabilities and borrowings for assets acquired under long-term financing were also repaid using the proceeds from the divestitures of other businesses and existing cash on hand. The decrease was partially offset by the issuance of Euro and U.S. Dollar Senior Notes of which proceeds were used to repay term loans and senior notes as discussed below.
Euro Senior Notes Issuance
During the second quarter of fiscal 2022, we issued (i) €750 million aggregate principal amount of our 0.450% senior notes due fiscal 2028 and (ii) €600 million aggregate principal amount of our 0.950% senior notes due fiscal 2032 (collectively, the “Euro Notes”). The proceeds from the Euro Notes were applied principally to the repayment in full of the €400 million aggregate principal amount of outstanding borrowings under our Euro-denominated term loan facility, the repayment of our U.S. dollar-denominated 4.25% senior notes due fiscal 2025 and the repayment of our Sterling-denominated 2.75% senior notes due fiscal 2025.
U.S. Dollar Senior Notes Issuance
During the second quarter of fiscal 2022, we issued (i) $700 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.80% senior notes due fiscal 2027, and (ii) $650 million aggregate principal amount of our 2.375% senior notes due fiscal 2029 (collectively, the “USD Notes”). The proceeds from the USD Notes were used for the repayment of our remaining 4.125% senior notes due fiscal 2026, our 4.75% senior notes due fiscal 2028 and our 7.45% senior notes due fiscal 2030.
We were in compliance with all financial covenants associated with our borrowings as of March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021.
As of March 31, 2022, our credit ratings were as follows:
For information on the risks of ratings downgrades, see Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors subsection titled, "Failure to maintain our credit rating and ability to manage working capital, refinance and raise additional capital for future needs, could adversely affect our liquidity, capital position, borrowing cost, and access to capital markets."
Liquidity
We expect our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our normal operating requirements for the next 12 months. We expect to continue using cash generated by operations as a primary source of liquidity; however, should we require funds greater than that generated from our operations to fund discretionary investment activities, such as business acquisitions, we have the ability to raise capital through debt financing, including the issuance of capital market debt instruments such as commercial paper and bonds. In addition, we currently utilize and will further utilize accounts receivable sales facilities, and our cross-currency cash pool for liquidity needs. There is no guarantee that we will be able to obtain debt financing, if required, on terms and conditions acceptable to us, if at all, in the future.
Our exposure to operational liquidity risk is primarily from long-term contracts which require significant investment of cash during the initial phases of the contracts. The recovery of these investments is over the life of the contract and is dependent upon our performance as well as customer acceptance.
The following table summarizes our total liquidity:
During November 2021 we amended our revolving credit facility to, among other things, decrease available borrowings from $4.0 billion to $3.0 billion.
Share Repurchases
During fiscal 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2.0 billion of our common stock and during fiscal 2019, our Board of Directors approved an incremental $2.0 billion share repurchase. On February 2, 2022, we announced our intention to repurchase incrementally up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding shares of common stock in the open market. This program became effective on April 3, 2017 with no end date established. During fiscal 2022, we repurchased 18,818,934 shares of our common stock at an aggregate cost of $634 million. See Note 16 - "Stockholders' Equity" for more information.
Dividends
To maintain our financial flexibility we continued to suspend payment of quarterly dividends for fiscal 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we are a party to arrangements that include guarantees, the receivables sales facility and certain other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, such as letters of credit and surety bonds. We also use performance letters of credit to support various risk management insurance policies. No liabilities related to these arrangements are reflected in the Company's balance sheets. See Note 6 - "Receivables" and Note 23 - "Commitments and Contingencies" for additional information regarding these off-balance sheet arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of March 31, 2022, were as follows:
(1) Amounts represent scheduled principal payments of long-term debt and mandatory redemption of preferred stock of a consolidated subsidiary.
(2) Amounts represent expected undiscounted cash payments. See Note 7 - "Leases" for more information.
(3) Includes long-term purchase agreements with certain software, hardware, telecommunication and other service providers and excludes agreements that are cancellable without penalty. If we do not meet the specified service minimums, we may have an obligation to pay the service provider a portion of or the entire shortfall. See Note 23 - "Commitments and Contingencies" for more information.
(4) The transition tax resulted in recording a total transition tax obligation of $276 million, of which $284 million was recorded as income tax liability and $8 million recorded as a reduction in our unrecognized tax benefits, which has been omitted from this table. The transition tax is payable over eight years; 8% of net tax liability in each of years 1-5, 15% in year 6, 20% in year 7, and 25% in year 8. We have made our first four payments. See Note 13 - "Income Taxes" for additional information about the transition tax and the estimated liability related to unrecognized tax benefits
(5) Amounts represent scheduled interest payments on long-term debt and scheduled dividend payments associated with the mandatorily redeemable preferred stock of a consolidated subsidiary excluding contingent dividends associated with the participation and variable appreciation premium features.
(6) See Note 13 - "Income Taxes" for additional information about the estimated liability related to unrecognized tax benefits, which has been omitted from this table. See Note 15 - "Pension and Other Benefit Plans" for the estimated liability related to estimated future benefit payments under our Pension and OPEB plans that have been omitted from this table.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements, in accordance with GAAP, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates may change in the future if underlying assumptions or factors change. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions. We consider the following policies to be critical because of their complexity and the high degree of judgment involved in implementing them: revenue recognition, income taxes, business combinations, defined benefit plans and valuation of assets. We have discussed the selection of our critical accounting policies and the effect of estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
Most of our revenues are recognized based on objective criteria and do not require significant estimates that may change over time. However, some arrangements may require significant estimates, including contracts which include multiple performance obligations.
Contracts with multiple performance obligations
Many of our contracts require us to provide a range of services or performance obligations to our customers, which may include a combination of services, products or both and may also contain leases embedded in those arrangements. As a result, significant judgment may be required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the elements specified in contracts with multiple performance obligations should be treated as separate performance obligations for revenue recognition purposes, and, when considered appropriate, how the total transaction price should be allocated among the performance obligations and any lease components and the timing of revenue recognition for each. For contracts with multiple performance obligations and lease components, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation and lease component based on the relative standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. Other than software sales involving multiple performance obligations, the primary method used to estimate standalone selling price is the expected cost plus a margin approach, under which we forecast our expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then add an appropriate margin for that distinct good or service. Certain of our contracts involve the sale of DXC proprietary software, post-contract customer support and other software-related services. The standalone selling price generally is determined for each performance obligation using an adjusted market assessment approach based on the price charged where each deliverable is sold separately. In certain limited cases (typically for software licenses) when the historical selling price is highly variable, the residual approach is used. This approach allocates revenue to the performance obligation equal to the difference between the total transaction price and the observable standalone selling prices for the other performance obligations. These methods involve significant judgments and estimates that we assess periodically by considering market and entity-specific factors, such as type of customer, features of the products or services and market conditions.
Once the total revenues have been allocated to the various performance obligations and lease components, revenues for each are recognized based on the relevant revenue recognition method for each. Estimates of total revenues at contract inception often differ materially from actual revenues due to volume differences, changes in technology or other factors which may not be foreseen at inception.
Contract modifications
A contract modification is a legally binding change to the scope, price, or both of an existing contract. Contract modifications are reviewed to determine whether they should be accounted for as part of the original contract, the termination of an existing contract and the creation of a new contract, or as a separate contract, and whether they modify an embedded lease. This determination requires significant judgment, which could impact the timing of revenue recognition.
Costs to obtain contracts with customers
Accounting for the costs to obtain contracts with customers requires significant judgments and estimates with regards to the determination of sales commission payments that qualify for deferral of costs and the related amortization period. Most of our sales commission plans are quota-based and payments are made by achieving targets related to a large number of new and renewed contracts. Certain sales commissions earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. We defer and amortize these costs on a straight-line basis over an average period of benefit of five years, which is determined and regularly assessed by considering the length of our customer contracts, our technology and other factors. Significant changes in these estimates or impairment may result if material contracts terminate earlier than the expected benefit period, or if there are material changes in the average contract period.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States (federal and state) and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, analyzing our income tax reserves, the determination of the likelihood of recoverability of deferred tax assets and any corresponding adjustment of valuation allowances. In addition, our tax returns are routinely audited, and settlements of issues raised in these audits sometimes affect our tax provisions.
As a global enterprise, our ETR is affected by many factors, including our global mix of earnings among countries with differing statutory tax rates, the extent to which our non-U.S. earnings are indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S., changes in the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, changes in tax regulations, acquisitions, dispositions and the tax characteristics of our income. We cannot predict with certainty what our ETR will be in the future because there is uncertainty regarding these factors. Future events, such as changes in tax laws, tax regulations, or interpretations of such laws or regulations, could have an impact on the provision for income tax and the effective tax rate. Any such changes could significantly affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements in the year these changes occur.
The majority of our global unremitted foreign earnings have been taxed in the U.S. or would be exempt from U.S. tax upon repatriation. Such earnings and all current foreign earnings are not indefinitely reinvested. The following foreign earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested: approximately $495 million that could be subject to U.S. federal tax when repatriated to the U.S. under section 1.245A-5(b) of the final Treasury regulations; and our accumulated earnings in India as of March 31, 2021. A portion of these indefinitely reinvested earnings may be subject to foreign and U.S. state tax consequences when remitted. The Company will continue to evaluate its position based on its strategic objectives and future cash needs.
Considerations impacting the recoverability of deferred tax assets include the period of expiration of the tax asset, planned use of the tax asset and historical and projected taxable income as well as tax liabilities for the tax jurisdiction to which the tax asset relates. In determining whether the deferred tax assets are realizable, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carryback years, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent results of financial operations. We recorded a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets of approximately $2.1 billion as of March 31, 2022 due to uncertainties related to the ability to utilize these assets. However, valuation allowances are subject to change in future reporting periods due to changes in various factors such as when inputs or estimates used in determining valuation allowances significantly change or upon the receipt of new information.
We determine whether it is more likely than not a tax position will be sustained upon examination by the appropriate taxing authorities before any part of the benefit is recorded in our financial statements. A tax position is measured as the portion of the tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon settlement with a taxing authority (that has full knowledge of all relevant information). We may be required to change our provision for income taxes when the ultimate treatment of certain items is challenged or agreed to by taxing authorities.
The Finance Act 2021 in the U.K. took effect after Royal Assent was received in June 2021. The Finance Act 2021 included increases in the corporation tax and diverted profits tax rates beginning on April 1, 2023, establishes a new temporary 130% super deduction for first year capital allowances and temporarily extends the carry-back of trading losses. The increase in the U.K. corporate tax rate and super deduction have been factored into the calculation of our income tax provision.
Business Combinations
We account for the acquisition of a business using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires us to estimate the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. This includes acquired intangible assets such as customer-related intangibles, the liabilities assumed and contingent consideration, if any. Liabilities assumed may include litigation and other contingency reserves existing at the time of acquisition and require judgment in ascertaining the related fair values. Independent appraisals may be used to assist in the determination of the fair value of certain assets and liabilities. Such appraisals are based on significant estimates provided by us, such as forecasted revenues or profits utilized in determining the fair value of contract-related acquired intangible assets or liabilities. Significant changes in assumptions and estimates subsequent to completing the allocation of the purchase price to the assets and liabilities acquired, as well as differences in actual and estimated results, could result in material impacts to our financial results. Adjustments to the fair value of contingent consideration are recorded in earnings. Additional information related to the acquisition date fair value of acquired assets and liabilities obtained during the allocation period, not to exceed one year, may result in changes to the recorded values of acquired assets and liabilities, resulting in an offsetting adjustment to the goodwill associated with the business acquired.
Defined Benefit Plans
The computation of our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations is dependent on various assumptions. Inherent in the application of the actuarial methods are key assumptions, including discount rates, expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, mortality rates, rates of compensation increases and medical cost trend rates. Our management evaluates these assumptions annually and updates assumptions as necessary. The fair value of assets is determined based on observable inputs for similar assets or on significant unobservable inputs if observable inputs are not available. Two of the most significant assumptions are the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets and the discount rate.
Our weighted average rates used were:
The assumption for the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is impacted by the expected asset mix of the plan; judgments regarding the correlation between historical excess returns and future excess returns and expected investment expenses. The discount rate assumption is based on current market rates for high-quality, fixed income debt instruments with maturities similar to the expected duration of the benefit payment period. The following table provides the impact changes in the weighted-average assumptions would have had on our net periodic pension benefits and settlement and contractual termination charges for fiscal 2022:
Valuation of Assets
We review long-lived assets, intangible assets, and goodwill for impairment in accordance with our accounting policy disclosed in Note 1 - "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies." Assessing the fair value of assets involves significant estimates and assumptions including estimation of future cash flows, the timing of such cash flows, and discount rates reflecting the risk inherent in projecting future cash flows. The valuation of long-lived and intangible assets involves management estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of assets, particularly purchased intangible assets. These estimates are subjective and can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and forecasts.
Evaluation of goodwill for impairment requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets, liabilities, and goodwill to reporting units and determination of the fair value of each reporting unit. The identification of reporting units involves consideration of components of the operating segments and whether or not there is discrete financial information available that is regularly reviewed by management. Additionally, we consider whether or not it is reasonable to aggregate any of the identified components that have similar economic characteristics. The estimates used to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit change from year to year based on operating results, market conditions, and other factors. Changes in these estimates and assumptions include a significant change in the business climate, established business plans, operating performance indicators or competition which could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit.
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a combination of an income approach, utilizing a discounted cash flow analysis, and a market approach, using performance-metric market multiples. The discount rate used in an income approach is based on our weighted-average cost of capital and may be adjusted for the relevant risks associated with business-specific characteristics and any uncertainty related to a reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected future cash flows.