Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS
As noted above in Part 1, this Annual Report, including, without limitation, this Item 7, contains “forward-looking statements,” including forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Actual results or developments could differ materially from those projected in such statements because of numerous factors, including, without limitation those risks and uncertainties set forth in Item 1A, Risk Factors, which you are encouraged to read. These forward-looking statements generally relate to plans and objectives for future operations and are based upon management’s reasonable estimates of future results or trends. Such statements include the potential impact on results in fiscal 2022 as it relates to the ongoing global supply chain disruptions, the geopolitical instability from Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the increase in freight costs, the increase in certain raw materials and labor shortages as well as overall changes in consumer spending and demand due to the continued risk of new variants and inflation. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in light of those risks and uncertainties and in conjunction with our accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto.
All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or to persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of the document in which they are made. We disclaim any obligation or undertaking to provide any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statement to reflect any change in our expectations or any change in events, conditions or circumstances in which the forward-looking statement is based.
Certain figures discussed below may not foot due to rounding.
Segment Reporting
We have three principal operating segments: our stores, direct business and our wholesale business. We consider our stores and direct business segments to be similar in terms of economic characteristics, production processes and operations, and have therefore aggregated them into one reportable segment, retail segment, consistent with our omni-channel business approach. Due to the immateriality of the wholesale segment’s revenues, profits and assets, its operating results have been aggregated with the retail segment for all periods.
COVID-19 Impact on our Business in Fiscal 2021
The COVID-19 pandemic and its variants continued to impact our business and results of operations in fiscal 2021. While we saw significant improvement in our business from fiscal 2020, substantial uncertainty remains regarding the impact of the pandemic, including the potential impact of new variants, continued disruptions in the supply chain, labor shortages and the long-term effect on the global economy, and overall consumer demand and spending.
Comparable Sales and E-Commerce (Direct) Sales Definition
Our customer’s shopping experience continues to evolve across multiple channels and we are continually adapting to meet the guest’s needs. The majority of our stores have the capability of fulfilling online orders if merchandise is not available in the warehouse. As a result, we continue to see more transactions that begin online but are ultimately completed at the store level. Similarly, if a customer visits a store and the item is out of stock, the associate can order the item through our website. A customer also has the ability to order online and pick-up in a store or at curbside. We define store sales as sales that originate and are fulfilled directly at the store level. E-commerce sales, which we also refer to as direct sales, are defined as sales that originate online, whether through our website, at the store level or through a third-party marketplace.
Stores that have been open for 13 months are included in comparable sales. Stores that have been remodeled or re-located during the period are also included in our determination of comparable stores sales. Stores that have been expanded by more than 25% are considered non-comparable for the first 13 months. If a store becomes a clearance center, it is also removed from the calculation of comparable sales. The method of calculating comparable sales varies across the retail industry and, as a result, our calculation of comparable sales is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other retailers.
The Company has not carved-out prior year sales for periods where the stores were temporarily closed in fiscal 2020 due to the pandemic. However, because the Company’s store in Canada was closed by government edict for a significant portion of fiscal 2021, we have removed it from the current calculation of comparable sales.
Non-GAAP Measures
We monitor certain non-GAAP financial measures on a regular basis in order to track the progress of our business. These measures include free cash flow, EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin. We believe these measures provide helpful information with respect to the Company’s operating performance and that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures is important to assist investors in comparing our performance in fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019. We also provide certain forward-looking information with respect to certain of these non-GAAP financial measures. However, these measures may not be comparable to
similar measures used by other companies and should not be considered superior to or as a substitute for net income (loss), net income (loss) per diluted share or cash flow from operating activities in accordance with GAAP. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” below for additional information on these non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliations to comparable GAAP measures.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our fiscal year is a 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to January 31. Fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 were all 52-week periods.
The following review of our results for fiscal 2021 includes certain comparisons against fiscal 2019 in addition to fiscal 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our results, particularly during fiscal 2020, we believe that the additional discussion against fiscal 2019 provides a more meaningful comparison of our business results in fiscal 2021. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 30, 2021 (fiscal 2020) includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations comparing fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
For the first time in the Company's history, we exceeded $500.0 million in sales, with growth across all retail channels during fiscal 2021. As compared to fiscal 2019, our comparable sales increased 14.2% driven by a comparable sales increase in the direct business of 44.0% and an increase in stores of 4.8%. This growth was the result of new customer acquisition, which was up 27% over fiscal 2019, as well as increases in conversion rate and dollars per transaction. We achieved this top-line growth while maintaining a low promotional posture, resulting in a 300 basis point improvement in merchandise margins as compared to fiscal 2019. As a result of this margin improvement, coupled with our restructured lease portfolio and lower operating cost base, we reported net income for fiscal 2021 of $56.7 million, or $0.83 per diluted share, and adjusted EBITDA of $76.9 million.
We ended fiscal 2021 in a substantially stronger liquidity position than a year ago. As a result of our earnings, we generated $75.5 million in cash flows from operations during fiscal 2021, resulting in $70.3 million of free cash flow, which we used to retire our long-term debt, pay off our revolver and renegotiate our credit facility on more favorable terms. At January 29, 2022, we are debt-free and have cash on hand of $15.5 million and excess availability under our credit facility of $68.9 million.
Our primary objective for fiscal 2022 is to build off the many successes we had in fiscal 2021 by continuing to drive new customer acquisition and lifetime value through greater retention and new channels of distribution. We are excited about the growth we saw this year and believe that we gained market share during this fiscal year. However, we also recognize that our business benefited this year from many macro-level tailwinds as well, including emergence from the pandemic restrictions, pent-up demand, and fiscal stimulus policy which we do not expect to deliver the same sales lift in fiscal 2022. We are also cautious of the ongoing global issues that may impact us through fiscal 2022, including the Russian invasion of Ukraine, supply chain disruptions, increased freight costs, increased cost of raw materials, labor shortages and overall changes in consumer sentiment.
As discussed more fully below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources” subsequent to the end of fiscal 2021, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase plan, pursuant to which we can purchase up to $15.0 million of our outstanding common stock through March 15, 2023.
SALES
For fiscal 2021, total sales increased 58.3% to $505.0 million from $318.9 million for fiscal 2020 and increased 6.5% from $474.0 million in fiscal 2019.
As compared to fiscal 2020, comparable sales increased 68.5%, with stores up 98.1% and the direct business up 25.4%. The comparable sales increase from our stores is largely due to the fact that our stores in fiscal 2020 were closed for a period of time due to the pandemic and many operated with reduced hours after reopening. In fiscal 2021, our customers returned to in-person shopping and our stores out-performed our expectations. Despite the surge of customers returning to stores, our direct business continued to grow in fiscal 2021, primarily driven by increased sales from our dxl.com website and mobile app. We also saw continued sales growth through our third-party marketplace presence, which is attracting a new customer to DXL.
As compared to fiscal 2019, comparable sales increased 14.2%, primarily due to a comparable sales increase in the direct business of 44.0% and an increase in stores of 4.8%. The growth in our direct business is due largely to our website and the growth from our mobile app. While store traffic remained soft during fiscal 2021, we saw strong increases in conversion rates and dollars per transaction as compared to fiscal 2019. The majority of our stores improved their performance as compared to fiscal 2019, but our Southeast, Midwest and South Central stores generally outperformed the other regions of the country. We attribute this trend to the fact that some areas of the country lifted mandates earlier than others and customer comfort level regarding in-store shopping differed throughout the country.
For fiscal 2021, wholesale revenues were $5.4 million as compared to $16.6 million in fiscal 2020 and $12.5 million in fiscal 2019. While a significant portion of our wholesale revenues in fiscal 2020 were due to the sale of masks, our wholesale business was driven primarily by our relationship with Amazon. Based on several factors, including low margins, volatility in the global supply chain, increasing lead times and the shifting dynamics of the business, the Company and Amazon have agreed to end the wholesale relationship.
GROSS MARGIN
The gross margin rate for fiscal 2021, inclusive of occupancy costs, was 49.5% compared to 32.9% in or fiscal 2020 and 43.1% for fiscal 2019.
As compared to fiscal 2020, our gross margin rate improved by 1660 basis points, driven by an increase in merchandise margin of 860 basis points and an improvement in occupancy of 800 basis points due to the leveraging of sales. On a dollar basis, occupancy costs decreased $4.2 million, or 6.7% as a result of our lease renegotiations as well as closed stores.
As compared to fiscal 2019, our gross margin rate for the year improved by 640 basis points, driven by a 300 basis point improvement in merchandise margins and a 340 basis point improvement in occupancy costs. As a result of our lease renegotiations as well as closed stores, on a dollar basis, occupancy costs for fiscal 2021 decreased by $12.5 million, or 17.7%, as compared to fiscal 2019.
The improvement in merchandise margin in fiscal year 2021 was primarily driven by our low promotional strategy and low clearance levels. Partially offsetting the savings from the reduction in markdowns was the continuing increase in the cost of freight due to shortages of vessels for overseas product, port congestion, and labor shortages of truck drivers. We estimate that the supply chain disruptions negatively impacted gross margin by approximately 84 basis points and we expect that we will continue to experience cost increases related to these supply chain issues as well as due to the increase in the cost of certain raw materials, particularly cotton, well into fiscal 2022. In aggregate, we expect that gross margin for fiscal 2022 may be impacted by upwards of 200 basis points after factoring in freight, markdowns, and the increased cost of certain raw materials.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
SG&A expenses as a percentage of sales were 34.2% for fiscal 2021, as compared to 40.5% in fiscal 2020 and 38.1% in fiscal 2019.
On a dollar basis, compared to fiscal 2020, SG&A expenses increased by $43.9 million primarily driven by an increase in variable costs as a result of our sales growth, including increases in store payroll and payroll-related costs, performance incentives and advertising. However, our costs as a percentage of sales significantly improved as a result of the cost-savings initiatives implemented in fiscal 2020.
On a dollar basis, compared to fiscal 2019, SG&A expenses for fiscal 2021 decreased $7.7 million. The decrease in SG&A expenses for the year was primarily due to the cost-savings initiatives implemented in fiscal 2020 and reductions in payroll and payroll-related costs. These costs were partially offset by an increase in incentive performance-based accruals and the reinstatement of our 401(k) profit sharing contribution.
Management views SG&A expenses through two primary cost centers: Customer Facing Costs and Corporate Support Costs. Customer Facing Costs, which include store payroll, marketing and other store operating costs, represented 19.1% of sales for fiscal 2021, compared to 20.2% of sales for fiscal 2020 and 22.6% of sales for fiscal 2019. Corporate Support Costs, which include the
distribution center and corporate overhead costs, represented 15.1% of sales, compared to 20.3% of sales for fiscal 2020 and 15.5% of sales for fiscal 2019.
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS
Asset impairment charges primarily represent the write-down of operating lease right-of-use assets, where the carrying value exceeds fair value, and the write-down of store property and equipment. In addition, any subsequent gains recognized in connection with a store closure related to a previously recorded operating lease right-of-use asset impairment will be included as an offset to impairment charges, with the remainder of the gain included as a reduction in store occupancy costs.
For fiscal 2021, the Company recorded a non-cash gain of $2.7 million on the reduction of its operating lease liability in connection with its decision to close certain retail stores, which resulted in a revaluation of the lease liability. Of the total non-cash gain, $2.3 million related to leases where the right-of-use assets had previously been impaired, and therefore, the gain was recorded as a reduction of the previously-recorded impairment. The remaining gain $0.4 million was recorded as a reduction to occupancy costs.
For fiscal 2020, the asset impairment charge was $14.8 million, which included $13.3 for the write-down of operating lease right-of-use assets and $4.1 million for the write-down of store assets, partially offset by a non-cash gain of $2.6 million. The asset impairment charge for fiscal 2019 was $0.9 million, which included $0.7 million for the write-down of right-of-use assets and $0.2 million for the write-down of store assets.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Depreciation and amortization expense was $17.2 million, as compared to $21.5 million in fiscal 2020 and $24.6 million for fiscal 2019. Our depreciation expense has been decreasing over the past few years, due to our reduced capital expenditures.
INTEREST EXPENSE, NET
Net interest expense for fiscal 2021 was $4.4 million, as compared to $3.9 million for fiscal 2020 and $3.3 million for fiscal 2019. The interest expense for fiscal 2021 includes a prepayment penalty of $1.1 million in connection with the Company's early prepayment of its $17.5 million FILO loan as well as $0.9 million for the write-off unamortized debt issuance costs associated with both the FILO loan and our prior credit facility. These costs were partially offset by a decrease in interest expense due to reduced borrowing levels in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019.
INCOME TAXES
Realization of our deferred tax assets, which relate principally to federal net operating loss carryforwards, of which approximately $100.7 million will expire from fiscal 2028 through fiscal 2037, is dependent on generating sufficient taxable income. In addition, there are $43.1 million of federal net operating loss carryforwards that do not expire.
At the end of fiscal 2013, we entered a three-year cumulative loss and based on all positive and negative evidence at February 1, 2014, we established a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets. Although we returned to profitability in fiscal 2021, we believe that a full valuation allowance remains appropriate at this time. Our conclusion is based on the fact that we remain in a three-year cumulative loss position, which is considered significant negative evidence. Once we transition to a three-year cumulative profit position and demonstrate more consistent and prolonged profitability, we will reevaluate the valuation allowance.
Our tax provision for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to income tax in states where NOL usage is statutorily limited. Our tax provision for fiscal 2020 was primarily due to state margin tax, based on gross receipts less certain deductions. See Note F of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
NET INCOME (LOSS )
Net income for fiscal 2021 was $56.7 million, or $0.83 per diluted share, as compared to a net loss of $(64.5) million, or $(1.26) per diluted share, in fiscal 2020 and a net loss of $(7.8) million, or $(0.16) per diluted share, in fiscal 2019. The improvement in earnings for fiscal 2021 was due to an increase in our comparable sales as compared to both fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, an improvement in gross margin driven by lower markdowns and restructured lease portfolio, and a reduction in operating costs, as a percentage of sales, as a result of our cost-savings initiatives implemented in fiscal 2020. In addition, our significant net operating loss carryforwards minimized our cash tax payments.
Included in our results for fiscal 2021 was a gain of $2.3 million against previously recognized impairment charges. Results for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 included asset impairment charges of $14.8 million and $0.9 million, respectively. Fiscal 2019 also included charges of $1.7 million for exit costs associated with our London operations and $0.7 million in CEO transition costs.
SEASONALITY
A comparison of sales in each quarter of the past three fiscal years is presented below. The sales results for fiscal 2020 reflect the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic had on the Company’s business, especially in the first and second quarters when we temporarily closed all of our stores in response to the pandemic. The amounts shown are also not necessarily indicative of actual trends, because such amounts also reflect the addition of new stores and the remodeling and closing of other stores during these periods. Consistent with the retail apparel industry, our business is seasonal. (Certain columns may not foot due to rounding)
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
During fiscal 2021, we began to be impacted by the effects of the inflationary pressures on freight, raw materials, and labor. We have taken selective price increases on our merchandise assortment to mitigate the pressure on gross margin. If such inflationary pressures increase, the effects may have an increased impact on our financial results in fiscal 2022.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations and availability under our credit facility, which is discussed below. We took several actions during fiscal 2020 to preserve our liquidity, and in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we further strengthened our liquidity position by completing a direct offering of our common stock, which raised $4.4 million, net of offering costs. Also in the first quarter of fiscal 2021, we refinanced our then existing $15.0 million FILO loan by entering into a new $17.5 million FILO loan, which increased our borrowing capacity. As a result of our improved earnings and free cash flow, in the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we used a portion of the excess cash flow to prepay the FILO loan, which bore an interest rate of 8.50%. At January 29, 2022, we had no outstanding debt, including no borrowings under our credit facility.
At January 29, 2022, our material contractual obligations primarily consisted of our operating lease obligations, as disclosed in Note E, Leases, to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition to our lease obligations, at January 29, 2022, we were also contractually committed pursuant to a merchandise purchase obligation to meet minimum purchases of $10.0 million in each fiscal year through fiscal 2023.
We believe our cash on hand, availability under our credit facility, and ongoing cash generated from our operations will be sufficient to fund our working capital requirements, commitments, capital expenditures and, as discussed further below, our stock repurchase program which was announced in March 2022. However, we remain cautious regarding the effect that the pandemic could have on consumer sentiment and the geopolitical impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine on our business and the global economy.
The following table sets forth financial data regarding our liquidity position at the end of the past three fiscal years:
Credit Facility
On October 28, 2021, we entered into a new $125.0 million revolving credit agreement, which replaced our prior credit facility that was due to expire in May 2023 (the "New Credit Facility"). The New Credit Facility has a five-year term and provides more favorable terms than the previous credit facility. The New Credit Facility includes a sublimit of $20.0 million for commercial and standby letters of credit and a sublimit of up to $15.0 million for swingline loans. Borrowings made pursuant to the New Credit Facility will be made pursuant to either a Base Rate loan or LIBOR Rate loan, at the Company's option. Base Rate loans will bear interest, at a rate equal to (i) the greater of: (a) the Prime Rate, (b) the Federal Funds effective rate plus 0.50% per annum and (c) the daily LIBOR rate plus 1.00% per annum, plus (ii) a varying percentage, based on the Company’s average excess availability, of either 0.25% or 0.50%. LIBOR Rate loans, which may be either for 1 month or 3 months, will bear interest at (i) the LIBOR rate, or the Benchmark Rate as defined in the credit agreement plus (ii) a varying percentage based on the Company’s average excess availability, of either 1.25% or 1.50%.
We had no outstanding borrowings under the New Credit Facility at January 29, 2022. At January 29, 2022, outstanding standby letters of credit were $2.7 million and outstanding documentary letters of credit of $1.4 million. The average monthly borrowing outstanding under the credit facilities during fiscal 2021 was approximately $16.4 million, resulting in an average unused excess availability of approximately $56.2 million. Unused excess availability at January 29, 2022 was $68.9 million. Our obligations under the New Credit Facility are secured by a lien on substantially all of our assets.
Our New Credit Facility is described in more detail in Note D to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
FILO Loan
In March 2021, we refinanced our existing $15.0 million FILO loan (the “existing FILO loan”) and entered into a new $17.5 million FILO loan (the “new FILO loan”). The new FILO loan had higher advance rates, provided additional borrowing capacity of approximately $5.0 to $10.0 million, and carried an interest rate of 8.50%. The terms of the new FILO loan included a prepayment penalty, if any portion of the principal for the new FILO Loan was prepaid during the initial two-year period, equal to the greater of (i) the incremental interest that would have been incurred with respect to that principal repayment during the two year period and (ii) 3% of the principal prepayment, unless the prepayment occurs after March 16, 2022 in connection with the Company’s renegotiation of its Credit Agreement in which case the prepayment premium would be equal to 1% of the principal prepayment.
On September 3, 2021, we prepaid the outstanding balance of $17.5 million under the new FILO loan. In connection with the prepayment, we negotiated a reduced prepayment penalty of $1.1 million and wrote-off unamortized debt issuance costs of $0.9 million. At January 29, 2022, the Company has no outstanding long-term debt.
Stock Repurchase Program
Subsequent to the end of fiscal 2022, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase plan. Under the stock repurchase plan, we may purchase up to $15.0 million of our common stock through open market and privately negotiated transactions during fiscal 2022. The timing and the amount of any repurchases of common stock will be determined based on the Company’s evaluation of market conditions and other factors. The stock repurchase program is expected to commence in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 and will expire on March 15, 2023 but may be suspended, terminated or modified at any time for any reason. We expect to finance the repurchases from operating funds and/or periodic borrowings on our credit facility. Any repurchased common stock will be held as treasury stock.
INVENTORY
At January 29, 2022, total inventories decreased to $81.8 million from $85.0 million at January 30, 2021 and $102.4 million at February 1, 2020. Maintaining sufficient inventory levels, given the ongoing supply chain disruptions, remains a primary focus. We believe that we have secured sufficient inventory to support our current sales forecast. We are continuing to manage our inventory conservatively, narrowing our assortments and increasing exclusivity with our national brands. As a result, we were able to increase our inventory turnover to over 2.0 times as compared to historical turnover of approximately 1.5 times. At January 29, 2022, our clearance inventory was 6.0% of our inventory as compared to 10.4% at January 30, 2021 and 10.0% at February 1, 2020.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
The following table sets forth the open stores and related square footage at January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 respectively:
We did not rebrand any of our Casual Male XL stores or open any new DXL locations during fiscal 2021. In total, we closed 21 stores during the year. Below is a summary of those store closings from January 30, 2021 to January 29, 2022:
Our capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 were $5.3 million, as compared to $4.2 million in fiscal 2020. The capital expenditures for fiscal 2021 primarily related to management information projects to support our distribution center, marketing, stores and website.
In response to the pandemic, capital expenditures for the past two years have been limited. For fiscal 2022, our capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $10.0-$12.0 million. In addition to technology investments related to our marketing and merchandising initiatives, we are also actively reviewing opportunities to relocate or convert Casual Male XL stores to DXL and we are reviewing white space opportunities in markets where our store footprint is underpenetrated. We believe that our store portfolio is a vital asset to our business strategy and we expect to continue to invest in stores over the next several years as we further strengthen the store portfolio. Over the next three to five years, based on our preliminary store development plan, we believe that we could potentially open up to 50 new and relocated stores.
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
We monitor certain non-GAAP financial measures on a regular basis in order to track the progress of our business, including the measures below. We believe these measures provide helpful information with respect to the Company’s operating performance to shareholders, investors and analysts, and that the inclusion of these non-GAAP measures is important to assist investors in comparing our performance in fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, on a comparable basis. However, these measures may not be comparable to similar measures used by other companies and should not be considered superior to or as a substitute for operating net income (loss), net income (loss) per diluted share or cash flows from operating activities in accordance with GAAP. (Certain amounts in the following tables may not foot due to rounding.)
Free Cash Flow
We calculate free cash flow as cash flow provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. Free cash flow excludes the mandatory and discretionary repayment of debt. The following table provides a reconciliation of free cash flow:
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, EBITDA margin and adjusted EBITDA margin are presented because we believe that these measures are useful to investors in evaluating our performance. Management uses EBITDA as a key metric to measure profitability and economic productivity. EBITDA is calculated as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated as EBITDA before asset impairment charges, exit costs associated with London operations, CEO transition costs and corporate restructuring. EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin are calculated as EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, respectively, divided by sales.
The following table is a reconciliation of net income (loss) on a GAAP basis to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, on a non-GAAP basis, for each fiscal year:
The following table is a reconciliation of operating margin, on a GAAP basis, to EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDA margin, on a non-GAAP basis, for each fiscal year:
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES; USE OF ESTIMATES
Our financial statements are based on the application of significant accounting policies, many of which require our management to make significant estimates and assumptions (see Note A to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We believe that the following items involve some of the more critical judgments in the application of accounting policies that currently affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Long-Term Incentive Plans
Stock awards are primarily granted pursuant to our Long-Term Incentive Plans (“LTIPs”). During fiscal 2021, we had three active LTIPs: the 2019-2021 LTIP, the 2020-2022 LTIP and the 2021-2023 LTIP. See Note H to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of our LTIPs. Awards under each LTIP consist of 50% time-based awards and 50% performance-based awards. All time-based awards are amortized over each LTIP’s respective vesting periods.
The performance-based component of each LTIP is a dollar-denominated award. Equity awards will only be granted if such performance targets are achieved. Accordingly, each quarter the Company reviews its expected achievement against such performance targets to assess whether an accrual is necessary. The performance metrics are for three-year performance periods and
may include metrics such as total shareholder return against peers, 3-year stacked comparable sales or Adjusted EBITDA. As such, the accruals are based on projections that may extend beyond a year and are subject to change quarter to quarter based on actual performance. All accruals are recorded as a liability. If performance targets are achieved and equity awards are granted, the related cost of those awards will be reclassified from the accrual to stock-based compensation on grant date.
The performance targets under the 2019-2021 LTIP were achieved at the end of fiscal 2021. Based on that achievement, subsequent to the end of fiscal 2021, on March 15, 2022, the Compensation Committee approved a total performance award of $2.6 million, to be awarded in a combination of 50% cash and 50% RSUs. All awards are subject to further vesting through August 31, 2022. Accordingly, at January 29, 2022, the Company has accrued $2.3 million of the $2.6 million award.
With respect to the performance-based component of the 2020-2022 LTIP and the 2021-2023 LTIP, which each approximate $1.9 million, at target, awards will be granted at the end of the respective performance period if the performance targets are achieved. Through the end of fiscal 2021, we have accrued approximately $1.5 million and $0.8 million for performance under the 2020-2022 LTIP and the 2021-2023 LTIP, respectively.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying values of such assets may not be recoverable. Our judgment regarding the identification of impairment indicators is based on operational performance at the store level. Factors considered by us that could result in an impairment triggering event include significant changes in the use of assets, a current period operating or cash flow loss, underperformance of a store relative to historical or expected operating results, and an accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the construction of the long-lived store assets. We will recognize an impairment when the undiscounted cash flow estimated to be generated by those assets is less than the assets’ carrying amount. If actual market conditions are less favorable than management’s projections, future write-offs may be necessary. The model for undiscounted future cash flows includes assumptions, at the individual store level, with respect to expectations for future sales and gross margin rates as well as an estimate for occupancy costs used to estimate the fair value of the respective store’s operating lease right-of-use asset. The amount of impairment, if any, is measured based on projected discounted future cash flows using a discount rate reflecting the Company’s average cost of funds. Due to uncertainty around the duration and extent of the pandemic’s impact on future cash flows, the Company’s projections in fiscal 2020 were based on multiple probability-weighted scenarios and assumed that consumer retail spending would remain substantially curtailed for a period of time.
In addition, any subsequent gains recognized in connection with a store closure related to a previously recorded operating lease right-of-use asset impairment will be included as an offset to impairment charges, with the remainder of the gain included as a reduction in store occupancy costs.
For fiscal 2021, we recognized a gain against previously recorded impairment charges of $2.3 million. In fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, we recorded net asset impairment charges of $14.8 million and $0.9 million, respectively.
Leases
In accordance with ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” our operating leases are reported as right-of-use assets with corresponding lease liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. As discussed above, we evaluate, at the individual store level, the right-of-use assets for impairment at least annually but also when facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Furthermore as the interest rate implicit in the Company’s leases is not readily determinable, the Company utilizes its incremental borrowing rate, based on information available at the lease measurement date to determine the present value of future payments. See Note A to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
We have reviewed accounting pronouncements and interpretations thereof that have effective dates during the periods reported and in future periods. See Note A to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for information on recent accounting pronouncements and the impact of impending standards on our future filings.