ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained within Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and the other financial information found elsewhere in this Report. Management’s Discussion and Analysis uses forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties as described previously in our Disclosure Regarding Forward-looking Statements and Item 1A. Risk Factors.
General Overview
DXP Enterprises, Inc. is a leading North American distributor of technical products and services. Our comprehensive knowledge, specialized services and leading brands serve MRO, OEM and capital equipment end users in virtually all industrial markets through our multi-channel capabilities that provide choice, convenience, expertise, timely response and an overall ease of doing business.
DXP's products are marketed in the United States, Canada and Dubai to customers that are engaged in a variety of industries, many of which may be counter cyclical to each other. Demand for our products generally is subject to changes in the United States and Canada, and global and macro-economic trends affecting our customers and the industries in which they compete. Certain of these industries, such as the oil and gas industry, are subject to volatility driven by a variety of factors, while others, such as the petrochemical industry and the construction industry, are cyclical and materially affected by changes in the United States and global economy. As a result, we may experience changes in demand within particular markets, segments and product categories as changes occur in our customers' respective markets.
CURRENT MARKET CONDITIONS AND OUTLOOK
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
We continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on macroeconomic and local economic conditions and the businesses and markets we serve. While we are currently able to operate in all of our locations, there is no guarantee that other events or a resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic or variants will not occur. For example, in the event of a surge in levels of COVID-19 infections in certain states or localities, those impacted locations may respond by reinstating shut-downs or shelter-in-place mandates.
We have implemented and continue to implement procedures and processes as required or recommended by governmental and medical authorities to ensure the continued safety of our employees, customers and community partners. While the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic fluctuated throughout the year, it has been accompanied by a resurgence in demand as
industries return to regular operations, which continues to disrupt supply chains, transportation efficiency, product and labor availability. Our businesses and locations have remained functional as we are an essential business partner for our customers to remain operational. The Company continues to monitor and refine its product assortment and inventory availability and remains committed to serving customers and supporting our employees. As the pandemic continues to impact global markets and the needs of customers, our employees, suppliers and the communities we serve change, the Company’s efforts and business strategy will evolve accordingly. However, we are not able to predict whether our customers will continue to operate at their current or historical levels, and such decreases in their operations would have a negative impact on our business. We are also unable to predict how long the COVID-19 pandemic will last and the impact of the pandemic on future demand for our products and services. For additional discussion of the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, see “Consolidated Results of Operations” under Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and "Item 1A. Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report.
Economic Indices
DXP monitors several economic indices that have been key indicators for industrial and oil & gas economic activity in the United States. These include the Industrial Production (IP) and Manufacturing Capacity Utilization (MCU) indices published by the Federal Reserve Board and the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) published by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM). Additionally, we track the Metalworking Business Index ("MBI"). A reading above 50 generally indicates expansion.
Below are readings for the fourth quarter versus the full year average:
* The information contained in this table has been obtained from third party publicly available sources.
DXP also monitors various oil & gas indicators including active drilling rigs, gross U.S. domestic production and the West Texas Intermediate ("WTI") price of oil. Below are readings for the last three years:
* The information contained in this table has been obtained from third party publicly available sources.
** Averages for the years indicated.
During 2021, the growth rate of the general economy improved from 2020 as well as the rig count. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $108.7 million, or 10.8%, to approximately $1.1 billion from $1.0 billion for the prior corresponding period. The majority of the 2021 sales increase is the result of increased sales due to acquisitions and the related sales of rotating equipment air compressors.
During 2020, the growth rate of the general economy declined from 2019 as well as the rig count. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $259.6 million, or 20.5%, to approximately $1.0 billion from $1.3 billion for the prior corresponding period. The majority of the 2020 sales decrease is the result of a decrease in the capital spending by oil and gas producers and related businesses stemming from a decrease in U.S. crude oil production due to low crude prices and the negative economic impacts of COVID-19.
Our sales growth strategy in recent years has focused on internal growth and acquisitions. Key elements of our sales strategy include leveraging existing customer relationships by cross-selling new products, expanding product offerings to new and existing customers, and increasing business-to-business solutions using system agreements and supply chain solutions for our integrated supply customers. We will continue to review opportunities to grow through the acquisition of distributors and other businesses that would expand our geographic reach and/or add additional products and services. Our results will depend on our success in executing our internal growth strategy and, to the extent we complete any acquisitions, our ability to integrate such acquisitions effectively.
Our strategies to increase productivity include consolidated purchasing programs, centralizing product distribution, customer service and inside sales functions, and using information technology to increase employee productivity.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
SALES. Sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $108.7 million, or 10.8%, to approximately $1.1 billion from $1.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This sales increase is the result of an increase in sales in our SC and SCS segments of $153.9 million and $3.2 million, respectively. This was partially offset by a decrease in sales in our IPS segment of $48.4 million. Sales from businesses recently acquired accounted for $147.5 million of the sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. Excluding the 2020 and 2021 sales of businesses acquired, sales for the year decreased by $19.2 million, or 2.0% from the prior year's corresponding period. The fluctuations in sales are further explained in our business segment discussions below.
Service Centers Segment. Sales for the Service Centers segment increased by $153.9 million, or 23.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding $129.1 million of 2021 Service Centers segment sales from businesses acquired, Service Centers segment sales increased $44.4 million, or 6.9% from the prior year's corresponding period. This sales increase is primarily the result of increased sales of rotating equipment, metal working, and bearings and power transmission products to customers engaged in a variety of markets .
Innovative Pumping Solutions Segment. Sales for the IPS segment decreased by $48.4 million, or 25.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding $18.4 million of 2021 IPS segment sales from businesses acquired, IPS segment sales decreased $66.8 million, or 35.5% from the prior year's corresponding period. This decrease was primarily the result of a decrease in the capital spending by oil and gas producers and related businesses stemming from a decrease in U.S. crude oil production due to low crude prices and the negative economic impacts of COVID-19.
Supply Chain Services Segment. Sales for the SCS segment increased by $3.2 million, or 2.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in sales is primarily related to increased sales to customers in the aerospace and oil and gas industries.
GROSS PROFIT. Gross profit as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately 192 basis points from the prior year's corresponding period. Excluding the impact of the businesses acquired, gross profit as a percentage of sales increased by approximately 185 basis points. The increase in the gross profit percentage excluding the businesses acquired is primarily the result of an approximate 435 basis point increase in the gross profit percentage in our IPS segment, a 154 basis point increase in the gross profit percentage in our SC segment and a 2 basis point increase in the gross profit percentage in our SCS segment.
Service Centers Segment. The gross profit percentage for the Service Centers increased approximately 142 basis points and approximately 154 basis points, excluding the impact for the businesses acquired, from the prior year's corresponding period. This was primarily the result of increased sales of rotating equipment and bearings and power transmission products to customers engaged in non-oil and gas markets.
Innovative Pumping Solutions Segment. The 2021 gross profit percentage for the IPS segment increased approximately 463 basis points from the prior year's corresponding period. The increase in gross profit percentage is primarily due to a mix shift (higher margin international work and domestic water and wastewater projects) as well as the shipment of negative gross profit percentage work completed in 2020. Gross profit dollars decreased $5.8 million, primarily as a result of significantly reduced capital expenditure budgets by our customers associated with the negative economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Supply Chain Services Segment. Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased approximately 2 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year's corresponding period. This improvement is primarily the result of an increase in sales discussed above.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ("SG&A"). SG&A for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately $43.7 million, or 17.8%, to $288.6 million from $245.0 million for prior year's corresponding period. SG&A expense from businesses acquired accounted for $26.8 million. Excluding expenses from businesses acquired in 2020 and 2021, SG&A for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 increased by $21.7 million, or 9.1%. The overall increase in SG&A is the result of increased payroll, incentive compensation and related taxes and 401(k) expenses as a result of increased business activity in 2021 compared to cost reduction actions associated with COVID-19 and depressed demand in oil and gas markets in the prior year.
OPERATING INCOME. Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $67.5 million to $39.9 million from an operating loss of $27.7 million in the prior year's corresponding period. This increase in operating income is primarily related to an impairment and other charges of $59.9 million in 2020 with no comparable activity in 2021.
INTEREST EXPENSE. Interest expense for year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $0.5 million, or 2.5%, from the prior year's corresponding period primarily due to a higher principal balance for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year's corresponding period as a result of the Company entering into a new term loan in December 2020 .
INCOME TAXES. Our effective tax rate was a tax expense of 17.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a tax benefit of 38.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Compared to the U.S. statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective tax rate was increased by state taxes, foreign taxes, nondeductible expenses, and a reserve for uncertain tax positions. This was partially offset by research and development tax credits, other tax credits, and a tax benefit from a net operating loss carryback claim due to the CARES Act. The Company reported a loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, items that ordinarily increase or decrease the tax rate had the opposite effect. Compared to the U.S. statutory rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, the effective tax rate was increased by state taxes, foreign taxes, research and development tax credits and other tax credits. This was partially offset by nondeductible expenses and a reserve for uncertain tax positions.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For the full year 2020 to 2019 comparative discussion, see Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in DXP’s Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Reconciliations
In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding our results of operations as determined by GAAP, we disclose non-GAAP financial measures. The non-GAAP financial measures we provide in this report should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative for, results prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”).
Our primary non-GAAP financial measures are organic sales (Organic Sales), sales per business day ("Sales per Business Day"), free cash flow ("Free Cash Flow"), earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") and adjusted EBITDA ("Adjusted EBITDA"). The non-GAAP financial measures presented may differ from similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies, and other companies may not define these non-GAAP financial measures in the same way. These measures are not substitutes for their comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, such as net sales, net income/(loss), diluted earnings per common share (“EPS”), or other measures prescribed by U.S. GAAP, and there are limitations to using non-GAAP financial measures.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures to assist in comparing our performance on a consistent basis for purposes of business decision making by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our underlying operations. Management believes that presenting our non-GAAP financial measures (i.e., Organic Sales, Sales per Business Day, Free Cash Flow, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA) are useful to investors because it (i) provides investors with meaningful supplemental information regarding financial performance by excluding certain items, (ii) permits investors to view performance using the same tools that management uses to budget, make operating and strategic decisions, and evaluate historical performance, and (iii) otherwise provides supplemental information that may be useful to investors in evaluating our results. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures, when considered together with the corresponding U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations to those measures, provides investors with additional understanding of the factors and trends affecting our business than could be obtained absent these disclosures.
Organic Sales is defined as net sales excluding the impact of acquisitions and divestitures for the respective periods. Organic Sales is a tool that can assist management and investors in comparing our performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our underlying operations.
Sales per Business Day is defined as total net sales divided by business days for the period. Sales per Business Day assists management and investors in evaluating the Company's historical performance.
Free Cash Flow is defined as cash provided by operations less net purchases of property and equipment. We believe Free Cash Flow is an important liquidity metric because it measures, during a given period, the amount of cash generated that is available to fund acquisitions, make investments, repay debt obligations, repurchase company shares, and for certain other activities.
EBITDA is defined as the sum of consolidated net income in such period, plus to the extent deducted from consolidated net income: (i) income tax expense, (ii) franchise tax expense, (iii) consolidated interest expense, (iv) amortization and depreciation during such period, (v) all non-cash charges and adjustments, and (vi) non-recurring cash expenses related to the Term Loan; in addition to these adjustments, we exclude, when they occur, the impacts of impairment losses and losses/(gains) on the sale of a
business. EBITDA is a tool that can assist management and investors in comparing our performance on a consistent basis by removing the impact of certain items that management believes do not directly reflect our underlying operations.
From time to time, due to accounting guidance and rules, the Company incurs non-cash, unique or one-time items. As such, the Company will add these items back to determine an Adjusted EBITDA.
We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally to evaluate and manage the Company's operations because we believe it provides useful supplemental information regarding the Company's ongoing economic performance. We have chosen to provide this information to investors to enable them to perform more meaningful comparisons of operating results.
A reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures, to its most comparable GAAP financial measure is included below.
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of net sales to organic net sales (in millions):
Reconciliation of Net Sales to Organic Net Sales
The sales per business day were as follows (in thousands):
We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally to evaluate and manage the Company's operations because we believe it provides useful supplemental information regarding the Company's ongoing economic performance. We have chosen to provide this information to investors to enable them to perform more meaningful comparisons of operating results.
For further discussion regarding free cash flow as a management metric see the "Liquidity and Capital Resources - Free Cash Flow" below.
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable GAAP financial measure (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $49.1 million and bank and other borrowings of $326.7 million. We have a $135 million asset-based loan facility that is due to mature in August 2022, under which we had no borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and a Term Loan B with $326.7 million in borrowings.
Our primary source of capital is cash flow from operations, supplemented as necessary by company shares, bank borrowings or other sources of debt. As a distributor of MRO products and services, we require significant amounts of working capital to fund inventories and accounts receivables. Additional cash is required for capital items for information technology, warehouse equipment, leasehold improvements, pump manufacturing equipment and safety services equipment. We also require cash to pay our lease obligations, fund project work-in-process and to service our debt.
The following table summarizes our net cash flows used in and provided by operating activities, net cash used in investing activities and net cash (used in) provided by financing activities for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The Company generated $37.1 million of cash in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to generating $109.7 million of cash during the prior year's corresponding period. The $72.6 million decrease in the amount of cash generated between the two periods was primarily due to increased business activity and beginning the process of rebuilding inventory levels in 2021. The Company generally builds cash during down cycles as the replenishment of inventory slows, project work narrows and the use of operating cash flows to fund these activities subsides.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $69.0 million compared to $121.8 million in the corresponding period in 2020. This decrease of $52.8 million was primarily driven by a reduction in total purchase price paid for acquisitions during 2021 of $64.7 million compared to $115.2 million for acquisitions in 2020.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $38.5 million, compared to net cash generated in financing activities of $77.4 million for the corresponding period in 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased approximately $33.5 million in outstanding shares. The net inflow of cash from financing activities in 2020 benefited from the refinancing of our Term Loan raising $330 million, offset by the repayment of the original Term Loan for $244 million.
On May 12, 2021, the Company announced that its Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program (the “program”) under which up to $85.0 million or 1.5 million shares of its outstanding common stock may be acquired in the open market over the next 24 months at the discretion of management. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 we purchased 1.2 million shares for approximately $33.5 million. Such consideration was funded with existing cash balances and an agreement to pay sellers over four equal installments beginning on June 15, 2021. The two remaining installments of $13.6 million were included in other current liabilities as of December 31, 2021.
On December 23, 2020, DXP entered into a new seven year, $330 million Senior Secured Term Loan (the “Term Loan Agreement”), which replaced DXP’s previously existing Senior Secured Term Loan.
On May 11, 2020, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Equity Distribution Agreement”) with BMO Capital Markets Corp. (the “Distribution Agent”) pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $37.5 million from time to time through the Distribution Agent. Sales of the Company’s common stock pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement are made in “at the market offerings” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued and sold 46 thousand shares of common stock under the Equity Distribution Agreement, with net proceeds totaling approximately $1.1 million less Agent’s commission.
On March 17, 2020, the Company entered into an Increase Agreement (the "Increase Agreement") which provides for a $135 million asset-backed revolving line of credit (the "ABL Revolver"), a $50 million increase from the $85.0 million available under the original revolver. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the amount available to be borrowed under our credit facility decreased to $131.7 million compared to $131.9 million at December 31, 2020.
We believe this is adequate funding to support working capital needs within the business.
At December 31, 2021, our total long-term debt, including the current portion, less principal repayments, was $326.7 million, or 47.7% of total capitalization (total long-term debt including current portion plus shareholders’ equity) of $685.4 million. Approximately $326.7 million of this outstanding debt bears interest at various floating rates. See