Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report.
OVERVIEW
Our business consists principally of marketing, manufacturing and selling floorcovering products to high-end customers through our various sales forces and brands. We focus primarily on the upper end of the floorcovering market where we believe we have strong brands and competitive advantages with our style and design capabilities and customer relationships. Our Fabrica, Masland, and Dixie Home brands have a significant presence in the high-end residential floorcovering markets. Dixie International sells all of our brands outside of the North American market.
Historically, we participated in the upper end specified commercial flooring marketplace through our Atlas | Masland Contract brand. On September 13, 2021, we sold our Commercial business. The results of our Commercial business activity are included in discontinued operations in the included financial statements.
Our net sales from continuing operations were $341 million for the fiscal year ended December 25, 2021 and $251 million for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020. Comparisons to the prior year are skewed by the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter of 2020 as well as high demand for residential products in 2021. Strong activity in the housing markets related to remodeling and new home construction have driven a strong demand for residential floor covering products in 2021.
Our net income for the twelve months ended December 25, 2021 was $1.6 million. The income was driven by strong sales volume, resulting in high production volume in our manufacturing plants, and selling and administrative expenses at levels that are favorably in line with sales volume when compared with prior periods. These favorable areas were offset by rising costs of raw materials and unfavorable adjustments to our LIFO inventory reserve, both of which negatively impacted our gross margin on the year.
Our interest expense for the twelve month period ended December 25, 2021 was $4,742 which compares favorably to the interest expense of $5,803 from the same period in the prior year. The reduced interest expense is a factor of our reduction and restructuring of debt over the last three years which included the sale and leaseback transaction for our facility in Santa Anna, California in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the divestiture of our Commercial division in the third quarter of 2021. We have reduced debt by $64 million from our most recent high level of debt at $141 million at September 29, 2018 to $77 million at December 25, 2021.
During the second quarter of 2021, the trademark for certain branded fibers our company has historically used in certain products was sold to a mass market retailer. Under the terms of the agreement, the availability of the trademark for use by our company, and others in the industry, was phased out. Prior to the sale of this trademark, our company had previously begun developing alternative offerings in response to prior disruptions in fiber supply. We accelerated the development process and we believe the movement away from dependence on the particular trademark and related fibers will provide the company with opportunities to develop enhanced competitive products with alternate fibers. We have also assisted our specialty retail customers with the transition to our new offerings through a non-disruptive, turnkey solution offering a retail friendly selling solution including new signage and merchandising materials.
RANSOMWARE INCIDENT
On April 17, 2021, we detected a ransomware attack on portions of our information technology systems. Response protocols were initiated immediately, we contacted our cybersecurity insurance provider, notified legal authorities and engaged cybersecurity experts. All systems impacted by this attack have been substantially restored and additional security measures have been put in place. We continue to assess the financial impact of the interruption to our business caused by this event.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
After experiencing a significant reduction in sales volume with the initial onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the second quarter of 2020, we started to see a gradual and consistent improvement in sales through the remainder of 2020 and throughout 2021. The sales growth was driven by a strong housing market and high residential remodeling activity. Although the pandemic continued in 2021, and we continue to take necessary safety precautions to protect the health of our employees, we have been able to limit the impact on operations. However, we cannot be certain as to any additional future impact of the COVID-19 crisis.
DIVESTITURE OF COMMERCIAL BUSINESS
On September 13, 2021, the Company sold its Atlas|Masland commercial business (the “Commercial Business”) to Mannington Mills, Inc. (the “Purchaser”).
In accordance with the Asset Purchase Agreement dated September 13, 2021, the Company sold assets that include certain inventory and certain items of machinery and equipment used exclusively in the Commercial Business, and related intellectual
Table of Contents 16
property for a purchase price of $20.5 million. The Purchaser also assumed the liability to fulfill the orders represented by advance customer deposit liabilities of $3.1 million.
The Company retained the Commercial Business’ cash deposits, all accounts receivable, and certain inventory and equipment. Additionally, the Company agreed not to compete with the specified commercial business and the Atlas|Masland markets for a period of 5 years following September 13, 2021. The agreement allows for the Company to sell the commercial inventory retained by the company after the divestiture.
As a result of the transaction the Company has effectively exited the Commercial Business and will now focus exclusively on its residential floorcovering segment. The sale of Atlas|Masland represents a strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations. The Company has accounted for the transaction as discontinued operations on the date the entity was disposed. Accordingly, the Company is reporting the results of Atlas|Masland operations and cash flows, and balance sheet classifications for the current and comparative periods as discontinued operations. Prior to the consummation of the sale, the Company was neither actively marketing the business for sale nor had intentions to abandon the Commercial Business and as a result did not present the results as assets held for sale or discontinued operations in prior filings. See footnotes to the financial statements for the Company’s discontinued operations reporting.
At closing, the Company received approximately $18.4 million in net proceeds, after depositing $2.1 million within an escrow account. The escrow account is for certain potential seller indemnifications and will be released to the Company in two installments. The first installment, for 50% of the escrow, was paid to the company 90 days after closing and the remaining 50% of the original escrow amount will be paid 18 months from the closing date. In order to release liens on certain fixed assets included in the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company placed $2.1 million in cash collateral in an account with the lender (Greater Nevada Credit Union). The remaining proceeds were applied to the Company's debt with its senior credit facility (Fifth Third Bank).
The gain on the sale of assets is summarized as follows:
Net Proceeds, including escrowed funds
20,500
Inventory, net
(9,195)
Fixed Assets
(2,278)
Contract Liabilities
3,127
Net tangible assets sold
(8,346)
Gain on sale of assets sold, prior to associated costs
12,154
Other transaction related costs
Adjustments to Accruals, Reserves and Allowances
(8,462) 1
Transaction Costs
(1,032) 2
Total other transaction related costs
(9,494)
Gain on sale of discontinued operations
2,660
1) For the remaining retained commercial inventory and fixed assets, the Company recognized adjustment to recognize the effects of the transaction. For inventory, the Company recognized lower of cost or market adjustments of approximately $6.6 million. The Company’s remaining fixed assets will be disposed of by sale and the Company recognized an adjustment of approximately $1.8 million to reflect the lower of its carrying value or estimated fair value less cost to sell. For these assets, the Company has suspended the associated depreciation and will recognize changes in the fair value less cost to sell as gains or losses in future periods until the date of sale.
2) Transaction costs were legal expenses and involuntary employee termination costs related to one-time benefit arrangements.
In addition, the Company and the Purchaser simultaneously entered into a transition services agreement pursuant to which the Company assisted Mannington in transitioning the AtlasMasland business to Mannington, by, among other things, assisting in filling open orders and completing the manufacture of work in progress that resulted in a temporary continued involvement in the Commercial Business until December 31,2021. The Company has shown the results of these operations as a component of discontinued operations.
Table of Contents 17
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year Ended December 25, 2021 Compared with Fiscal Year Ended December 26, 2020
Net Sales. Net sales for the year ended December 25, 2021 were $341.2 million compared with $250.9 in the year-earlier period, an increase of 36.0% for the year-over-year comparison. Net sales in 2020 were heavily impacted by the initial outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. After the initial impact of the pandemic in the second quarter of 2020, sales demand began to increase in line with the demand in the residential housing market.
Gross Profit. Gross profit, as a percentage of net sales, decreased .3 percentage points in 2021 compared with 2020. The Company saw significant increases in raw material costs throughout 2021. Increases in the price of our products were implemented on a delayed basis after the initial impact of the cost increase. These cost increases created an inflationary impact that increased our LIFO reserve on inventory for continuing operations by $16.2 million in 2021 which negatively impacted our margins. These increased costs were partially offset by higher absorption of fixed costs due to increased sales volume in 2021.
Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses were $67.9 million in 2021 compared with $58.2 million in 2020, but lower as a percentage of the higher sales volume. Selling and administrative expenses as a percent of the net sales for 2021 and 2020 were 19.9% and 23.2% respectively. The increase in selling and administrative expenses in 2021 was the result of increased investment in samples, marketing and travel expense in 2021 after the reduced spending in these areas in 2020 due to the pandemic.
Other Operating Income. Net other operating income was $927 thousand in 2021 compared with an income of $108 thousand in 2020. In 2021, the income was primarily the result of $1.7 million in insurance proceeds related to a claim at our Roanoke, Alabama facility partially offset by $1.1 million in legal expenses.
Facility Consolidation and Severance Expenses, Net. Facility consolidation expenses were $.3 million in 2021 compared with $3.8 million in the year-earlier period. The facility consolidation expenses incurred during 2020 were primarily related to our COVID-19 Continuity Plan including severance and financing related charges, as well as residual costs from our Profit Improvement Plan including adjustments for workers' compensation related charges. The expenses in 2021 were primarily related to residual expense activity from the Profit Improvement Plan.
Operating Income (Loss). The operating income in 2021 was $10.0 million compared to a loss of $4.5 million in 2020. The 2020 loss was heavily driven by the negative sales impact during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2021 operating income was primarily the result of higher sales volume and lower expenses from restructuring.
Interest Expense. Interest expense of $4.7 million in 2021 was a reduction of $1.1 million from $5.8 million incurred in 2020. The reduction is the result of lower levels of debt in 2021 offset by adjustments to other comprehensive income as a result of financing initiatives in the fourth quarter of 2021 and elimination of related interest rate swap agreements.
Table of Contents 18
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). Our effective income tax rate was an expense of 2.00% in 2021. The benefit relates to federal and state cash taxes paid offset by certain federal and state credits and also includes a benefit for the termination of certain derivative contracts for which there existed stranded tax effects within other comprehensive income. In 2021, we decreased our valuation allowance by $1.4 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state tax credit carryforwards.
Our effective income tax rate was a benefit of 10.49% in 2020. The benefit relates to certain federal and state credits and also includes a benefit for the termination of certain derivative contracts for which there existed stranded tax effects within Other Comprehensive Income.
Net (Income) Loss. Continuing operations reflected an income of $5.2 million, or $0.32 per diluted share in 2021, compared with a loss from continuing operations of $9.8 million, or $0.64 per diluted share in 2020. Our discontinued operations reflected a loss of $3.5 million, or $0.23 per diluted share in 2021 compared with an income of $615 thousand, or $0.04 per diluted share in 2020. Including discontinued operations, we had a net income of $1.6 million, or $0.09 per diluted share, in 2021 compared with a net loss of $9.2 million, or $0.60 per diluted share, in 2020.
Discontinued operations includes the financial results related to the Commercial Business. In the third quarter of 2021, the Company divested the commercial business. The revenue, margin and selling expenses for the Commercial Business have been moved to discontinued operations. See footnote 21 to the consolidated financial statements for additional details related to discontinued operations.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
During the year ended December 25, 2021, cash used in continuing operations was $6.6 million driven by increases in working capital. Increased sales volume resulted in an increase of $7.8 million in accounts receivable. Higher demand and increased costs drove inventories up by $14.8 million. These increases were slightly offset by a decrease in accounts payable and other accrued expenses of $7.3 million. The reduction in accounts payable and other accrued expenses was offset by increases in prepaids and other current assets of $1.9 million as the Company was required to prepay one primary raw material provider at fiscal year end December 25, 2021.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $15.1 million in the fiscal year 2021. This amount was primarily the result of the divestiture of the Commercial Business in the third quarter of 2021.
During the year ended December 25, 2021, cash used in financing activities was $.3 million. We had net borrowings of $4.8 million on the revolving credit facility. Payments on notes payable net of borrowings decreased cash by $2.9 million and finance leases were reduced by payments, net of borrowings, of $3.2 million. The balance in amount of checks outstanding in excess of cash at year end 2021 increased from prior year resulting in a cash inflow of $1.1 million.
We believe our operating cash flows, credit availability under our revolving credit facility and other sources of financing are adequate to finance our anticipated liquidity requirements under current operating conditions. We cannot predict, and are unable to know, the long-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic consequences or how these events may affect our future liquidity. Availability under the new Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility on December 25, 2021 was $37.6 million. Significant additional cash expenditures above our normal liquidity requirements, significant deterioration in economic conditions or continued operating losses could affect our business and require supplemental financing or other funding sources. There can be no assurance that such supplemental financing or other sources of funding can be obtained or will be obtained on terms favorable to us.
Debt Facilities
Revolving Credit Facility. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into a $75.0 million Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility with Fifth Third Bank National Association as lender. The loan is secured by a first priority security interest on all accounts receivable, cash, and inventory, and provides for borrowing limited by certain percentages of values of the accounts receivable and inventory. The revolving credit facility matures on October 30, 2025.
At our election, advances of the revolving credit facility bear interest at annual rates equal to either (a) LIBOR for 1, 2, or 3 month periods, as defined with a floor or 0.75% or published LIBOR, plus an applicable margin ranging between 1.50% and 2.00%, or (b) the higher of the prime rate plus an applicable margin ranging between 0.50% and 1.00%. The applicable margin is determined based on availability under the revolving credit facility with margins increasing as availability decreases. As of December 25, 2021, the applicable margin on our revolving credit facility was 1.75% for LIBOR and 0.75% for Prime. We pay an unused line fee on the average amount by which the aggregate commitments exceed utilization of the revolving credit facility equal to 0.25% per annum. The weighted-average interest rate on borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility was 3.00% at December 25, 2021 and 2.68% at December 26, 2020.
Table of Contents 19
The agreement is subject to customary terms and conditions and annual administrative fees with pricing varying on excess availability and a fixed charge coverage ratio. The agreement is also subject to certain compliance, affirmative, and financial covenants. We are only subject to the financial covenants if borrowing availability is less than 12.5% of the availability, and remains until the availability is greater than 12.5% for thirty consecutive days. As of December 25, 2021, the unused borrowing availability under the revolving credit facility was $37.6 million.
Term Loans. Effective October 28, 2020, we entered into a $10.0 million principal amount USDA Guaranteed term loan with AmeriState Bank as lender. The term of the loan is 25 years and bears interest at a minimum 5.00% rate or 4.00% above 5-year treasury, to be reset every 5 years at 3.5% above 5-year treasury. The loan is secured by a first mortgage on our Atmore, Alabama and Roanoke, Alabama facilities and requires certain compliance, affirmative, and financial covenants.
Effective October 29, 2020, we entered into a $15.0 million principal amount USDA Guaranteed term loan with the Greater Nevada Credit Union as lender. The term of the loan is 10 years and bears interest at a minimum 5.00% rate or 4.00% above 5- year treasury, to be reset after 5 years at 3.5% above 5-year treasury. The loan is secured by a first lien on a substantial portion of the Company’s machinery and equipment, a certificate of deposit and a second lien on our Atmore and Roanoke facilities. Payments on the loan are interest only over the first three years and principal and interest over the remaining seven years.
Notes Payable - Buildings. On November 7, 2014, we entered into a ten-year $8.3 million note payable to purchase a previously leased distribution center in Adairsville, Georgia. The note payable is scheduled to mature on November 7, 2024 and is secured by the distribution center. The note payable bears interest at a variable rate equal to one-month LIBOR plus 2.0% and is payable in equal monthly installments of principal of $35 thousand, plus interest calculated on the declining balance of the note, with a final payment of $4.2 million due on maturity. In addition, we entered into an interest rate swap with an amortizing notional amount effective November 7, 2014 which effectively fixes the interest rate at 4.50%.
Notes Payable - Equipment and Other. Our equipment financing notes have terms ranging from 1 to 7 years, bear interest ranging from 1.60% to 7.00% through the year and are due in monthly installments through their maturity dates. Our equipment financing notes are secured by the specific equipment financed and do not contain any financial covenants.
Finance Lease - Buildings. On January 14, 2019, we entered into a purchase and sale agreement (the “Purchase and Sale Agreement”) with Saraland Industrial, LLC, an Alabama limited liability company (the “Purchaser”). Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase and Sale Agreement, we sold our Saraland facility, and approximately 17.12 acres of surrounding property located in Saraland, Alabama (the “Property”) to the Purchaser for a purchase price of $11,500. Concurrent with the sale of the Property, we and the Purchaser entered into a twenty-year lease agreement (the “Lease Agreement”), whereby we will lease back the Property at an annual rental rate of $977, subject to annual rent increases of 1.25%. Under the Lease Agreement, we have two (2) consecutive options to extend the term of the Lease by ten years for each such option. This transaction was recorded as a failed sale and leaseback as the present value of lease payments exceeded 90% of its fair value. We recorded a liability for the amounts received, will continue to depreciate the asset, and have imputed an interest rate so that the net carrying amount of the financial liability and remaining assets will be zero at the end of the lease term. Concurrently with the sale, we paid off the approximately $5,000 mortgage on the property to First Tennessee Bank National Association and terminated the related fixed interest rate swap agreement.
Finance Lease Obligations. Our finance lease obligations are due in monthly or quarterly installments through their maturity dates. Our finance lease obligations are secured by the specific equipment leased. (See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Stock-Based Awards
We recognize compensation expense related to share-based stock awards based on the fair value of the equity instrument over the period of vesting for the individual stock awards that were granted. At December 25, 2021, the total unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested restricted stock awards was $1,337 thousand with a weighted-average vesting period of 6.5 years. At December 25, 2021, there was no unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock options.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements at December 25, 2021 or December 26, 2020.
Income Tax Considerations
In the tax year ended December 25, 2021 we increased our valuation allowances by $1.4 million related to our net deferred tax asset and specific state net operating loss and state credit carryforwards.
During 2022 and 2023, we do not anticipate any cash outlays for income taxes to exceed $1 million. This is due to tax loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards that will be used to partially offset taxable income. At December 25, 2021, we were in a net deferred tax liability position of $91 thousand.
Table of Contents 20
Discontinued Operations - Environmental Contingencies
We have reserves for environmental obligations established at five previously owned sites that were associated with our discontinued textile businesses. We have a reserve of $1.9 million for environmental liabilities at these sites as of December 25, 2021. The liability established represents our best estimate of loss and is the reasonable amount to which there is any meaningful degree of certainty given the periods of estimated remediation and the dollars applicable to such remediation for those periods. The actual timeline to remediate, and thus, the ultimate cost to complete such remediation through these remediation efforts, may differ significantly from our estimates. Pre-tax cost for environmental remediation obligations classified as discontinued operations were primarily a result of specific events requiring action and additional expense in each period.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
At December 25, 2021, we had no assets or liabilities measured at fair value that fall under a level 3 classification in the hierarchy (those subject to significant management judgment or estimation).
Certain Related Party Transactions
We purchase a portion of our product needs in the form of fiber, yarn and carpet from Engineered Floors, an entity substantially controlled by Robert E. Shaw, a shareholder of our Company. An affiliate of Mr. Shaw holds approximately 7.6% of our Common Stock, which represents approximately 3.2% of the total vote of all classes of our Common Stock. Engineered Floors is one of several suppliers of such materials to us. Total purchases from Engineered Floors for 2021 and 2020 were approximately $3.9 million and $4.5 million, respectively; or approximately 1.4% and 2.3% of our cost of goods sold in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Purchases from Engineered Floors are based on market value, negotiated prices. We have no contractual commitments with Mr. Shaw associated with our business relationship with Engineered Floors. Transactions with Engineered Floors are reviewed annually by our board of directors.
We were a party to a ten-year lease with the Rothman Family Partnership to lease a facility as part of the Robertex acquisition in 2013. The controlling principal of the lessor was an associate of our Company until June 30, 2018. Rent paid to the lessor during 2021 and 2020 was $196 thousand and $289 thousand, respectively. The lease was based on current market values for similar facilities. This lease was terminated on August 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies
Certain estimates and assumptions are made when preparing our financial statements. Estimates involve judgments with respect to, among other things, future economic factors that are difficult to predict. As a result, actual amounts could differ from estimates made when our financial statements are prepared.
The Securities and Exchange Commission requires management to identify its most critical accounting policies, defined as those that are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and operating results and the application of which requires our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments. Although our estimates have not differed materially from our experience, such estimates pertain to inherently uncertain matters that could result in material differences in subsequent periods.
We believe application of the following accounting policies require significant judgments and estimates and represent our critical accounting policies. Other significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Revenue recognition. We derive our revenues primarily from the sale of floorcovering products and processing services. Revenues are recognized when control of these products or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products and services. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Shipping and handling fees charged to customers are reported within revenue. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. We do not have any significant financing components as payment is received at or shortly after the point of sale. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
▪Identification of the contract with a customer
▪Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
▪Determination of the transaction price
▪Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
▪Recognition of revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied
Table of Contents 21
•Variable Consideration. The nature of our business gives rise to variable consideration, including rebates, allowances, and returns that generally decrease the transaction price, which reduces revenue. These variable amounts are generally credited to the customer, based on achieving certain levels of sales activity, product returns, or price concessions.
Variable consideration is estimated at the most likely amount that is expected to be earned. Estimated amounts are included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Estimates of variable consideration are estimated based upon historical experience and known trends.
•Customer claims and product warranties. We generally provide product warranties related to manufacturing defects and specific performance standards for our products for a period of up to two years. We accrue for estimated future assurance warranty costs in the period in which the sale is recorded. The costs are included in Cost of Sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and the product warranty reserve is included in accrued expenses in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We calculate our accrual using the portfolio approach based upon historical experience and known trends. We do not provide an additional service-type warranty.
•Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using the last-in, first-out method (LIFO), which generally matches current costs of inventory sold with current revenues, for substantially all inventories. Reserves are also established to adjust inventories that are off-quality, aged or obsolete to their estimated net realizable value. Additionally, rates of recoverability per unit of off-quality, aged or obsolete inventory are estimated based on historical rates of recoverability and other known conditions or circumstances that may affect future recoverability. Actual results could differ from assumptions used to value our inventory.
•Self-insured accruals. We estimate costs required to settle claims related to our self-insured medical, dental and workers' compensation plans. These estimates include costs to settle known claims, as well as incurred and unreported claims. The estimated costs of known and unreported claims are based on historical experience. Actual results could differ from assumptions used to estimate these accruals.
•Income taxes. Our effective tax rate is based on income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in a future period. We evaluate the recoverability of these future tax benefits by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. These sources of income inherently rely on estimates, including business forecasts and other projections of financial results over an extended period of time. In the event that we are not able to realize all or a portion of our deferred tax assets in the future, a valuation allowance is provided. We recognize such amounts through a charge to income in the period in which that determination is made or when tax law changes are enacted. We had valuation allowances of $12.9 million at December 25, 2021 and $14.2 million at December 26, 2020. At December 25, 2021, we were in a net deferred tax liability position of $91 thousand. For further information regarding our valuation allowances, see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
•Loss contingencies. We routinely assess our exposure related to legal matters, environmental matters, product liabilities or any other claims against our assets that may arise in the normal course of business. If we determine that it is probable a loss has been incurred, the amount of the loss, or an amount within the range of loss, that can be reasonably estimated will be recorded.
Table of Contents 22