Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes, as well as Part I, Item 1. Business, and Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Introduction
We are a leading provider of specialty contracting services throughout the United States. These services include program management; planning; engineering and design; aerial, underground, and wireless construction; maintenance; and fulfillment services for telecommunications providers. Additionally, we provide underground facility locating services for various utilities, including telecommunications providers, and other construction and maintenance services for electric and gas utilities. We supply the labor, tools, and equipment necessary to provide these services to our customers.
Significant demand for broadband is driven by applications that require high speed connections as well as the everyday use of mobile data devices. To respond to this demand and other advances in technology, major industry participants are constructing or upgrading significant wireline networks across broad sections of the country. These wireline networks are generally designed to provision gigabit network speeds to individual consumers and businesses, either directly or wirelessly using 5G technologies. Industry participants have stated their belief that a single high capacity fiber network can most cost effectively deliver services to both consumers and businesses, enabling multiple revenue streams from a single investment. We believe this view is increasing the appetite for fiber deployments and that the industry effort to deploy high capacity fiber networks continues to meaningfully broaden our industry’s set of opportunities. Increasing access to high-capacity telecommunications continues to be crucial to society, especially in rural America. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (“Infrastructure Act”) includes over $40 billion for the construction of rural communications networks in unserved and underserved areas across the country. This represents an unprecedented level of support. In addition, an increasing number of states are commencing programs that will provide funding for telecommunications networks even prior to the initiation of funding under the Infrastructure Act.
We are providing program management, planning, engineering and design, aerial, underground, and wireless construction and fulfillment services for gigabit deployments. These services are being provided across the country in numerous geographic areas to multiple customers. These deployments include networks consisting entirely of wired network elements and converged wireless/wireline multi-use networks. Fiber network deployment opportunities are increasing in rural America as new industry participants respond to emerging societal initiatives. We continue to provide integrated planning, engineering and design, procurement and construction and maintenance services to several industry participants.
Macro-economic effects and supply constraints may influence the near-term execution of some customer plans. Broad increases in demand for fiber optic cable and related equipment may cause delivery lead time volatility in the short to intermediate term. In addition, the market for labor remains tight in many regions around the country. It remains to be seen how long this condition persists. Furthermore, the automotive and equipment supply chain remains challenged, particularly for the large truck chassis required for specialty equipment. Prices for capital equipment are increasing. As we contend with these factors, we remain confident that our scale and financial strength position us well to deliver valuable service to our customers.
Telephone companies are deploying fiber-to-the-home to enable gigabit high-speed connections. Increasingly, rural electric utilities are doing the same. Dramatically increased speeds to consumers are being provisioned and consumer data usage is growing, particularly upstream. Wireless construction activity in support of newly available spectrum bands is beginning and expected to increase this year. Federal and state support for rural deployments of communications networks is dramatically increasing in scale an duration. Cable operators are deploying fiber to small and medium businesses and enterprises. A portion of these deployments are in anticipation of the customer sales process. Deployments to expand capacity as well as new build
opportunities are underway. Customers are consolidating supply chains creating opportunities for market share growth and increasing the long-term value of our maintenance and operations business.
The cyclical nature of the industry we serve affects demand for our services. The capital expenditure and maintenance budgets of our customers, and the related timing of approvals and seasonal spending patterns, influence our contract revenues and results of operations. Factors affecting our customers and their capital expenditure budgets include, but are not limited to, overall economic conditions, the introduction of new technologies, our customers’ debt levels and capital structures, our customers’ financial performance, our customers’ positioning and strategic plans, and any potential effects from the COVID-19 pandemic. Other factors that may affect our customers and their capital expenditure budgets include new regulations or regulatory actions impacting our customers’ businesses, merger or acquisition activity involving our customers, and the physical maintenance needs of our customers’ infrastructure.
Our operations expose us to risks associated with pandemics, epidemics or other public health emergencies, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Since March 2020, the economy of the United States has been severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and by the nation’s response to it. Measures mandated by governmental agencies have included vaccination and masking requirements, travel and large gathering restrictions, social distancing requirements, quarantines, and shelter in place orders. Even as efforts to contain the pandemic have made progress and some restrictions have been relaxed, new variants of COVID-19 have resulted in, and may continue to result in, additional outbreaks. As a result, certain business-related activities have been curtailed or modified.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, our services have generally been considered essential in nature and have not been materially interrupted by governmental mandates. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including its effects on our customers, subcontractors, suppliers, vendors and employees, as well as any impacts affecting our ability to provide services to our customers. We believe the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operating results, cash flows and financial condition will be determined by factors which are uncertain, unpredictable and outside of our control. These factors include the duration and severity of the pandemic, including any new variants, vaccination rates in the areas we operate and among our employees and subcontractors, the nature and duration of containment and mitigation actions taken by federal, state and local governments, the protocols and contractual requirements implemented by our customers, and the resulting impact on the demand for our services. The situation surrounding COVID-19 remains fluid, and if disruptions do arise, they could materially adversely impact our business.
In addition, the ability of our employees and our suppliers’ and customers’ employees to work may be significantly impacted by individuals contracting or being exposed to COVID-19, or as a result of the control measures noted above. Our customers may be directly impacted by business curtailments or weak market conditions and may not be willing to continue investments in the services we provide. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused delays, and increases the risk of further delays, in our provision of construction services due to delays in our ability to obtain permits from government agencies or as a result of constraints to the availability of labor, supplies, and equipment. For further discussion of this matter, refer “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in Part I of this report.
Fiscal Year
In September 2017, our Board of Directors approved a change in the Company’s fiscal year end from the last Saturday in July to the last Saturday in January. The change better aligned our fiscal year with the planning cycles of our customers. For quarterly comparisons, there were no changes to the months in each fiscal quarter. We use a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the last Saturday in January. Fiscal 2022, fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019, and fiscal 2017 each consisted of 52 weeks of operations. Fiscal 2021 consisted of 53 weeks of operations.
We refer to the period beginning January 31, 2021 and ending on January 29, 2022 as “fiscal 2022”, the period beginning January 26, 2020 and ending on January 30, 2021 as “fiscal 2021”, the period beginning on January 27, 2019 and ending on January 25, 2020 as “fiscal 2020”, the period beginning on January 28, 2018 and ending January 26, 2019 as “fiscal 2019”, the period beginning July 30, 2017 and ending January 27, 2018 as the “2018 transition period”, and the period beginning July 31, 2016 and ending July 29, 2017 as “fiscal 2017”.
Customer Relationships and Contractual Arrangements
We have established relationships with many leading telecommunications providers, including telephone companies, cable multiple system operators, wireless carriers, telecommunications equipment and infrastructure providers, as well as electric and gas utilities. Our customer base is highly concentrated, with our top five customers accounting for approximately 66.2%, 74.1%, and 78.4% of our total contract revenues during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020, respectively.
The following reflects the percentage of total contract revenues from customers who contributed at least 2.5% to our total contract revenues during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020:
(1) Formerly known as CenturyLink, Inc.
In addition, another customer contributed 3.7%, 1.6% and 0.5% to our total contract revenues during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020, respectively.
We perform a majority of our services under master service agreements and other contracts that contain customer-specified service requirements. These agreements include discrete pricing for individual tasks. We generally possess multiple agreements with each of our significant customers. To the extent that such agreements specify exclusivity, there are often exceptions, including the ability of the customer to issue work orders valued above a specified dollar amount to other service providers, the performance of work with the customer’s own employees, and the use of other service providers when jointly placing facilities with another utility. In many cases, a customer may terminate an agreement for convenience. Historically, multi-year master service agreements have been awarded primarily through a competitive bidding process; however, occasionally we are able to negotiate extensions to these agreements. We provide the remainder of our services pursuant to contracts for specific projects. These contracts may be long-term (with terms greater than one year) or short-term (with terms less than one year) and often include customary retainage provisions under which the customer may withhold 5% to 10% of the invoiced amounts pending project completion and closeout.
The following table summarizes our contract revenues from multi-year master service agreements and other long-term contracts, as a percentage of contract revenues:
Acquisitions
As part of our growth strategy, we may acquire companies that expand, complement, or diversify our business. We regularly review opportunities and periodically engage in discussions regarding possible acquisitions. Our ability to sustain our growth and maintain our competitive position may be affected by our ability to identify, acquire, and successfully integrate companies. The results of these businesses acquired are included in our consolidated financial statements from their respective dates of acquisition.
Understanding Our Results of Operations
The following information is presented so that the reader may better understand certain factors impacting our results of operations, and should be read in conjunction with Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates below, as well as Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies & Estimates, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contract Revenues. We perform a majority of our services under master service agreements and other contracts that contain customer-specified service requirements. These agreements include discrete pricing for individual tasks including, for example, the placement of underground or aerial fiber, directional boring, and fiber splicing, each based on a specific unit of measure. Contract revenue is recognized over time as services are performed and customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits we provide. Output measures such as units delivered are utilized to assess progress against specific contractual performance obligations for the majority of our services. For certain contracts, we use the cost-to-cost measure of progress as more fully described within Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates below.
Costs of Earned Revenues. Costs of earned revenues includes all direct costs of providing services under our contracts, including costs for direct labor provided by employees, services by independent subcontractors, operation of capital equipment (excluding depreciation), direct materials, costs of insuring our risks, and other direct costs. Under our insurance program, we retain the risk of loss, up to certain limits, for matters related to automobile liability, general liability (including damages associated with underground facility locating services), workers’ compensation, and employee group health.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation and related expenses, including performance-based compensation and stock-based compensation, legal, consulting and professional fees, information technology and development costs, provision for or recoveries of bad debt expense, acquisition and integration costs of businesses acquired, and other costs not directly related to the provision of our services under customer contracts. Our provision for bad debt expense is determined by evaluating specific accounts receivable and contract asset balances based on historical collection trends, the age of outstanding receivables, and the creditworthiness of our customers. We incur information technology and development costs primarily to support and enhance our operating efficiency. Our executive management team and the senior management of our subsidiaries perform substantially all of our sales and marketing functions as part of their management responsibilities.
Depreciation and Amortization. Our property and equipment primarily consist of vehicles, equipment and machinery, and computer hardware and software. We depreciate property and equipment on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. In addition, we have intangible assets, including customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete intangibles, which we amortize over their estimated useful lives. We recognize amortization of customer relationship intangibles on an accelerated basis as a function of the expected economic benefit and amortization of other finite-lived intangibles on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net, consists of interest incurred on outstanding variable rate and fixed rate debt and certain other obligations. Interest expense also includes the non-cash amortization of our convertible senior notes debt discount and amortization of debt issuance costs. See Note 13, Debt, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on the non-cash amortization of the debt discount and debt issuance costs.
(Loss) Gain on Debt Extinguishment. Gain on debt extinguishment for fiscal 2021 of $12.0 million includes pre-tax charges related to the extinguishment of $401.7 million of our convertible senior notes, including the write-off of deferred debt issuance costs on convertible senior notes.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net, primarily consists of gains or losses from sales of fixed assets. Other income, net also includes discount fee expense associated with the collection of accounts receivable under a customer-sponsored vendor payment program.
Seasonality and Fluctuations in Operating Results. Our contract revenues and results of operations exhibit seasonality as we perform a significant portion of our work outdoors. Consequently, adverse weather, which is more likely to occur with greater frequency, severity, and duration during the winter, as well as reduced daylight hours, impact our operations during the fiscal quarters ending in January and April. In addition, a disproportionate number of holidays fall within the fiscal quarter ending in January, which decreases the number of available workdays. Because of these factors, we are most likely to experience reduced revenue and profitability during the fiscal quarters ending in January and April compared to the fiscal quarters ending in July and October.
We may also experience variations in our profitability driven by a number of factors. These factors include variations and fluctuations in contract revenues, job specific costs, insurance claims, the allowance for doubtful accounts, accruals for contingencies, stock-based compensation expense for performance-based stock awards, the fair value of reporting units for the goodwill impairment analysis, the valuation of intangibles and other long-lived assets, gains or losses on the sale of fixed assets from the timing and levels of capital assets sold, the employer portion of payroll taxes as a result of reaching statutory limits, and our effective tax rate.
Accordingly, operating results for any fiscal period are not necessarily indicative of results we may achieve for any subsequent fiscal period.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements. These statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). In conformity with GAAP, the preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in these consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates and assumptions require the use of judgment as to the likelihood of various future outcomes and, as a result, actual results could differ materially from these estimates.
Below, we have identified those accounting policies that are critical to the accounting of our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. These accounting policies require making significant judgments and estimates that are used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. The impact of these policies affects our reported and expected financial results. We have discussed the development, selection and application of our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors, and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosure relating to our critical accounting policies herein.
Other significant accounting policies, primarily those with lower levels of uncertainty than those discussed below, are also important to understanding our consolidated financial statements. The notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain additional information related to our accounting policies and should be read in conjunction with this discussion.
Revenue Recognition. We perform the majority of our services under master service agreements and other contracts that contain customer-specified service requirements. These agreements include discrete pricing for individual tasks including, for example, the placement of underground or aerial fiber, directional boring, and fiber splicing, each based on a specific unit of measure. A contractual agreement exists when each party involved approves and commits to the agreement, the rights of the parties and payment terms are identified, the agreement has commercial substance, and collectability of consideration is probable. Our services are performed for the sole benefit of our customers, whereby the assets being created or maintained are controlled by the customer and the services we perform do not have alternative benefits for us. Contract revenue is recognized over time as services are performed and customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits we provide. Output measures such as units delivered are utilized to assess progress against specific contractual performance obligations for the majority of our services. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the services to be provided. For us, the output method using units delivered best represents the measure of progress against the performance obligations incorporated within the contractual agreements. This method captures the amount of units delivered pursuant to contracts and is used only when our performance does not produce significant amounts of work in process prior to complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. For a portion of contract items, units to be completed consist of multiple tasks. For these items, the transaction price is allocated to each task based on relative standalone measurements, such as selling prices for similar tasks, or in the alternative, the cost to perform the tasks. Contract revenue is recognized as these tasks are completed as a measurement of progress in the satisfaction of the corresponding performance obligation, and represented approximately 5%, 10%, and 15% of contract revenues during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020, respectively.
For certain contracts, representing less than 5% of contract revenues during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020, we use the cost-to-cost measure of progress. These contracts are generally projects that are completed over a period of less than 12 months and for which payment is received in a lump sum at the end of the project. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress toward completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs. Contract costs include direct labor, direct materials, and subcontractor costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs. Contract revenues are recorded as costs are incurred. We accrue the entire amount of a contract loss, if any, at the time the loss is determined to be probable and can be reasonably estimated.
There were no material amounts of unapproved change orders or claims recognized during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020.
Accounts Receivable, net. We grant credit to our customers, generally without collateral, under normal payment terms (typically 30 to 90 days after invoicing). Generally, invoicing occurs within 45 days after the related services are performed. Accounts receivable represents an unconditional right to consideration arising from our performance under contracts with
customers. Accounts receivable include billed accounts receivable, unbilled accounts receivable, and retainage. The carrying value of such receivables, net of the allowance for doubtful accounts, represents their estimated realizable value. Unbilled accounts receivable represent amounts we have an unconditional right to receive payment for that will be billed at a later date due to administrative requirements in the billing processes specified by our customers. Certain of our contracts contain retainage provisions whereby a portion of the revenue earned is withheld from payment as a form of security until contractual provisions are satisfied. The collectability of retainage is included in our overall assessment of the collectability of accounts receivable. We expect to collect the outstanding balance of current accounts receivable, net (including trade accounts receivable, unbilled accounts receivable, and retainage) within the next 12 months. We estimate our allowance for doubtful accounts by evaluating specific accounts receivable balances based on historical collection trends, the age of outstanding receivables, and the credit worthiness of our customers.
We participate in a customer-sponsored vendor payment program for one of our customers. All eligible accounts receivable from this customer are included in the program and payment is received pursuant to a non-recourse sale to a bank partner of the customer. This program effectively reduces the time to collect these receivables as compared to that customer’s standard payment terms. We incur a discount fee to the bank on the payments received that is reflected as an expense component in other income, net, in the consolidated statements of operations.
Contract assets. Contract assets include unbilled amounts typically resulting from arrangements whereby complete satisfaction of a performance obligation and the right to payment are conditioned on completing additional tasks or services.
Contract liabilities. Contract liabilities consist of amounts invoiced to customers in excess of revenue recognized. Our contract assets and liabilities are reported in a net position on a contract by contract basis at the end of each reporting period. As of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, the contract liabilities balance is classified as current based on the timing of when we expect to complete the tasks required for the recognition of revenue.
Leases. Our leases are accounted for as operating leases, with lease expense recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The lease term may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. For leases with initial terms greater than 12 months, we record operating lease right-of-use assets and corresponding operating lease liabilities. Operating lease right-of-use assets represent our right to use the underlying asset for the lease term and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make the related lease payments. These assets and liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed annually for impairment, or more frequently, if events occur that would indicate a potential reduction in the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. We perform our annual impairment review of goodwill at the reporting unit level. Each of our operating segments with goodwill represents a reporting unit for the purpose of assessing impairment. If we determine the fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill or other indefinite-lived intangible assets is less than their carrying value as a result of an annual or interim test, an impairment loss is recognized and reflected in operating income or loss in the consolidated statements of operations during the period incurred.
We review finite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be fully recoverable. Recoverability is determined based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of an asset and its eventual disposition. Should an asset not be recoverable, an impairment loss is measured by comparing the fair value of the asset to its carrying value. If we determine the fair value of an asset is less than the carrying value, an impairment loss is recognized in operating income or loss in the consolidated statements of operations during the period incurred.
We use judgment in assessing whether goodwill and intangible assets are impaired. Estimates of fair value are based on our projection of revenues, operating costs, and cash flows taking into consideration historical and anticipated future results, general economic and market conditions, as well as the impact of planned business or operational strategies. We determine the fair value of our reporting units using a weighing of fair values derived in equal proportions from the income approach and market approach valuation methodologies. The income approach uses the discounted cash flow method and the market approach uses the guideline company method. Changes in our judgments and projections could result in significantly different estimates of fair value, potentially resulting in impairments of goodwill and other intangible assets. The inputs used for fair value measurements of the reporting units and other related indefinite-lived intangible assets are the lowest level (Level 3) inputs.
The Company’s goodwill resides in multiple reporting units and primarily consists of expected synergies, together with the expansion of the Company’s geographic presence and strengthening of its customer base from acquisitions. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed annually for impairment, or more frequently if events occur that would indicate a potential reduction in the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. The profitability of individual reporting units may suffer periodically due to downturns in customer demand, increased costs of providing services, and the level of overall economic activity. The Company’s customers may reduce capital expenditures and defer or cancel pending projects due to changes in technology, a slowing or uncertain economy, merger or acquisition activity, a decision to allocate resources to other areas of their business, or other reasons. The profitability of reporting units may also suffer if actual costs of providing services exceed the costs anticipated when the Company enters into contracts. Additionally, adverse conditions in the economy and future volatility in the equity and credit markets could impact the valuation of the Company’s reporting units. The cyclical nature of the Company’s business, the high level of competition existing within its industry, and the concentration of its revenues from a limited number of customers may also cause results to vary. These factors may affect individual reporting units disproportionately, relative to the Company as a whole. As a result, the performance of one or more of the reporting units could decline, resulting in an impairment of goodwill or intangible assets.
The Company performs its annual goodwill assessment as of the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter of each fiscal year. Goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets are required to be tested for impairment between annual tests if events occur that would indicate a potential reduction in the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value.
We performed our annual impairment assessment for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020, and concluded that no impairment of goodwill or the indefinite-lived intangible asset was indicated at any reporting unit for any of the periods other than the first quarter of fiscal 2021 as described below. In each of these periods, qualitative assessments were performed on reporting units that comprise a significant portion of our consolidated goodwill balance. A qualitative assessment includes evaluating all identified events and circumstances that could affect the significant inputs used to determine the fair value of a reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset for the purpose of determining whether it is more likely than not that these assets are impaired. We consider various factors while performing qualitative assessments, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, financial performance of the reporting units, changes in market capitalization, and any other specific reporting unit considerations. These qualitative assessments indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair value exceeded carrying value for those reporting units. For the remaining reporting units, we performed the quantitative analysis described in ASC Topic 350 in each of these periods. When performing the quantitative analysis, we determine the fair value of our reporting units using a weighing of fair values derived in equal proportions from the income approach and market approach valuation methodologies. Under the income approach, the key valuation assumptions used in determining the fair value estimates of our reporting units for each annual test were: (a) a discount rate based on our best estimate of the weighted average cost of capital adjusted for certain risks for the reporting units; (b) terminal value based on our best estimate of terminal growth rates; and (c) seven expected years of cash flow before the terminal value based on our best estimate of the revenue growth rate and projected operating margin.
The table below outlines certain assumptions used in our annual quantitative impairment analyses for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021, and fiscal 2020;
The discount rate reflects risks inherent within each reporting unit operating individually. These risks are greater than the risks inherent in the Company as a whole. Determination of discount rates included consideration of market inputs such as the risk-free rate, equity risk premium, industry premium, and cost of debt, among other assumptions. The discount rate was consistent for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. The increase in the discount rate for fiscal 2022 from fiscal 2021 was mainly a result of a heavier weighting of the cost of equity versus debt in the current year as a result of recent market trends for capital structure. We believe the assumptions used in the impairment analysis each year are reflective of the risks inherent in the business models of our reporting units and our industry. Under the market approach, the guideline company method develops valuation multiples by comparing our reporting units to similar publicly traded companies. Key valuation assumptions used in determining the fair value estimates of our reporting units rely on: (a) the selection of similar companies and (b) the selection of valuation multiples as they apply to the reporting unit characteristics.
We determined that the fair values of each of the reporting units and the indefinite-lived intangible asset were in excess of their carrying values in the fiscal 2022 assessment. Management determined that significant changes were not likely in the
factors considered to estimate fair value, and analyzed the impact of such changes were they to occur. Specifically, if the discount rate applied in the fiscal 2022 impairment analysis had been 100 basis points higher than estimated for each of the reporting units, and all other assumptions were held constant, the conclusion of the assessment would remain unchanged and there would be no impairment of goodwill. Additionally, if there was a 25% decrease in the fair value of any of the reporting units due to a decline in their discounted cash flows resulting from lower operating performance, the conclusion of the assessment would remain unchanged for all reporting units except for one. For this reporting unit with goodwill of $5.7 million, the excess of fair value above its carrying value was approximately 10% of the fair value. Recent operating performance, along with assumptions for specific customer and industry opportunities, were considered in the key assumptions used during the fiscal 2022 impairment analysis. Management has determined the goodwill of the Company may have an increased likelihood of impairment if a prolonged downturn in customer demand were to occur, or if the reporting units was not able to execute against customer opportunities, and the long-term outlook for their cash flows were adversely impacted. Furthermore, changes in the long-term outlook may result in a change to other valuation assumptions. Factors monitored by management which could result in a change to the reporting units’ estimates include the outcome of customer requests for proposals and subsequent awards, strategies of competitors, labor market conditions and levels of overall economic activity.
The Company determined that there were no events or changes in circumstances for the other reporting units or indefinite lived intangible assets during fiscal 2022 that would indicate a potential reduction in their fair value below their carrying amounts. As of January 29, 2022, the Company continues to believe the remaining goodwill and the indefinite-lived intangible asset are recoverable for all of its reporting units. However, if adverse events were to occur or circumstances were to change indicating that the carrying amount of such assets may not be fully recoverable, the assets would be reviewed for impairment and could be impaired. There can be no assurances that goodwill or the indefinite-lived intangible asset may not be impaired in future periods.
During fiscal 2021 and 2022, the economy of the United States was severely impacted by the nation’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Measures taken included travel restrictions, social distancing requirements, quarantines, and shelter in place orders. As a result, businesses had been closed and certain business activities curtailed or modified. During the COVID-19 pandemic, our services have generally been considered essential in nature and have not been materially interrupted. However, certain customers of one of the Company’s reporting units (“Broadband”) had decided to restrict our technicians from entering third party premises. Furthermore, customers have modified their protocols to increase the self-installation of customer premise equipment by their subscribers.
Broadband generates a substantial portion of its revenue and operating results from installation services inside third party premises. The events following the onset of COVID-19 were expected to result in a prolonged downturn in customer demand for installation services from Broadband. This was expected to have a direct, adverse impact on its revenue, operating results and cash flows. These indicators represented a triggering event that warranted impairment testing of Broadband during the three months ended April 25, 2020.
The Broadband reporting unit includes the operations of Broadband Installation Services, Prince Telecom and certain other operations and generated revenue of less than 4% of the consolidated contract revenue of Dycom in fiscal 2020. The Broadband reporting unit did not incur losses in fiscal 2020.
The fiscal 2021 interim impairment analysis for Broadband utilized the same valuation techniques used in the Company’s annual fiscal 2020 impairment analysis. The key assumptions used to determine the fair value of the Company’s reporting units during this interim impairment analysis were: (a) expected cash flow for a period of seven years; (b) terminal value based upon terminal growth rates; and (c) a discount rate based on the Company’s best estimate of the weighted average cost of capital adjusted for risks associated with Broadband. Recent operating performance, along with key assumptions for specific customer and industry opportunities, were used during the fiscal 2021 interim impairment analysis. The terminal growth rate used in the fiscal 2021 interim assessment was 1.5% as compared to 3.0% in the fiscal 2020 assessment reflecting lower long-term demand levels. The discount rate used in the fiscal 2021 interim assessment was 12% compared to 10% in the fiscal 2020 assessment reflecting increased risk associated with the outlook of Broadband.
The combination of lower expected operating results and cash flows from the reduction in revenue, as well as changes in valuation assumptions in the fiscal 2021 interim analysis resulted in a substantial decline in the fair value of the Broadband reporting unit. In accordance with ASU 2017-04, the Company compared the estimated fair value of Broadband to its carrying amount. As a result, the Company recognized an impairment charge of $53.3 million which is the amount by which the carrying amount exceeded the reporting unit’s fair value. After the impairment charge, Broadband has $10.1 million of remaining goodwill. The goodwill impairment charge did not affect the Company’s compliance with its financial covenants and conditions under its revolving credit agreement.
Accrued Insurance Claims. For claims within our insurance program, we retain the risk of loss, up to certain annual stop-loss limits, for matters related to automobile liability, general liability (including damages associated with underground facility locating services), workers’ compensation, and employee group health. Losses for claims beyond our retained risk of loss are covered by insurance up to our coverage limits.
For fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021 with regards to workers’ compensation losses, we retained the risk of loss up to $1.0 million on a per occurrence basis. This retention amount is applicable to all of the states in which we operate, except with respect to workers’compensation insurance in two states in which we participate in state-sponsored insurance funds. With regard to automobile liability and general liability losses for fiscal 2020, we retained risk of loss up to $1.0 million on a per-occurrence basis. With regard to automobile liability and general liability losses for fiscal 2021, we retained the risk of loss up to $1.0 million on a per-occurrence basis for the first $5.0 million of insurance coverage. In addition, we also retained the risk of loss for automobile and general liability for the next $5.0 million on a per-occurrence basis with aggregate loss limits of $11.5 million within this layer of retention.
For fiscal 2022, with regard to workers’ compensation losses, our retention of risk remained the same as fiscal 2021. With regard to automobile liability and general liability losses, our retention of primary risk remained the same as fiscal 2021. In addition, we reduced our coverage limit and retained $10.0 million risk of loss on a per occurrence basis for losses above $30.0 million
For fiscal 2023, with regard to workers’ compensation losses, our retention of risk remains the same as fiscal 2022. With regard to automobile liability and general liability losses our retention of risk remains the same as fiscal 2022, with the exception that we retained an additional $5.0 million risk of loss on a per occurrence basis for losses above $10.0 million , if any.
We are party to a stop-loss agreement for losses under our employee group health plan. For calendar year 2019, we retained the risk of loss, on an annual basis, up to the first $400,000 of claims per participant, as well as an annual aggregate amount for all participants of $425,000. For the calendar year 2020, we retained the risk of loss on an annual basis, up to the first $450,000 of claims per participant, as well as an annual aggregate amount for all participants of $475,000. For the calendar years 2021 and 2022, we retain the risk of loss on an annual basis, up to the first $600,000 of claims per participant.
We have established reserves that we believe to be adequate based on current evaluations and our experience with these types of claims. A liability for unpaid claims and the associated claim expenses, including incurred but not reported losses, is determined with the assistance of an actuary and reflected in the consolidated financial statements as accrued insurance claims. The effect on our financial statements is generally limited to the amount needed to satisfy our insurance deductibles or retentions. Amounts for total accrued insurance claims and insurance recoveries/receivables are as follows (dollars in millions):
The liability for total accrued insurance claims included incurred but not reported losses of approximately $48.0 million and $59.6 million as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively.
We estimate the liability for claims based on facts, circumstances, and historical experience. Even though they will not be paid until sometime in the future, recorded loss reserves are not discounted. Factors affecting the determination of the expected cost for existing and incurred but not reported claims include, but are not limited to, the magnitude and quantity of future claims, the payment pattern of claims which have been incurred, changes in the medical condition of claimants, and other factors such as inflation, tort reform or other legislative changes, unfavorable jury decisions, and court interpretations.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. This approach requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities.
Measurement of our tax position is based on the applicable statutes, federal and state case law, and our interpretations of tax regulations. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income during the period that includes the enactment date. We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In making such determination, we consider all relevant factors, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and recent financial operations. In the event we determine that we would be able to realize deferred income tax assets in excess of their net recorded amount, we would adjust the valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
We recognize tax benefits in the amount that we deem more likely than not will be realized upon ultimate settlement of any tax uncertainty. Tax positions that fail to qualify for recognition are recognized during the period in which the more-likely-than-not standard has been reached, when the tax positions are resolved with the respective taxing authority, or when the statute of limitations for tax examination has expired. We recognize applicable interest related to tax amounts in interest expense and penalties within general and administrative expenses.
Fluctuations in our effective income tax rate were attributable to the difference in income tax rates from state to state where work was performed, non-deductible and non-taxable items, tax credits recognized, the tax effects of the vesting and exercise of share-based awards, and changes in unrecognized tax benefits. Fiscal 2022 includes approximately $5.0 million for incremental tax benefits for credits related to tax filings for prior periods. During fiscal 2021 our effective tax rate was impacted by a $53.3 million goodwill impairment charge which was mostly non-deductible for income tax purposes, and the benefit from a $2.6 million tax loss carryback technical correction under the CARES Act. See Note 14, Income Taxes, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Stock-Based Compensation. We have stock-based compensation plans under which we grant stock-based awards, including stock options, time-based restricted share units (“RSUs”), and performance-based restricted share units (“Performance RSUs”) to attract, retain, and reward talented employees, officers, and directors, and to align stockholder and employee interests. The resulting compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, net of actual forfeitures, and is included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. This expense fluctuates over time as a function of the duration of vesting periods of the stock-based awards and the Company’s performance, as measured by criteria set forth in performance-based awards.
Compensation expense for stock-based awards is based on fair value at the measurement date. The fair value of stock options is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This valuation is affected by the Company’s stock price as well as other inputs, including the expected common stock price volatility over the expected life of the options, the expected term of the stock option, risk-free interest rates, and expected dividends, if any. Our outstanding stock options generally vest ratably over a four-year period and are generally exercisable over a period of up to ten years. The fair value of RSUs and Performance RSUs is estimated on the date of grant and is equal to the closing market price per share of our common stock on that date. RSUs generally vest ratably over a four-year period. Performance RSUs vest ratably over a three-year period, if certain performance measures are achieved. Each RSU and Performance RSU is settled in one share of our common stock upon vesting.
For Performance RSUs, we evaluate compensation expense quarterly and recognize expense only if we determine it is probable that the performance measures for the awards will be met. The performance measures for target awards are based on our operating earnings (adjusted for certain amounts) as a percentage of contract revenues and our operating cash flow level (adjusted for certain amounts) for the applicable four-quarter performance period. Additionally, certain awards include three-year performance measures that are more difficult to achieve than those required to earn target awards and, if met, result in supplemental shares awarded. The performance measures for supplemental awards are based on three-year cumulative operating earnings (adjusted for certain amounts) as a percentage of contract revenues and three-year cumulative operating cash flow level (adjusted for certain amounts). If we determine it is no longer probable that we will achieve certain performance measures for the awards, we reverse the stock-based compensation expense that we had previously recognized associated with the portion of Performance RSUs that are no longer expected to vest. The amount of the expense ultimately recognized depends on the number of awards that actually vest. Accordingly, stock-based compensation expense may vary from period to period. For additional information on our stock-based compensation plans, stock options, RSUs, and Performance RSUs, see Note 18, Stock-Based Awards, in the notes to the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contingencies and Litigation. In the ordinary course of our business, we are involved in certain legal proceedings and other claims, including claims for indemnification by our customers. In determining whether a loss should be accrued, we evaluate, among other factors, the probability of an unfavorable outcome and the ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss. If only a range of probable loss can be determined, we accrue for our best estimate within the range for the contingency. In those cases where none of the estimates within the range is better than another, we accrue for the amount representing the low end of the range. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to our pending litigation and other contingencies and revise our estimates as applicable. Revisions of our estimates of the potential liability could materially impact our results of operations. Additionally, if the final outcome of such litigation and contingencies differs adversely from that currently expected, it would result in a charge to operating results when determined.
Business Combinations. We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. The purchase price of each business acquired is allocated to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and the liabilities assumed based on information regarding their respective fair values on the date of acquisition. Any excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the separately identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is allocated to goodwill. We determine the fair values used in purchase price allocations for intangible assets based on historical data, estimated discounted future cash flows, expected royalty rates for trademarks and trade names, as well as other information. The valuation of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires a number of judgments and is subject to revision as additional information about the fair value of assets and liabilities becomes available. Additional information, which existed as of the acquisition date but unknown to us at that time, may become known during the remainder of the measurement period. This measurement period may not exceed 12 months from the acquisition date. The Company will recognize any adjustments to provisional amounts that are identified during the measurement period in the reporting period in which the adjustments are determined. Additionally, in the same period in which adjustments are recognized, the Company will record the effect on earnings of changes in depreciation, amortization, or other income effects, if any, as a result of any change to the provisional amounts, calculated as if the accounting adjustment had been completed at the acquisition date. Acquisition costs are expensed as incurred. The results of operations of businesses acquired are included in the consolidated financial statements from their dates of acquisition.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated and the amounts as a percentage of contract revenues (totals may not add due to rounding) (dollars in millions):
A discussion of our financial results for fiscal 2021 compared to our financial for fiscal 2020 can be found in the “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations” section in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021, filed on March 5, 2021.
Contract Revenues. Contract revenues were $3.131 billion during fiscal 2022 compared to $3.199 billion during fiscal 2021. Additionally, we earned $3.9 million and $14.6 million of contract revenues from storm restoration services during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. Fiscal 2022 had 52 weeks of operations while fiscal 2021 had 53 weeks.
Excluding amounts generated from storm restoration services, contract revenues decreased by $57.9 million during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. Contract revenues decreased by approximately $249.0 million for a large telecommunications customer primarily for services for fiber deployments and by approximately $165.6 million for a large telecommunications customer primarily for decreases in services performed under existing contracts. Additionally contract revenues decreased by approximately $60.1 million for a leading cable multiple system operator from installation, maintenance and construction services. Contract revenues also decreased by approximately $51.9 million for services performed for a telecommunications customer in connection with rural services. Partially offsetting these decreases, contract revenues increased by approximately $202.2 million for a large telecommunications customer improving its network and by approximately $72.2 million for a telecommunications customer for fiber deployments. All other customers had net increases in contract revenues of $194.2 million on a combined basis during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
The percentage of our contract revenues by customer type from telecommunications, underground facility locating, and electric and gas utilities and other customers, was 88.7%, 8.2%, and 3.1%, respectively, for fiscal 2022 compared to 89.1%, 7.2%, and 3.7%, respectively, for fiscal 2021.
Costs of Earned Revenues. Costs of earned revenues decreased to $2.634 billion, or 84.1% of contract revenues, during fiscal 2022 compared to $2.642 billion, or 82.6% of contract revenues, during fiscal 2021. The primary components of the decrease were a $44.6 million decrease in direct materials and a $19.2 million decrease in other direct costs. Partially offsetting these decreases was a $41.7 million aggregate increase in direct labor and subcontractor costs and a $13.9 million increase in equipment maintenance and fuel costs combined.
Costs of earned revenues as a percentage of contract revenues increased 1.6% during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. As a percentage of contract revenues, labor and subcontracted labor costs increased 2.7% primarily due to the mix of work performed. Equipment maintenance and fuel costs combined increased 0.5% as a percentage of contract revenues primarily resulting from an increase in fuel prices. Direct materials decreased 1.2% primarily as a result of our mix of work in which we provide materials for our customers and other direct costs decreased 0.5% as a percentage of contract revenues during fiscal 2022.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased to $262.4 million, or 8.4% of contract revenues, during fiscal 2022 compared to $259.8 million, or 8.1% of contract revenues, during fiscal 2021. The increase in total general and administrative expenses primarily resulted from increased administrative, payroll and other costs, including bad debt expense, offset in part by a decrease in professional fees, performance based compensation and stock-based compensation.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation expense was $135.2 million, or 4.3% of contract revenues, during fiscal 2022, compared to $155.3 million, or 4.9% of contract revenues, during fiscal 2021. The decrease in depreciation expense during fiscal 2022 was primarily due certain assets becoming fully depreciated or sold and reduced capital expenditures during fiscal 2021 compared to prior periods. Amortization expense was $17.5 million and $20.6 million during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net was $33.2 million and $29.7 million during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. Interest expense includes $1.7 million and $7.4 million for the non-cash amortization of the debt discount associated with the 0.75% convertible senior notes due September 2021 (the “2021 Convertible Notes”) during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. Excluding this amortization, interest expense, net increased to $31.5 million during fiscal 2022 from $22.2 million during fiscal 2021 as a result of higher interest rates on funded debt balances and higher outstanding borrowings during the current period.
Other Income, Net. Other income, net was $4.4 million and $8.6 million during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. The change in other income, net was primarily a function of the number of assets sold and prices obtained for those assets during each respective period. Gain on sale of fixed assets was $4.2 million and $10.0 million during fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively. Other income, net also includes expense associated with the non-recourse sale of accounts receivable under a customer-sponsored vendor payment program.
(Loss) gain on Debt Extinguishment. Gain on debt extinguishment for fiscal 2021 of $12.0 million includes pre-tax charges related to the extinguishment of $401.7 million of our 2021 Convertible Notes, including the write-off of deferred debt issuance costs on the 2021 Convertible Notes.
Income Taxes. The following table presents our income tax provision and effective income tax rate for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 (dollars in millions):
Our effective income tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to the difference in income tax rates from state to state where work was performed, non-deductible and non-taxable items, tax credits recognized, tax effects from the vesting and exercise of share-based awards, and changes in unrecognized tax benefits. Fiscal 2022 includes approximately $5.0 million for incremental tax benefits for credits related to tax filings for prior periods. During fiscal 2021 our effective tax rate was impacted by a $53.3 million goodwill impairment charge which was mostly non-deductible for income tax purposes, and the benefit from a $2.6 million tax loss carryback technical correction under the CARES Act.
Net Income. Net income was $48.6 million for fiscal 2022 compared to $34.3 million for fiscal 2021.
Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is a Non-GAAP measure, as defined by Regulation G of the SEC. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, gain on sale of fixed assets, stock-based compensation expense, and certain non-recurring items. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA is a helpful measure for comparing the Company’s operating performance with prior periods as well as with the performance of other companies with different capital structures or tax rates. The following table provides a reconciliation of net income to Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA (dollars in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We are subject to concentrations of credit risk relating primarily to our cash and equivalents, accounts receivable, and contract assets. Cash and equivalents primarily include balances on deposit with banks and totaled $310.8 million as of January 29, 2022, compared to $11.8 million as of January 30, 2021. We maintain our cash and equivalents at financial institutions we believe to be of high credit quality. To date, we have not experienced any loss or lack of access to cash in our operating accounts.
Sources of Cash. Our sources of cash are operating activities, long-term debt, equity offerings, bank borrowings, proceeds from the sale of idle and surplus equipment and real property, and stock option proceeds. Cash flow from operations is
primarily influenced by demand for our services and operating margins, but can also be influenced by working capital needs associated with the services that we provide. In particular, working capital needs may increase when we have growth in operations and where project costs, primarily associated with labor, subcontractors, equipment, and materials, are required to be paid before the related customer balances owed to us are invoiced and collected. Our working capital (total current assets less total current liabilities, excluding the current portion of debt) was $991.8 million as of January 29, 2022 compared to $801.9 million as of January 30, 2021.
Capital resources are used primarily to purchase equipment and maintain sufficient levels of working capital to support our contractual commitments to customers. We periodically borrow from and repay our revolving credit facility depending on our cash requirements. We currently intend to retain any earnings for use in the business and other capital allocation strategies which may include investment in acquisitions and share repurchases. Consequently, we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
Our level of capital expenditures can vary depending on the customer demand for our services, the replacement cycle we select for our equipment, and overall growth. We intend to fund these expenditures primarily from operating cash flows, availability under our credit agreement, and cash on hand. We expect capital expenditures, net of disposals, to range from $180.0 million to $190.0 million during fiscal 2023 to support growth opportunities and the replacement of certain fleet assets.
Sufficiency of Capital Resources. We believe that our capital resources, including existing cash balances and amounts available under our credit agreement, are sufficient to meet our financial obligations. These obligations include interest payments required on the $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.50% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”) and outstanding term loan facility and revolver borrowings, if any, under our credit agreement, working capital requirements, and the normal replacement of equipment at our expected level of operations for at least the next 12 months. Our capital requirements may increase to the extent we seek to grow by acquisitions that involve consideration other than our stock, experience difficulty or delays in collecting amounts owed to us by our customers, increase our working capital in connection with new or existing customer programs, or to the extent we repurchase our common stock, or repay credit agreement borrowings. Changes in financial markets or other components of the economy could adversely impact our ability to access the capital markets, in which case we would expect to rely on a combination of available cash and our credit agreement to provide short-term funding. Management regularly monitors the financial markets and assesses general economic conditions for possible impact on our financial position. We believe our cash investment policies are prudent and expect that any volatility in the capital markets would not have a material impact on our cash investments.
Net Cash Flows. The following table presents our net cash flows for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 (dollars in millions):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities. Depreciation and amortization, goodwill impairment charge, non-cash lease expense, stock-based compensation, amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, deferred income taxes, gain on sale of fixed assets, goodwill impairment charge, gain and loss on debt extinguishment and provision for bad debt were the primary non-cash items in cash flows from operating activities during the current and prior periods.
During fiscal 2022, net cash provided by operating activities was $308.7 million. Changes in working capital (excluding cash) and changes in other long-term assets and liabilities provided $54.4 million of operating cash flow during fiscal 2022. Working capital changes that provided operating cash flow during fiscal 2022 included a decrease in contract assets, net of $177.0 million and other assets of $2.2 million. Changes that used operating cash flow during fiscal 2022 included a decrease in accrued liabilities of $49.7 million and accounts payable of $4.9 million. In addition, an increase in accounts receivable of $40.7 million, other current assets and inventories of $12.3 million and net increase in income tax receivable of $17.2 million used operating cash flow during fiscal 2022.
Days sales outstanding (“DSO”) is calculated based on the ending balance of total current and non-current accounts receivable (including unbilled accounts receivable), net of the allowance for doubtful accounts, and current contract assets, net
of contract liabilities, divided by the average daily revenue for the most recently completed quarter. Long-term contract assets are excluded from the calculation of DSO, as these amounts represent payments made to customers pursuant to long-term agreements and are recognized as a reduction of contract revenues over the period for which the related services are provided to the customers. Including these balances in DSO is not meaningful to the average time to collect accounts receivable and current contract asset balances. Our DSO was 108 days as of January 29, 2022, compared to 136 days as of January 30, 2021. The decrease in our DSO was primarily a result of a decrease in outstanding balances for a large customer program. This program consists of multiple tasks which will be billed as the tasks are completed.
See Note 5, Accounts Receivable, Contract Assets, and Contract Liabilities, for further information on our customer credit concentration as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 and Note 19, Customer Concentration and Revenue Information, for further information on our significant customers. We believe that none of our significant customers were experiencing financial difficulties that would materially impact the collectability of our total accounts receivable and contract assets, net as of January 29, 2022 or January 30, 2021.
During fiscal 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $381.8 million. Changes in working capital (excluding cash) and changes in other long-term assets and liabilities provided $113.3 million of operating cash flow during fiscal 2021. Working capital changes that used operating cash flow during fiscal 2021 included increases in accounts receivable of $41.8 million. Changes that provided operating cash flow during fiscal 2021 included a decrease in contract assets, net; other current assets and inventories; income tax receivable; and other assets of $53.7 million, $27.3 million, $7.5 million and $9.2 million, respectively. In addition, a net increase in accounts payable of $43.7 million and accrued liabilities of $13.6 million, each primarily as a result of the timing of payments, provided operating cash flow during fiscal 2021.
Cash Used in Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $151.7 million during fiscal 2022. During fiscal 2022, capital expenditures of $157.0 million, primarily as a result of spending for new work opportunities and the replacement of certain fleet assets, were offset in part by proceeds from the sale of assets of $5.4 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $44.6 million during fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2021, capital expenditures of $58.0 million, primarily as a result of spending for new work opportunities and the replacement of certain fleet assets, were offset in part by proceeds from the sale of assets of $13.4 million.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $142.0 million during fiscal 2022. The primary source of cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2022 was the $500.0 million principal amount of the “2029 Notes” issued in a private placement in April 2021. This was partially offset by a $58.3 million payment on long-term debt related to the repayment in full of our 2021 Convertible Notes during fiscal 2022 and an additional $0.7 million to unwind warrants associated with the remaining portion of the 2021 Convertible Notes that was repaid. In addition, we used $105.0 million of the proceeds of the 2029 Notes offering to repay outstanding borrowings under the revolving portion of our credit agreement and approximately $71.9 million to repay term loan borrowings under our credit agreement. We paid approximately $11.6 million in issuance costs and third party fees and expenses related to our financing transactions.We repurchased 1,231,638 shares of our common stock in open market transactions, at an average price of $86.17 per share, for $106.1 million. The exercise of stock options provided $2.3 million during fiscal 2022 and we paid $6.6 million to tax authorities in order to meet the payroll tax withholding obligations on restricted share units that vested during the period.
Net cash used in financing activities was $383.4 million during fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2021, borrowings under our credit agreement, net of repayments, were $82.5 million. We repurchased 1,324,381shares of our common stock in open market transactions, at an average price $75.51 per share, for $100.0 million. We also purchased $401.7 million of our 2021 Convertible Notes for $371.4 million, including interest and fees, resulting in a $30.8 million redemption discount on 2021 Convertible Notes. In connection with the purchase, we unwound convertible note hedge transactions and warrants proportionally to the number of 2021 Convertible Notes. We received $7.2 million for the settlement of the convertible note hedges and paid $7.2 million for the warrants. During fiscal 2021, we withheld shares and paid $0.7 million to tax authorities in order to meet the payroll tax withholding obligations on restricted share units that vested during the period. Partially offsetting these uses, we received $5.7 million from the exercise of stock options during fiscal 2021.
Compliance with Credit Agreement. On April 1, 2021, the Company and certain of its subsidiaries amended its credit agreement, dated as of October 19, 2018, with the various lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (the “Credit Agreement”) to among other things, decrease the maximum revolver commitment to $650.0 million from $750.0 million and decrease the term loan facility to $350.0 million from $416.3 million. The Credit Agreement includes a $200.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and a $50.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit and a $50.0 million sublimit for swingline loans. As part of the amendment, the maturity of the Credit Agreement was extended to April 1, 2026.
Subject to certain conditions, the Credit Agreement provides us with the ability to enter into one or more incremental facilities either by increasing the revolving commitments under the Credit Agreement and/or by establishing one or more additional term loans, up to the sum of (i) $350.0 million and (ii) an aggregate amount such that, after giving effect to such incremental facilities on a pro forma basis (assuming that the amount of the incremental commitments are fully drawn and funded), the consolidated senior secured net leverage ratio does not exceed 2.25 to 1.00. The consolidated senior secured net leverage ratio is the ratio of our consolidated senior secured indebtedness reduced by unrestricted cash and equivalents in excess of $25.0 million to our trailing twelve-month consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, as defined by the Credit Agreement (“EBITDA”). Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by substantially all of our domestic subsidiaries and secured by 100% the equity interests of our direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries and 65% of the voting equity interests and 100% of the non-voting interests of our first-tier foreign subsidiaries (subject to customary exceptions).
Under our credit agreement, borrowings bear interest at the rates described below based upon our consolidated net leverage ratio, which is the ratio of our consolidated total funded debt reduced by unrestricted cash and equivalents in excess of $25.0 million to our trailing 12 month consolidated EBITDA, as defined by our credit agreement. In addition, we incur certain fees for unused balances and letters of credit at the rates described below, also based upon our consolidated net leverage ratio.
(1) To address the transition in financial markets away from LIBOR, the credit agreement includes provisions related to the replacement of LIBOR with a LIBOR successor rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement), which may be a rate based on the secured overnight financing rate published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
(2) Base rate is described in the credit agreement as the highest of (i) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.50%, (ii) the administrative agent’s prime rate, and (iii) the Eurodollar rate plus 1.00% and if such rate is less than zero, such rate shall be deemed zero.
Standby letters of credit of approximately $46.3 million and $52.2 million, issued as part of our insurance program, were outstanding under our Credit Agreement as January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively.
The weighted average interest rates and fees for balances under our credit agreement as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 were as follows:
(1) There were no outstanding borrowings under our revolving facility as of January 29, 2022.
Our credit agreement contains a financial covenant that requires us to maintain a consolidated net leverage ratio of not greater than 3.50 to 1.00, as measured at the end of each fiscal quarter, and provides for certain increases to this ratio in connection with permitted acquisitions. The agreement also contains a financial covenant that requires us to maintain a consolidated interest coverage ratio, which is the ratio of our trailing 12 month consolidated EBITDA to our consolidated interest expense, each as defined by our credit agreement, of not less than 3.00 to 1.00, as measured at the end of each fiscal quarter. At January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, we were in compliance with the financial covenants of our credit agreement and had borrowing availability under our revolving facility of $326.3 million and $558.7 million, respectively, as determined by the most restrictive covenant. For calculation purposes, applicable cash on hand is netted against the funded debt amount as permitted in the Credit Agreement.
The indenture governing the 2029 Notes contains certain covenants that limit, among other things, our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to (i) incur additional debt and issue certain preferred stock, (ii) pay certain dividends on, repurchase, or make distributions in respect of, our and our subsidiaries’ capital stock or make other payments restricted by the indenture, (iii) enter into agreements that place limitations on distributions made from certain of our subsidiaries, (iv) guarantee certain debt, (v) make certain investments, (vi) sell or exchange certain assets, (vii) enter into transactions with affiliates, (viii) create certain liens, and (ix) consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of our or our Subsidiaries’ assets. These covenants are subject to a number of exceptions, limitations and qualifications as set forth in the indenture governing the 2029 Notes.
Contractual Obligations. The following table sets forth our outstanding contractual obligations as of January 29, 2022 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Includes interest payments on our $500.0 million principal amount of 2029 Notes outstanding, and excludes interest payments on our variable rate debt. Variable rate debt as of January 29, 2022 consisted of $350.0 million outstanding under our term loan facility.
(2) Amounts represent undiscounted lease obligations under long-term operating leases and exclude long-term operating leases that have not yet commenced of $3.0 million as of January 29, 2022.
(3) Amounts represent lease obligations under short-term operating leases that are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheet as of January 29, 2022.
(4) During 2020, the U.S. federal government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the CARES Act), which provided for various tax relief and tax incentive measures. These measures did not have a material impact on our results of operations. However, pursuant to the CARES Act, we deferred the payment of $37.4 million of employer payroll taxes during the year ended December 31, 2020, $18.7 million of which was paid by December 31, 2021 and the remainder is due by December 31, 2022.
(5) We have committed capital for the expansion of our vehicle fleet in order to accommodate manufacturer lead times. As of January 29, 2022, purchase and other contractual obligations includes approximately $78.9 million for issued orders with delivery dates scheduled to occur over the next 12 months.
We have excluded contractual obligations under the multi-employer defined pension plans that cover certain of our employees, as these obligations are determined based on our future union employee payrolls, which cannot be reliably determined as of January 29, 2022. See Note 16, Employee Benefit Plans, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding obligations under multi-employer defined pension plans.
Our consolidated balance sheet as of January 29, 2022 includes a long-term liability of approximately $48.2 million for accrued insurance claims. This liability has been excluded from the table above as the timing of payments is uncertain.
The liability for unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions was approximately $11.9 million and $5.9 million, as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively, and is included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance
sheets. This amount has been excluded from the contractual obligations table because we are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of the resolution of the underlying tax positions with the relevant tax authorities.
Performance and Payment Bonds and Guarantees. We have obligations under performance and other surety contract bonds related to certain of our customer contracts. Performance bonds generally provide a customer with the right to obtain payment and/or performance from the issuer of the bond if we fail to perform our contractual obligations. As of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 we had $296.4 million and $208.7 million of outstanding performance and other surety contract bonds, respectively. The estimated cost to complete projects secured by our outstanding performance and other surety contract bonds was approximately $138.0 million as of January 29, 2022. In addition to performance and other surety contract bonds, as part of our insurance program we also provide surety bonds that collateralize our obligations to our insurance carriers. As of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, we had $20.3 million and $20.9 million, respectively, of outstanding surety bonds related to our insurance obligations. Additionally, we have periodically guaranteed certain obligations of our subsidiaries, including obligations in connection with obtaining state contractor licenses and leasing real property and equipment.
Letters of Credit. We have standby letters of credit issued under our credit agreement as part of our insurance program. These letters of credit collateralize obligations to our insurance carriers in connection with the settlement of potential claims. In connection with these collateral obligations, we had $46.3 million and $52.2 million outstanding standby letters of credit issued under our credit agreement as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively.
Backlog. Our backlog is an estimate of the uncompleted portion of services to be performed under contractual agreements with our customers and totaled $5.822 billion and $6.810 billion at January 29, 2022, and January 30, 2021, respectively. We expect to complete 52.8% of the January 29, 2022 total backlog during the next 12 months. Our backlog represents an estimate of services to be performed pursuant to master service agreements and other contractual agreements over the terms of those contracts. These estimates are based on contract terms and evaluations regarding the timing of the services to be provided. In the case of master service agreements, backlog is estimated based on the work performed in the preceding 12 month period, when available. When estimating backlog for newly initiated master service agreements and other long and short-term contracts, we also consider the anticipated scope of the contract and information received from the customer during the procurement process and, where applicable, other ancillary information. A significant majority of our backlog comprises services under master service agreements and other long-term contracts.
In many instances, our customers are not contractually committed to procure specific volumes of services under a contract. Contract revenue estimates reflected in our backlog can be subject to change due to a number of factors, including contract cancellations or changes in the amount of work we expect to be performed. In addition, contract revenues reflected in our backlog may be realized in different periods from those previously reported due to these factors as well as project accelerations or delays due to various reasons, including, but not limited to, changes in customer spending priorities, scheduling changes, commercial issues, such as permitting, engineering revisions, job site conditions and adverse weather, and the potential adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The amount or timing of our backlog can also be impacted by the merger or acquisition activity of our customers. Many of our contracts may be cancelled by our customers, or work previously awarded to us pursuant to these contracts may be cancelled, regardless of whether or not we are in default. The amount of backlog related to uncompleted projects in which a provision for estimated losses was recorded is not material.
Backlog is not a measure defined by United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for, GAAP results. Participants in our industry often disclose a calculation of their backlog; however, our methodology for determining backlog may not be comparable to the methodologies used by others. We utilize our calculation of backlog to assist in measuring aggregate awards under existing contractual relationships with our customers. We believe our backlog disclosures will assist investors in better understanding this estimate of the services to be performed pursuant to awards by our customers under existing contractual relationships.
Legal Proceedings
Refer to Note 20, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3, Accounting Standards, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting standards and pronouncements.